

===== BOOK: wmp.txt =====



Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

 

WOMAN'S MYSTERIES OF A PRIMITIVE PEOPLE

 

The Ibibios of Southern Nigeria

 

D. AMAURY TALBOT

 

London

 

[1915]

 

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, November, 2001. J.B. Hare, redactor. This text is in the public domain. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose provided this notice of attribution is left intact.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

 

CONTENTS

  Chapter     Page 
  1.  INTRODUCTORY  1 
  2.  PRENATAL INFLUENCES AND BIRTH CUSTOMS  15 
  3.  BIRTH CUSTOMS (continued)  31 
  4.  AFFINITIES OR "BUSH SOULS"  43 
  5.  CHILDHOOD  62 
  6.  MAIDENHOOD TO MARRIAGE  76 
  7.  WEDDED LIFE AND MOTHERHOOD  96 
  8.  DOMESTIC LIFE  112 
  9.  MARRIAGE PROBLEMS  128 
  10.  LOVE PHILTRES AND MAGIC  138 
  11.  WITCHCRAFT  162 
  12.  JUJUS  176 
  13.  WOMAN AND SECRET SOCIETIES  189 
  14.  WOMAN IN WAR TIME  205 
  15.  WIDOWHOOD AND BURIAL CUSTOMS  218 
  16.  WIDOWHOOD AND BURIAL CUSTOMS (continued)  225 
     L'ENVOI  238 
  

 

[p. vi]

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

 

LIST OF PLATES

  "FATTING-HOUSE" WOMEN  Frontispiece 
     FACING PAGE 
  TYPES OF IBO WOMEN  4 
  CHIEF DANIEL HENSHAW, WITH HIS FAMILY  8 
  A HUNTING SCENE  12 
  IBIBIO CHIEFS, WITH ATTENDANTS  12 
  A JUJU SHRINE, WITH JUJU LEAVES IN THE FOREGROUND  16 
  A BEACH ON WHICH TWINS WERE FORMERLY OFFERED UP  24 
  THE PATH OVER THE MAGIC WATER WHICH SHRANK UNDERGROUND TO AVOID THE POLLUTION OF A TWIN WOMAN  28 
  ORON MAN WITH TWINS WHOSE LIVES HE SAVED  30 
  NDIYA BEACH  32 
  VIEW ON THE CROSS RIVER, IN THE EKET DISTRICT  38 
  AN IBOIBO MARKET  48 
  A HIGH IDIONG PRIEST  52 
  CLIMBING PALMS, "IN WHICH DWELLS THE SOUL OF A WOMAN"  56 
  AN IBIBIO GIRL, WITH WAIST BEADS  64 
  JUJU "IMAGE" WITH MASK AND DRESS OF WOVEN FIBRE  66 
  A TYPICAL SACRED POOL IN IBIBIO LAND  76 
  JUJU TREE OF THE COMPOUND SHOWN IN THE BACKGROUND  80 
  FATTING-HOUSE GIRLS AFTER THE FIRST TIME OF SECLUSION (Mbobi)  84 
  "FATTING-HOUSE" WOMEN  88 
  IKOTOBO MARKET-PLACE  96 
  A TOWN PLAYGROUND  104 
  POOL OF ISEMIN, TO WHICH THE WOMEN GO IN PROCESSION NAKED AT DAWN  108 
  

 

[p. viii]

     FACING PAGE 
  SHRINE OF ISEMIN  110 
  TYPE OF ROAD IN THE EKET DISTRICT  114 
  EKOI WOMAN AND GIRLS FROM NCHOPAN  116 
  A TYPICAL EGBO HOUSE  118 
  AN IBO WOMAN  118 
  JUJU TO WHICH HUMAN VICTIMS ARE OFFERED UP  120 
  CHIEF OKONNOR OF IKOTOBO  128 
  A NIGERIAN LANDSCAPE: MUD FLATS LEFT DRY BY THE TIDE  130 
  AN IBIBIO CHIEF  130 
  A BREWER OF LOVE PHILTRES  142 
  JUJU ITA BRINYAN  146 
  A JUJU WHICH PROTECTS A FAMILY FROM WITCHCRAFT  162 
  GULLY DOWN WHICH THE SUSPECTED WITCH WAS THROWN  170 
  LEAF "IMAGE," IN A JUJU "PLAY"  176 
  A RIVER DISCOVERED BY p. A. TALBOT  184 
  EGBO "IMAGES"  192 
  THE "MOTHER OF GHOSTS AND DEVILS"  200 
  TYPE OF EKOI WOMAN  208 
  A WOMAN'S MEMORIAL  216 
  PATH NEAR AKAIYA, PASSING THROUGH "THE FOREST OF THOSE WHO MAY NOT BE BURIED  220 
  WATER LILIES ON A CREEK DISCOVERED BY p. A. TALBOT  232 
  

 

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

 

WOMAN'S MYSTERIES OF A PRIMITIVE PEOPLE

 

CHAPTER I

 

INTRODUCTORY

FOR many years good fortune has granted to my sister and myself the happiness of living amid scenes of indescribable beauty and peoples of peculiar interest. The novelty of being the first white women to visit any particular spot has indeed long worn off by reason of the frequency of the experience, but the thrill of penetrating to places as yet unvisited by any European is still a matter of unmixed joy. Time and again our little party has been so fortunate as to happen upon peoples never studied before, who have been induced to confide to us traditions, beliefs, and legends of unexpected charm.

That all this came into our lives, a golden gift from the gods, without hardship worth the name, is due to the fact that, unlike Mary Kingsley and the small band of women travellers who followed in her footsteps, my sister and I were not alone. A never-failing watchful care has always surrounded us, smoothing each difficulty, and, as far as is humanly possible, providing against every discomfort and

[p. 2]

danger--at what cost of personal sacrifice one hardly dares to think.

During this time we were naturally anxious to do something in return for all that was done for us, and soon discovered that the chief way in which we could be of use was by making clear copies of rough notes jotted down in spare moments by my husband, and by writing out information which there was no time to collect save orally, thus putting upon paper page after page of description, incident or legend, which pressure of official work must otherwise have kept unrecorded.

When therefore a kind request came from England for a paper embodying "the woman's point of view" of scenes and happenings so different from those to which most of us are accustomed, the idea of separate authorship seemed to one who, up till then, had only acted as an unofficial secretary, almost as startling as if a pen from the inkstand had been asked to start writing on its own account. On thinking the matter over, however, it really appeared that, since the women of these regions had never yet been studied by a white woman, a paper dealing with the question from this side might have a certain interest.

It was not, however, until the mail brought a letter from one of the kindest and most brilliant literary men of our acquaintance, pointing out that, although men have taught us much of late years concerning primitive man, primitive woman is still unknown save through the medium of masculine influence, that the importance really struck us of making use of the chance which a kind fate had given us.

[p. 3]

Only a few weeks before this letter was sent, Mr. Walter Heape, F.R.S., had written:

"From the biological point of view the crux of the whole matter lies in Dr. Frazer's convinced belief that the Central Australian women do not know anything of the part played by the father. . . . This is indeed a case when a woman's help would be of the greatest value. I venture to think it is not improbable a woman would have discovered something more from the female members of these Central Australian tribes." [*1]

On this suggestion, therefore, and that of the friend already mentioned, we determined, in default of those better fitted for the task, to take up this branch of research. Yet, when we realised then for the first time that, for the friendly controversy at present waged between ethnologists--concerning exogamy, for instance-not one word of information is available from the woman's point of view, on a matter so nearly concerning her--"without some man intervening either as inquirer or interpreter"--my sister and I seemed at a loss. We felt much as two sixteenth-century women might have done, who, hitherto following easily along paths made smooth for them by their men-folk, suddenly found themselves, at a turn of the road, standing alone--Nunez like--"Silent upon a peak in Darien," gazing out over the waves of an unknown ocean.

As is usual in such cases, once the study had been begun, difficulties, which at first loomed so large as to appear almost in the light of impossibilities, faded

[p. 4]

away of themselves. Although during the ten months of our sojourn among the Ibibios of Southern Nigeria, my sister and I were able to pick up but the merest fragment of the language, yet careful inquiry brought out the fact that a few native women in the district were capable of speaking intelligible English, and were willing, for a certain compensation, to act as interpreters. Among the Ibibios, surely, if anywhere, there is a chance to study primitive woman living to-day in all essentials as she lived, moved and had her being while Greece and Rome lay in the womb of Time.

This strange race, consisting of some three-quarters of a million souls, inhabits the south-eastern part of Southern Nigeria. Before our arrival in the Eket District, which forms the southernmost stretch of the Ibibio country, we had been informed, on all hands, that the natives of these regions were of the lowest possible type, entirely devoid of ethnological interest, and indeed, to quote the expression of our informant, "mere mud-fish." Saving the more civilised Efiks, it is indisputable that the Ibibios occupy a low rung on the ladder of culture, and are perhaps as bloodthirsty as any people throughout the length and breadth of the Dark Continent. Yet, to our minds at least, it would appear that their present condition is due to gradual descent from a very different state of things. Fragments of legend and half-forgotten ritual still survive to tell of times shrouded in the mists of antiquity, when the despised Ibibio of to-day was a different being, dwelling not amid the fog and swamp of fetishism, but upon the sunlit heights or

[p. 5]

a religious culture hardly less highly evolved perhaps than that of Ancient Egypt.

Indeed, if, as is held by so great an authority as Dr. Wallis Budge, much of the magic lore of Egypt may have originally come from the West, it is most probable that these very Ibibios formed a link in the long chain by which such knowledge was passed across the continent. In this case, the likeness in ritual or legend still occasionally to be traced between those of present-day West Coast tribes and of ancient Egypt would not appear to have been borrowed from the latter and borne across the Continent from east to west, but rather, contrariwise, from the Niger to the Nile. In any case, the Ibibios would seem to be a people of hoar antiquity, and so long have they dwelt in this region, that no legend of an earlier home can be traced among them.

By one of those strange coincidences which are always happening, it had come to our knowledge, some little time before the arrival of the letter asking us to undertake an independent study of the women, that here, at least, many customs of great ethnological interest still obtain which are not only unknown to men, but must always remain beyond the ken of male inquirers. For, by the unwritten law bequeathed to Ibibios from times so remote as to be almost forgotten, it is forbidden for any man to be allowed even a glimmering of mysteries which custom has decreed should be confided to women alone.

To mention one instance--when a man is slain in flight, only married women of his kin or town may

[p. 6]

bear the corpse to its last resting-place. There, in a part of the "bush" set aside for the purpose, and screened from all eyes, the last strange rites are carried out; but nothing that passes within those mysterious shadows may be revealed to man or maiden, whether white or black.

So much my husband had learned, and, as the matter seemed likely to prove of interest, I undertook further investigations, since it was probable that information denied him by ancient law might be given to me. After some difficulty, and on the promise that the name of my informant should never be given, an ancient woman consented to reveal to me rites surely as strange as any on earth. These will be dealt with more fully later, but it seems well to mention the matter here, because it was owing to this discovery that we first learned of the existence of the so-called "women's mysteries," and thus stumbled upon the knowledge that, in West Africa at least, and possibly among primitive peoples the world over, a vast field for research, untrodden as yet, lies open to women which to men must ever remain hopelessly barred.

On this point, Herr Gunter Tessmann, who was fortunate enough to witness the rites of the principal male secret societies among the Pangwe, writes in his excellent monograph: [*1]

 Die Schwierigkeiten, welche allgemein zu uberwinden waren, ehe ich auch nur einen fluchtigen Einblick in das Kultwesen der Manner bekan, die sich auszudenken 

[p. 7]

 habe ich dem Leser uberlassen. Hinsichtlich der Weiberkulte hauften sich diese Schwierigkeiten eben durch den Ausschluss des mannlichen Geschlechts und die naturliche Scheu der Frauen derart, dass es mir nicht moglich war, personlich zu ihnen Zutritt zu erlangen." [*1]

Since our eyes have been opened to the value of data collected from such women with no intervening male influence, it is a matter of deep regret to my sister and myself that we made no independent attempt on a former tour to learn the inner secrets of the great Ekoi cult of Nimm--the woman's secret society, which in the Oban District is strong enough to hold its own against the dreaded Egbo Club itself, and the secrets of which, though closed to all men, might, and probably would, have been revealed to us. It is the more unfortunate that, so far as we could learn, among Ibibio women only two exclusively feminine societies still exist, those of "Ebere" and "Iban Isong," both comparatively small and insignificant. The knowledge of what we had formerly missed, however, naturally made us the more anxious to lose no scrap of information which yet remains to be gleaned concerning those feminine mysteries which have survived to the present day.

In attempting to put upon paper some account of what was thus garnered, the first difficulty confronting so unpractised a writer, was to decide at which point of the life cycle to begin. At first we

[p. 8]

thought of starting this little study of primitive woman at the time when, as a tiny piccan, so fair as to seem almost white, an Ibibio girl-babe first opens her eyes upon the light. Soon, however, we found that the true beginning must be made still farther back. So far, indeed, that little more than a faint echo has floated down through the ages from those remote and distant times.

One evening my husband was seeking information as to the existence of sacrificial altars from a man belonging to the household of Chief Daniel Henshaw, who is head of one of the seven ruling families of Calabar and Native Political Agent for the Eket District. The man questioned on this particular evening was well known for his knowledge of secret things forgotten by, or hidden from, the common herd. He chanced to mention that the only case, in which, to his knowledge, altars were actually built, was on the occasion of sacrifices made to the Great Mother, Eka Abassi (Mother of God).

Offerings to this goddess are always laid upon altars built of logs set crosswise in alternate layers one above the other. When less than breast high, dry twigs are piled above, and upon these the body of a white hen is placed. This must be such a one as has laid many eggs, but by reason of age can lay no more. Fire is set to the twigs and the whole consumed, forming a burnt offering "sweet in the nostrils of Eka Abassi." Subsequent inquiries brought out the fact that the last-named deity is the mother not alone of the Thunder God, Obumo, whom we had hitherto been assured was the head

[p. 9]

of the whole Ibibio pantheon, but also of all created things.

From out the strange vague twilight of the gods therefore, beyond Obumo's self, looms, mystic and awful, the great dim figure of "The Mother"--recalling with startling vividness those dread presences met by Faust on his journey through the realms of the dead in search of the shade of Helen; the "Great Mothers," whose power was so vast as to overawe Mephistopheles himself--recalling, too, whole crowds of myths, lovely or awful, at the root of ancient religions. For Eka Abassi is at. once mother and spouse of Obumo, and between her and the other gods there is a great gulf fixed. To quote the Ibibio phrase, spoken in hushed accents, as was every mention of her--"She is not as the others. She it is who dwells on the other side of the wall."

Nameless, therefore, this Mother of gods and men looms, misty and vast, at the very fount of Ibibio religion. To none now living would the true name of the goddess appear to have been entrusted. Possibly only to a small band of initiates was it ever revealed, in accordance with the old belief that the names of supreme gods may only be confided to a chosen few, lest, by means of these dread names, men, and even lesser gods, might be tempted to conjure. Thus Ra explained the reason why the name given him by his great parents "remained hidden in my body since my birth, that no magician might acquire magic power over me." So Lilith, to avoid the consequences of disobedience to her husband Adam, is said to have uttered the "Most Great Name," by virtue of which

[p. 10]

she was enabled to flee away to a place of safe refuge, and indeed gained such power that even Jehovah Himself was unable to coerce her.

Eka Abassi may not be spoken of among the other gods because she is so far beyond them all. From her has sprung all which exists-from Abassi Obumo "the Thunderer," her son and consort, to the least of living things and every twig, stone or water-drop. In all there dwells some fraction of her. According to those to whom the esoteric teaching has been handed down from times when her cult was as yet unobscured by the fungus growth of fetish and juju worship which has since grown up to hide it, of her might be quoted the words, long hidden beneath the sands of Oxyrhynchus:

"Cleave the log and thou shalt find me. Break the stone, and there am I."

Perhaps most nearly of all does Eka Abassi manifest herself in the unhewn stones set amid sacred waters which are to be found scattered over the length and breadth of the land, or in the great trees, "the givers of babes." Her supreme attribute is "Bestower of Fertility," for, since from her all things have sprung, to her appointed dwelling-places creep barren women, to pray that their curse may be taken from them; while those with hearths left desolate by the silencing of lisping voices, lay before her curls clipped from dead heads, praying that the small feet may soon be set once more upon the earthward road to gladden the hearts of parents untimely deserted.

All babes born in this part of the world are sent by her; while, of the dead, save those who met a to

[p. 11]

violent end, men say "Eka Abassi has taken our brother."

Her eldest-born, Obumo "the Thunderer," once dwelt upon earth, but later went to join "the Sky People." Earth folk have lost the road by which he went, so cannot climb thither, but the Sky People sometimes, though rarely, come down to mix with the children of men. One such story is told of a family in Kwa Town, near to Calabar, who claim to be descendants of no earthly forbears.

"Long ago," so the legend runs, "a big play was being given. All the people were dancing and singing, when suddenly they noticed a stranger going up and down among them. He was very tall and splendid, but answered no word when questioned as to whence he came. All night long the festival lasted, and at dawn a strange woman was seen to have joined the guests. She, too, was finely made and beautiful, but sad looking, and, when asked of her town and parentage, kept silence for a time, but at length after much questioning said:

"'This "play" sounded too sweet in my ears, in the place where I dwelt on high; so I climbed down to hear it more clearly. Half way, the rope broke, and I fell. Now I can never go home any more, since there is no other way by which to climb thither--and I fear! I fear!'

"The townsfolk tried to comfort her, but she would not listen; only went up and down, wringing her hands and weeping. After a while, however, she saw the other stranger and, recognising him for a countryman, was comforted. He, too, had come down

[p. 12]

to view the 'play,' but had lost his road and could not go back. So lie set to work building a home for the Sky woman, where they two might dwell together. Later, children began to come to them 'softly, softly' (i.e. gradually and gently), and these were the ancestors of the present family."

*    *    *    *    *

In many ways the belief of Ibibio women as to the origin of the souls of their babes is much the same as that of Central Australians, whose theory, according to Sir James Frazer, is that a "spirit child has made its way into the mother from the nearest of those trees, rocks, water-pools or other natural features at which the spirits of the dead are waiting to be born again." That some such belief is held by Ibibios is clearly shown by the action of bereaved parents who, as already mentioned, bring curls, clipped from the heads of dead babes, to be placed in a hole in the rock, dedicated to Eka Abassi, here known as Abassi Isu Ma, i.e. "the goddess of the Face of Love"--or, since by a beautiful connection of thought the word for love and motherhood is the same, the name may also be translated "the Face of the Mother"--praying that she will speedily set the feet of their little ones upon the road back to life. In the sacred fish, too, with which all holy pools and streams abound, the souls of dead ancestors are thought to dwell, waiting for reincarnation. Unlike Central Australians, however, as reported by Sir James Frazer, Ibibio women--like their far-off sisters of Banks Island--are well aware that without mortal father no earth-child can be born. Yet, while the body of the new-comer is clearly

[p. 13]

attributed to natural causes, its spirit is thought to be that of the "affinity," either animal or vegetable, with which one or other of its parents was mysteriously linked; or of an ancestor, returned to earth in this new guise.

Among those few, however, who still keep in their hearts, jealously guarded, the secret which has come down from times when woman, not man, was the dominant sex--that not Obumo, but Eka Abassi herself, is the great First Cause--one ancient crone was persuaded to explain to me, after considerable hesitation and obvious nervousness at the thought of confiding so intimate and sacred a matter to a stranger, that the laws which bind mortal women could not apply to the Great Mother of All.

"My grandmother once told me," she said, "that the Juju Isu Ndemm ("the Face of the Juju"), which lies in our town of Ndiya, is the mouthpiece of Eka Abassi. So great is the latter, that no husband was needed for the birth of her babes. By her own might alone, did the first of these, Obumo, spring forth; but to none of her descendants was this power transmitted. When, therefore, she saw that all the first earth-women were barren, long she pondered; then sent down to them a great white bird, which, on reaching earth, laid a gleaming egg--(the symbol of fertility).

"Old women tell that, after showing the people how, by honouring eggs and oval stones, and making sacrifice to the Great Mother, the gift of fruitfulness might be won, the magic bird flew back to its home in the sky; whence, with folded wings, soft brooding,

[p. 14]

she still watches over the children of men. Mortals call her 'Moon' and sometimes, when people are sleeping, the Moon-bird floats down from her place in the sky and pecks up grains or other food, which she finds lying about. She looks round to see that all is well with the earth-folk, and that the tabu on fowls and eggs is still observed; for in our town neither may be eaten, and, were this command broken, sudden death would fall upon the offender, by means of the great Juju Isu Ndemm. Should the hens have any complaint to make on this subject they would tell the Moon-bird, and she would bear their plaint before Eka Abassi, who would not only exact the death of the actual offenders, but withdraw her gift--thus sending barrenness upon all the countryside."

(It is because of this service that the goddess, as already mentioned, forbids the offering to her of any fowl, save such as has borne many eggs in its day, but, by reason of age, has ceased from bearing.)

The ancient woman naively added:

"That this is the simple truth and no fable, can be proved even to white people. For when you look up into the sky on a clear night, many or few, but plain to be seen, are the little star eggs--and how could these get there, if it were not that the great white Moon-bird had laid them?

Footnotes

^3:1 "Sex Antagonism," p. 80.

^6:1 Die Pangwe. Volkerkundliche Monographie eines westafrikanischen Negerstammes. Von Gunter Tessmann. Vol. ii.

^7:1 "The difficulties to be overcome in general before I obtained even a glimpse into the secrets of male cults I have left to the imagination of the reader. With regard to feminine cults. these difficulties were so increased, through the exclusion of the male sex and the natural timidity of woman, that it was impossible for me to gain personal access to such."

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

 

CHAPTER II

 

PRENATAL INFLUENCES AND BIRTH CUSTOMS

FOR Ibibio women motherhood is the crown of life, and therefore "jujus" thought to have the power of granting fertility or removing the curse of barrenness are held in greater reverence than all others.

Juju is beyond all else the force which dominates the lives of people such as these. The word itself is said to be taken from the French joujou, and was given to the fetish images everywhere seen because early traders of this nationality looked upon them as a kind of doll.

Many West-Coasters use the terms juju and fetish as if they were interchangeable, yet there would seem to be a distinct difference between the two. The latter appears to apply only to objects inhabited by the indwelling power of juju, which "includes all uncomprehended mysterious forces of Nature. These vary in importance from elementals so powerful as to hold almost the position of demi-gods, to the 'mana'--to use a Melanesian term--of herb, stone, or metal. In another sense the word also includes the means by which such forces may be controlled or influenced; secrets wrung from the deepest recesses of Nature by men wise above their fellows, or mercifully

[p. 16]

imparted to some favoured mortal by one or other of the deities." [*1]

The word fetish is "derived through the Portuguese feitico from the Latin facticius--facere, i.e. to do. This shows the original conception at the root of the word." . . . . (It) "was probably first applied to images, idols or amulets made by hand, and later includes all objects possessing magical potency, i.e. bewitched or 'faked.'" [*2]

Holy pools and rocks, many of which are regarded as the earthly manifestation of Eka Abassi, and are often connected with the rites of her son and spouse, Obumo the Thunderer, hold first place among jujus, in the opinion of the greater number of Ibibio women. True it is that her fame and glory have--save to a few initiates--long since been eclipsed by his. Yet "water, earth and stone, the three great 'Mothers,' are almost always to be found within the grove of the All-Father. Each of these is thought to symbolise a different phase of motherhood. The first, for instance, may perchance be taken as a representation of the Ibibio Aphrodite. She is all that is soft and alluring, while the fish which teem in her waters are the sign of boundless and inexhaustible fruitfulness. She never grows old or parched, neither may she be roughly used, burnt by fire, nor torn and cut by hoe and spade, as is the case with her homelier sister the Earth. This second member of the trilogy may perhaps be described as the working mother. She it is who produces the crops to nourish her children

[p. 17]

in life, and provides their last long resting-place when work is done." [*1]

A term in common use for expressing the approach of death is to speak of the time "when my mother shall take me," because all men are laid to sleep in her gentle arms. It is for this reason, above all others, that Ibibios cling with such jealous tenacity to their land and so fiercely resent the least hint at a change of tenure. The proudest landowners of our own northern climes, who, at no matter what cost of poverty or hardship, hold to ancestral acres, can hardly be moved by so intense a passion at the thought of their loss as are these poor sons of the soil at the merest hint of a change in the land laws. Such a thought seems like outrage aimed at a loved one; for to them, Isong, the Earth Mother, is, in a way, nearest and dearest of all.

Stones and rocks again are also looked upon as givers of fertility; mostly in conjunction with Obumo himself. The genius of the stone is sometimes named Abassi Ma, and is looked upon in a special sense as the consort of the Thunder God. She it is who, more than all other manifestations of Eka Abassi, is thought to have the power to remove the curse of sterility from barren women, or send new babes to desolate hearths. It is naturally hard to induce primitive peoples to explain fundamental ideas such as these, yet, from what could be gleaned in the matter, it seems not over-fanciful to think that the trilogy of motherhood symbols may be taken to represent three aspects of womanhood--mistress, attracting and alluring;

[p. 18]

house-mother, drudge and provider; and consort, the sharer of dignities and honours.

Of the sacred pools, some two score in number, which we were privileged to be the first "white men" to view, that of Abassi Isu Ma, near Ikotobo--a rumour of which was first brought to my husband's notice by Mr. Eakin of the Kwa Ibo Mission, who, later on, induced a guide to lead us thither--is perhaps the most famous. In his company, one Sunday afternoon, we set out, and at length, after passing along a narrow path through thick "bush," reached the farthest point to which ordinary mortals had hitherto been allowed access. Beyond this only the head priest had been permitted to penetrate, in order to lay offerings within a hole in the sacred rock which faces the entrance and is the outward visible sign of the Great Mother herself.

"Low down on the face of the stone, beneath its veil of moss, and about a foot above the surface of the water, loomed a circular hole, partially filled by offerings laid there by the Chief Priest."

"A strange superstition has grown up around the rock. To it, or rather to the place of sacrifice just below, for, as has already been mentioned, the spot itself is too sacred for the near approach of ordinary mortals, come wedded couples to pray that babes may be born to them. Barrenness is regarded, not only as the greatest curse which can fall to the lot of man or woman, but also as a sign that the bride was a disobedient daughter. When a maid refuses to obey her mother, the latter says:

"'Because you have been a bad daughter to me

[p. 19]

no child shall be born to you, that thus atonement may be made for your undutiful behaviour.'" [*1]

This idea is surely near of kin to the warning voiced in the "Maxims of Ani":

"Give thy mother no cause to be offended at thee, lest she lift up her hands to the god, who will surely hear her complaint and will punish thee." [*2]

A little earlier in the same interesting document a man is bidden "to be most careful how he treats the mother who suckled him for three years and carried bread and beer to him every day when he was at school."

When an Ibibio woman has transgressed in such a manner, and punishment has in consequence befallen, her husband leads her down to the sacred pool. At the place of sacrifice they give offerings to the priest. Thence the woman wades up stream almost to the entrance of the sacred pool, where she makes obeisance and prays:

"O Abassi Ma! Keeper of souls! What have I done to anger Thee? Look upon me, for from the time I left the fatting-room in my mother's house I have never conceived, and am a reproach before all women. Behold! I bring gifts, and beg Thee to have pity upon me and give me a child. Grant but this prayer, and all my life I will be Thy servant!"

The priest then takes an earthen bowl, never before used, dips it into the sacred water, and pours some over the woman, who bends down so that face, arms and body may be laved by the stream.

[p. 20]

When she rises again the little party climb up the steep bank to the place where the rest of the offerings lie. These are cooked and eaten by husband, wife and priest; after which the suppliant returns home, strong in the hope that Isu Ma will take away her reproach. . . . When a child is granted in answer to such a prayer, custom ordains that he or she shall be named 'Ma,'" [*1] in gratitude to the Great Mother. This fact alone would appear sufficient refutation of the charge that love and gratitude play no part in West African religions.

So soon as an Ibibio woman discovers that she is about to bear a babe, old wise women of the race gather round her to teach the thousand and one things which she must or must not do in order to secure the well-being of the new-comer.

All over this part of the country grows a herb with blue flowers, the spikes of which bear blooms in shape like those of a giant heliotrope, but of vividest cobalt, while the stems look as if stained with indigo. The under sides of the leaves, too, are often blue veined, and, from a distance, stretches of this plant, which springs up upon old farm-land or any cleared space, look like a splash of summer sky caught in the green of the bush. Large posies of this flower are picked by the friends of the mother-to-be and rubbed over her body that her pains may be lightened.

The greater number of tabu imposed at such times relate to food. For instance, no snail, especially the great Acatina marginata, may be eaten, lest the babe

[p. 21]

should be afflicted with a too plentiful flow of saliva. Nor may an expectant mother eat pig, lest the skin of her child should become spotted in consequence, nor of the fat white maggots to be found in palm trees, lest its breathing powers should be affected. The tabu on pig, which is strictly observed here for mothers, is much like that reported from Guiana as imposed upon fathers, whose "partaking of the agouti would make the child meagre, or eating a labba would make the infant's mouth protrude like the labba's or make it spotted like the labba, which spots would ultimately become ulcers." [*1] So far as could be learnt, however, an Ibibio father is not under the necessity of abstaining from any kind of food.

When a woman on the verge of motherhood chances to pass along a path crossed by a line of ants, she may not step over them, lest her unborn babe should be marked with a bald line round the head, supposed to resemble the "ant road." To avoid such a catastrophe she must first pick large leaves and lay these over the spot where she means to cross. Next she should collect sand and strew it over them, for only when the leaves are thus almost covered may she step across.

Mr. Elphinstone Dayrell informed us that among the natives of the Ikom District, of which he was Commissioner, the curious superstition obtains that should a man or woman chance to tread upon a millipede no further children would be born to them. Among Ibibios, too, these creatures axe regarded as the harbingers of misfortune.

[p. 22]

Amid both Efiks and Ibibios the ancient custom still obtains that locks should be undone and knots untied in the house of a woman who is about to bear a babe, since all such are thought, by sympathetic magic, to retard delivery. A case was related of a jealous wife, who, on the advice of a witch doctor versed in the mysteries of her sex, hid a selection of padlocks beneath her garments, then went and sat down near the sick woman's door and surreptitiously turned the key in each. She had previously stolen an old waist-cloth from her rival, which she knotted so tightly over and over that it formed a ball, and, as an added precaution, she locked her fingers closely together and sat with crossed legs, exactly as did Juno Lucina of old when determined to prevent the birth of the infant Hercules.

Sir James Frazer, in the "Taboo" section of his wonderful book "The Golden Bough," gives many examples of similar beliefs. To quote a few instances:

"In north-western Argyllshire superstitious people used to open every lock in the house at childbirth. The old Roman custom of presenting women with a key as a symbol of an easy delivery perhaps points to the observance of a similar custom."

"Thus, among the Saxons of Transylvania, when a woman is in travail all knots on her garments are untied, because it is believed that this will facilitate her delivery, and with the same intention all the locks in the house, whether on doors or boxes, are unlocked." [*1]

"The Lapps think that a lying-in woman should

[p. 23]

have no knot on her garments, because a knot would have the effect of making the delivery difficult and painful. In ancient India it was a rule to untie all knots in a house at the moment of childbirth. Roman religion required that women who took part in the rites of Juno Lucina, the Goddess of Childbirth, should have no knot tied on their persons." [*1]

The temptation to quote from Sir James Frazer, which besets one at every turn, must, however, be resisted as far as possible, since, did one but yield to it, even to a comparatively small extent, such is the charm of style and vast learning of this great anthropologist that one could no longer venture to claim for this little record that it was written without intervening male influence."

*    *    *    *    *

Throughout the whole of her life no Ibibio woman may eat of a double yam or double plantain lest she bear twin children--the dread of which misfortune looms so large as to darken the existence of Ibibio women. Wretched indeed, in the old days, was the lot of any unfortunate mother of twins, since, though most of the men now deny this, averring that twin babes were only hated and feared as something monstrous and unnatural, a considerable number of women confessed that they, like those of many neigbbouring tribes, believed that one of the pair at least was no merely mortal offspring but that of some wandering demon.

Till a comparatively short time ago such a birth was followed by the death of both mother and babes,

[p. 24]

and, except where the fear of the white man is too strong, twins are not allowed to live even now. The custom is either to fling both little ones into the bush to be devoured by leopards or other fierce wood-folk, to offer them up on the beach to be eaten by vultures, or to kill one of them outright and starve the other, the bodies being then flung into bush or river.

Of late years this cruel custom has been modified to the extent that, after bringing about, or at least consenting to, the death of her babes, the woman is allowed to seek refuge in a town set apart for twin mothers. There she is still obliged to undergo "purification" for a period of twelve moons before being allowed to mix again with her fellows. In such circumstances it is customary, in some parts, for the husband to build a but for her and take food thither once a week.

On one occasion not very long ago a wretched twin mother, driven out of her town, made her way to the nearest "twin village." It happened that most of the inhabitants had almost "cleansed" themselves, that is to say, had passed through the greater part of the twelve moons during which they were forbidden to mix with their fellows. Contact with another woman who had but just borne twins would have rendered them unclean once more, so they drove forth the wretched mother, who, weak and almost despairing, managed to reach the town where Mr. Eakin, of the Kwa Ibo Mission, was staying at the time. The unfailing charity of this good friend provided all that was necessary for the moment; then,

[p. 25]

as soon as the woman was sufficiently recovered, they set out together for the nearest "twin town."

It was midnight when they arrived, and none of the inhabitants would open their doors to this sister in misfortune. So soon, however, as they understood that she was no longer alone, but accompanied by one whose word they had long since learned it was best to obey, a great clatter arose. A woman, whose time of "purification" was almost at an end, turned out every pot, pan and chattel from her dwelling, lest they might be contaminated by the new-comer, and bore them to the house of a neighbour whose year of seclusion was also all but over. The sick woman was then allowed to take possession of the deserted dwelling.

At stated intervals markets are held by the unhappy outcasts, to which, under certain restrictions and precautions, others may come to buy or sell. On the way to one of these markets, should a "twin woman" meet one not defiled like herself, she must spring into the bush and remain hidden till her more fortunate sister has passed by, so that the "clean" woman may not be soiled by contact with one so befouled. Perhaps one of the saddest effects of this cruel superstition is the dread with which "twin mothers" regard their own offspring. Mr. Eakin told us that once, on entering a house to which he had hastened on learning of the event which had just taken place there, he found a pair of new-born twins lying in a little basket. The wretched mother shook with fear whenever her glance fell upon them. It is difficult indeed to persuade such women to

[p. 26]

nourish their unfortunate babes, which are often only kept alive by the charity of Christian natives, or of women from other tribes who have come to settle in the neighbourhood. Such a case happened near Awa, in the western part of the district, where Mrs. Etete, a Christian woman from the Gold Coast, brought up to us twins and their mother, whom she had saved from death the year before.

Sad indeed is the lot of girl twins rescued from the fate ordained by the law of their race; for, unless some fortunate chance takes them away from their own country, they are shunned through life. No matter where they may strive to hide their secret it somehow gets known that they are "twin women," and no man would dream of approaching such with thoughts of love or marriage, save those who have absolutely no regard for their reputations. Only a short time ago a libel case was brought before my husband in one of the native courts. In this the plaintiff claimed heavy damages for defamation of character. During the course of the evidence it transpired that the words so bitterly resented had been--"He said that I was such a man as would be willing to marry a 'twin woman'!"

The gravity of this statement from the native point of view can readily be understood when one remembers that, by Ibibio law, any man found guilty of intercourse with a "twin woman" could be put to death. Even now it would be looked upon as sufficient cause for granting divorce to a wife if she could prove that her husband was keeping a "twin woman" as his sweetheart.

[p. 27]

Also, should such a charge be proved against a member of the Idiong Society--one of the most powerful secret cults of the region--he was immediately expelled. On August 21st, 1913, a case in point was brought up before the Native Court at Ikotobo. In this, Ekkpo Akpan, son of the head priest of Idiong, stated on oath:

"The Idiong Society has a law that if any member should take a 'twin woman' as sweetheart he must be expelled. It was found out that Nwa Adiaha Udo Ide was a 'twin woman,' and therefore we decided that her husband should be turned out for having married her. In revenge for his expulsion the woman came and said that I also had been her sweetheart. She made this charge because my father is the head priest of Idiong, and she wished to be revenged upon him, through me. Formerly she had accused my brother of the same offence. The case was tried in this Court, and the members decided that her statement was false. Judgment was therefore given in my brother's favour."

With great difficulty and after much persuasion a woman of the tribe was induced to impart to me the secret reason which lies at the root of this dread of taking a girl twin in marriage. Shaking with fear at the thought of even mentioning so abhorrent a thing, my informant said in a voice so low as to be barely audible:

"Since the girl herself is not as other women, but part offspring of a demon, so the souls of children born to her go, sooner or later, to join their kindred, the evil devils. When the husband dies also, and

[p. 28]

comes to the ghost town, he finds the spirits of his accursed brood waiting to claim him as their father, and shame him in the sight of all the shades."

In this there would seem to be an echo of the ancient Babylonian and rabbinical belief "that a man might have children by allying himself with a demon, and although they would naturally not be visible to human beings, yet when that man was dying they would hover round his bed, and, after his death, would hail him as their father." [*1]

No "twin mother" may pass through, or even near, a sacred water. This prohibition would seem also to apply to their offspring, but, as so few of these latter have hitherto been allowed to live, no case of actual transgression by them has come to our notice.

Once, in passing through the Okkobbor country near the town of Ube, we came to a little dell crossed by a raised path from the higher land beyond. On either side of the road was marshy ground, and, towards the middle of the glen, a stream of water flowed. right through the earth beneath the path.

We were looking at this and wondering how it had been formed, when a group of women and children passed by on their way back to Ube, their native town. When questioned about the water, they threw out their hands with the graceful gesture usual among this people in disclaiming knowledge, and answered, "Mi ifiokka," i.e. "I don't know."

It was quite obvious that they knew but would not tell. The prettiest and most richly dressed among

[p. 29]

them was wearing four silver bangles, each bearing the emblems of Faith, Hope and Charity; so her reason for disclaiming knowledge was easily read.

My husband asked if she were a Christian; whereon she at once, and proudly, answered in the affirmative. He then said, smiling and holding up an admonitory finger, "But Christians may not tell lies! "Whereon they all burst into laughter, and she began to speak:

"In the old old days long ago, a magic water lay between the little hills, and through this no 'twin woman' might pass. Mbiam Ube was the name of the spirit of the pool, and to him the people of Ube used to bring offerings of palm-wine and rum, white hens and black cocks; for this was a strong juju for the granting of prayers.

"One day there came a 'twin woman' who was proud and of a bad heart, and paid no heed to the old laws. Right through the water she walked, but it shrank away from the touch of her, and since then has only flowed through the earth, beneath the road, that it may no longer be polluted by the feet of such as she. To this day no one drinks of the stream lest he should die, but offerings are still made to the indwelling juju, for fear that he might otherwise grow angry and harm our town."

Fortunately missionary effort and the influence of white rule are now beginning to make headway against this dread of twins.

Once, near the end of our tour, on returning to Eket, the son of the head chief of a neighbouring town came to bring us the news that his wife and

[p. 30]

sister-in-law had each given birth to twins on the same day, only a few hours before our arrival. He is a Christian, and knew himself and his family secure in the protection of Government; but his dancing eyes and happy air showed that, in his case at least, the old horror of twins was a thing of the past.

How different were matters before the coming of white men, is proved by the fact that one of the first acts of the "African Association" after building their factory at Eket was to establish, on their own grounds, a place of refuge for "twin mothers." This afterwards grew into the Eket "twin town."

Footnotes

^16:1 "In the Shadow of the Bush," p. 49. P. Amaury Talbot.

^16:2 "Magic and Fetishism," pp. 66-7. Dr. Haddon, F.R.S.

^17:1 Edinburgh Review," July, 1914. P. Amaury Talbot.

^19:1 "By Haunted Waters." P. Amaury Talbot--to be published shortly.

^19:2 "Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection," p. 216. Dr. E. Wallis Budge.

^20:1 By Haunted Waters." P. Amaury Talbot.

^21:1 "Magic and Fetishism," p. 13. A. C. Haddon, F.R.S.

^22:1 "Volksthumlicher Brauch und Glaube bei Geburt und Taufe im Siebenburger Sachsenlande," p. 15. J. Hillner.

^23:1 Taboo and the Perils of the. Soul," p. 294. J. G. Frazer.

^28:1 "The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia." R. C. Thompson. Vol. i., p. xxvi. See also "Burial Customs."

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

 

CHAPTER III

 

BIRTH CUSTOMS (continued)

THE rumour of another "twin town" of a very different kind has lately reached our ears. It is given on the authority of Akpan Abassi of Ndiya, who asserts that he visited the place with five companions. Certainly his fame as a magician has been greatly augmented since this visit. The following is his story:

"About three months' distance from Ndiya on the far side of the Kwa Ibo River, when one has journeyed past Opobo and past Bonny which lie to the leftward, after marching for many miles to the north-west, one comes at length to a part of the land where white rule is unknown. Here there is a town called Ekeple Ukim, where none but women live. It is a famous town, and the women who dwell there know 'plenty medicine too much.' That is why strangers go thither, because they seek to learn both magic and healing from its inhabitants. Our people call the place by another name, namely, Obio Iban-Iban, i.e. the Town of Women.

"By the side of the road grows high bush, which, as the town is neared, arches over till the view is quite shut out. So thick are the bushes, that towards the end of the way one cannot walk upright,

[p. 32]

but must bend down and in places even creep, especially where the bamboo clumps grow thick and high. When we had passed through this leafy tunnel, the prospect suddenly opened before us, and we saw the town, girt round with hundreds of giant cotton trees.

"Near to the main entrance bubbles a spring, the water of which is white like milk, because it flows over chalk. This the townswomen drink; but we refused it. Luckily, near by grew clumps of a cane, something like sugar-cane to look at, but with acid juice. This we cut and sucked, and its sap served us instead of water.

"When we entered the town the women left their occupations and ran up, crowding round us and asking by signs, 'What do you want?' Adding, 'No man may come here!'

"As we did not know the language of the country we could only talk by signs like deaf and dumb people at home. When we tried to explain why we had come, an old wife said further:

"'If you would live among us, even for a short time, each of you must sacrifice a fowl to our juju, otherwise you will die.'

"To this four of us agreed, but the other two said to themselves, 'What these people say is mere foolishness. We are strong and well, and have our own jujus; therefore we will not sacrifice to theirs.'

"On behalf of the four who made the offering ordained the women prayed to the gods of the town that their lives might be spared; and this prayer was granted. For a month all of us were permitted to stay because the women saw that we were foot-sore

[p. 33]

and weary, so they said that we might tarry for that space to refresh ourselves for the fatigues of the return journey. Longer than this we were not allowed to linger, so at the end of the time all six set forth once more; but the two who had refused to sacrifice died on the homeward way. Every day during our visit the women beat fu-fu and cooked soup, and set it out in a certain place. It seemed to be the custom for visitors to eat this, so we did so, and left money in exchange on the spot where the 'chop' had been found.

"At one place in this town was a great juju, the name of which we could not learn. On the top of it was a man's skull, and many skulls lay around. Hundreds of sheep and chickens wandered up and down in the streets, but not a single goat was to be seen, nor one solitary head of cattle.

"It was a very big town, and we wished to find out the reason why it was inhabited by women only. After a time we learnt as follows from nelghbouring tribes:

"'Once, long ago, at a town hereabouts, a woman bore twin children--a boy and a girl. Now, it was unlawful for twins, or the mother of twins, to dwell in these towns; so the inhabitants drove them off.

"'It happened that the husband of the woman loved her very much. So he said, "If my wife may not live in this place neither will I. I would rather dwell with her in the bush." He therefore followed her, and built a home where they might all live together.

In course of time the boy died, but the girl grew 

[p. 34]

strong and big. Again the mother conceived, and bore twins once more, a boy and a girl. A second time the boy died and the girl lived. A third time also the same thing happened.

"'Now, all these girls grew up to be fine and tall, and when men passed by that way they wished to wed them. Each time, however, that a male babe was borne to any of these he died, and only girls were left. After awhile, therefore, the habit was formed of sending boy children away when they were still very small; while the girls remained and grew up, until at length they formed a big town. Even now, though they welcome lovers who please them, they will never let these stay for long. Boy babes are sent away to be brought up in the homes of their fathers, but girls must always remain with their mothers in Obio Iban-Iban.'"

Perhaps it is wrong to suspect our informant and his companions of other motives in visiting this mysterious town save that of the thirst for knowledge alleged by themselves. An air of retrospective pleasure ran through the man's account, however, possibly due to satisfaction in relating a rare--and indeed for this part of the world unique--experience. Unless my memory deceives me, certain similarities in his description and in that of the town of the Amazons given by Spruce in his book "A Botanist on the Orinoco," would, I think, strike the most casual reader. At any rate, the lot of these far-off "twin town" women is much to be envied by their unfortunate Ibibio sisters.

One day, when after a very long march we arrived

[p. 35]

at Okon Ekkpo, or Jamestown, as it is more usually called by white men, we learned from the two lady missionaries stationed there in connection with the Primitive Methodist Mission that an event, rare amid races such as these, had just taken place--namely the birth of triplets to a woman of the town. No sooner was news of this occurrence brought to the Institute than the devoted missionaries set out for the house of the unhappy mother in order to make sure that the new-born should not be sacrificed according to the ancient custom of the tribe. They found the woman in a state of utmost terror, and it was only through constant visiting, and themselves holding and tending the unwelcome new-comers, that the mother was somewhat reassured and induced to nourish her offspring. They noticed that one of the three was stronger and bigger than the others, and to this the mother devoted herself to the neglect of its fellows, which were therefore not long-lived. So far as we could learn this is the first case recorded among Ibibios in which even one out of a triple birth has been allowed to grow up.

To show how rare is such an event among primitive peoples, it may perhaps be well to mention here that among the Ekoi and neighbouring tribes, so far as we could learn, the arrival of triplets had never been heard of, nor would such an occurrence appear to be regarded as within the bounds of possibility. Dr. Mansfeld, a well known German Commissioner in the South Kamerun, told us that once, when questioning a native on the subject, the man had smiled with a superior air and answered:

[p. 36]

"Aber, mein Herr, mit drei Kindern Niederkommen ist nicht moglich! Eine Frau hat ja nur zwei Bruste!"

Had it not been for the presence of the missionaries and a fear that rumours of the deed might reach the ever-open ear of Government, the mother and her three babes would, in all probability, have been sacrificed. The power for good wielded by such white women as these missionaries can hardly be exaggerated. Young, almost childlike in appearance, the one with wide-open blue eyes and long braids of golden hair falling below the waist, the other with eyes of steady brown set in a, face grown pale with overwork and strain, these two heroic women lived alone in a part of the district, which, although we personally have rather a partiality for it, is generally regarded as a kind of Alsatia for the whole region. The "Girls' Institute," for which at the time of the occurrence above related Miss Fisher and Miss Elkins had made themselves responsible, was founded some years ago by Miss Richardson, a member of the same mission, who later returned to resume charge of the educational department, while Miss Fisher (now Mrs. Dodd) has accompanied her husband to another sphere of missionary work. To our pleasure Miss Elkins still remained.

In that part of the district which lies round Awa a reason is given for the killing of twins which is quite unconnected with any idea as to demoniacal origin. The following is the local account of the cause of the custom:

"The first pair of twins sent to Earth, so our

[p. 37]

mothers tell, unfortunately came to the dwelling of a family poor and of little account. When news of their arrival reached the neighbouring chiefs and members of great houses, these gathered together in much anxiety at such an unprecedented occurrence, and consulted as to what should be done. 'Behold,' said they, 'this woman first bore one child. Now she has given birth to two together; should she continue to go on in the way in which she has begun, next time she may bear four, and after that six or even eight, and so on until her family surpasses any of ours. If poor people are allowed to grow "strong" at such a rate, what will become of us? We shall have no chance to seize their property on the death of the head of their house, nor to force them to serve us as before when their family was small and of little account and there was none to take their part.'

That, so our grandmothers tell, is the reason why the murder of twins was started in the Awa country. Had the first twins come to a rich or powerful family there would have been no killing.

"Not long afterwards the king's head wife also gave birth to a boy and a girl, and a meeting of the townsfolk was called to discuss the matter. The king and his relatives tried their utmost to save the lives of the babes, but the poor folk combined and said, 'They shall be killed, as were those of our woman.' The more the rich strove to save the chief's twin children, the more did the poor insist upon their death, crying, 'As you did to us and our babes, so will we do also unto you and yours.' That is the reason why twin children were killed even unto our own day. In the

[p. 38]

country round Awa, however, no 'twin mother' is ever put to death, only driven forth from her town."

With this fear before their eyes, it is natural that women about to become mothers should consult a native doctor some time before the expected birth of their babes in order to learn from him if there is any probability of the arrival of twins. Should he answer in the affirmative, medicine is given by which the danger may be averted.

Next to the dread of becoming a mother of twins looms that of bearing a child into whose body some evil spirit has entered. This may be that of ancestor or kinsman undesirable on account of bodily or mental deformity, or because they come from a family tainted with "witchcraft."

So-called "birth-marks" seem to be quite common among this people, although such are here attributed to causes different from those assigned them in northern climes. An Ibibio baby is eagerly scanned for any sign which may reveal the identity of the indwelling Ego. Parents often notice some likeness to a dead friend, or trick of speech or movement in a child which to their minds shows that it is an old spirit reborn in some new body. A striking example of the way in which such deductions are made happened at Ndiya about ten years ago, and was told as follows:

"A man named Osim Essiet married a wife, and a little while before the birth of their first child he was attacked by an enemy and left lying in the bush with his head severed from his body. When he did not return, friends set out to look for him. After some time they found the corpse, bore it home and

[p. 39]

laid it upon a native bed. When the young wife saw this horrible sight, she cried out and flung herself down by the side of the body, calling upon the name of her husband and entreating him not to leave her.

"Some weeks afterwards the child was born. Round his neck was the mark as of a line at the place where his father's head had been severed, and, indeed, his neck is still shorter than that of most people. The townsfolk noticed this peculiarity, and felt sure, because of it, that the boy was really Osim Essiet himself come back to life again because he loved his wife very dearly and in answer to her entreaties that she might not be left alone. They therefore gave him, in his new incarnation, the same name as he had borne before."

A somewhat similar case happened at Ikott Atako, near Eket, and is thus related:

"There was once a woman of this town, Etuk Nkokk by name, who, not long after she had left the Fatting-house, bore a boy. At first the babe was like other children save that he was very weak, but as the years went on he hardly seemed to grow at all, and by the age of twenty was not quite four feet high. One day his mother went out and noticed the fine strong children born to her neighbours. When she came home, she looked loweringly at her sickly son and said, 'No other woman has a child like you! I wish you might die that I may be no more shamed by the sight of you!' Not long afterwards the boy sickened and died, and before they brought the coffin in which to lay him for burial the mother said to herself: 'This piccan gave me too much trouble!

[p. 40]

I wish to find some way of punishing him and preventing him from returning to life.' So she took thought, and at length cut off his right hand, saying to herself, 'Now he will surely be ashamed, and not come back into my family any more.'

"A few months later another child was born, but lo! it was the same boy come back again, as was plain to be seen because he had only one hand. When the people went to see the mother and the new-born babe, they recognised him at once for the one who had died, and, seeing the handless wrist, asked 'How could you do such a cruel thing to your firstborn?' She answered, 'It was because I did not want him to come back again, and thought he would be ashamed to show himself among us thus maimed.' The people said, 'It is a misfortune, but it cannot be helped! This is your punishment, and you must just do your best for him.' So the woman took their advice and did everything possible for the child, in consequence of which he grew up and is still alive, a little taller than during his first earth-life, but smaller than other men."

The mother of Chief Henshaw of Oron regards him as an example of reincarnation. The name Nyung, by which he is everywhere known among black people, means "thrice born"--an appellation which she gave him because her two first babes had died, and she believed that at his birth the same spirit came back once more; this time, not in vain.

The dread of the return of "wandering souls," who reincarnate only to bring trouble upon the family

[p. 41]

into which they have chosen to come, is common over the greater part of West Africa. Mary Kingsley thus describes the way in which parents seek to protect themselves against the infliction of these annoying spirits:

"When two babes in a family have previously died in suspicious circumstances the father takes the body of the third baby which has also died in the same way and smashes one of its leg bones before it is thrown away into the bush; for he knows he has got a wanderer soul--namely a sisa. . . . He just breaks the leg so as to warn the soul he is not a man to be trifled with, and will not have his family kept in a state of perpetual uproar and expense. It sometimes happens, however, in spite of this that when his fourth baby arrives that too goes off in convulsions. Thoroughly roused now, paterfamilias sternly takes a chopper, and chops that infant's remains extremely small, and it is scattered broadcast. Then he holds he has eliminated that sisa from his family.

"I am informed, however, that the fourth baby to arrive in a family afflicted by a sisa does not usually go off in convulsions, but that fairly frequently it is born lame, which shows that it is that wanderer soul back with its damaged leg."

Mothers seek eagerly for the first sign of resemblance to deceased relatives shown by a babe, and should no likeness be traceable, they watch to see which of the surrounding objects will first attract the notice of the new-comer. This custom is also recorded by Miss Kingsley in her characteristically lively manner.

[p. 42]

"The new babies as they arrive in the family are shown a selection of small articles belonging to deceased members . . . .; the thing the child catches hold of identifies him. 'Why, he's Uncle John! See, he knows his own pipe;' or 'That's Cousin Emma! See, she knows her market calabash,' and so on."

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

 

CHAPTER IV

 

AFFINITIES OR "BUSH SOULS"

THE time at which little ones first begin to creep must be an anxious one to those Ibibio mothers to whom no sign has as yet been vouchsafed as to the identity of the soul which has entered into their babes. For should the child be possessed by an "affinity," either animal or vegetable, the fact begins to manifest itself during the crawling stage.

The term "affinity" is in use among educated natives throughout the West Coast to express the mysterious link believed to exist between human beings and the plant or animal into which they are thought, under certain conditions, to have the power of sending forth their souls.

To white people, at first sight, such ideas seem so strange that it is almost inconceivable that they could have gained so firm a hold over the imagination of natives in such far distant parts of the world. When, however, we remember the belief in were-wolves and other terrible half-human folk, which persisted till comparatively lately in our own northern climes, the idea of the so-called Calabar "bush soul" becomes less incredible.

True it is that at home amid the matter-of-fact surroundings of the present day it seems, as one of our

[p. 44]

friends lately remarked, "impossible for human beings to believe that they actually take upon themselves animal form." Out here, however, whether camping in the vast dimness of the bush, or sitting, as now, in a little mud and wattle rest-house beneath which the dark, swift waters of the Cross River slip soundlessly by, such ideas take on a new aspect. The silence seems pregnant with mysteries, fascinating but terrible, the secrets of which, voices--half drowned in rustle of leaves or lap of water--seem ever about to reveal to the listening ear. For those, who live close to the heart of nature, there undoubtedly exists a link between man and the forest creatures, long since lost to dwellers in cities.

Even white men are, now and again, admitted to a strange intimacy with the jungle folk, and in some ways the uncanny tie, thought by some primitive peoples to exist between man and animal, seems hardly more strange than does the affection lavished by some bush creatures on those white intruders upon their solitudes into whose power chance may have caused them to fall. Once, at evening time, for instance, when sitting before our tents in a little clearing made in the heart of the bush, a tiny lemur sprang to shelter inside my husband's shirt from the snake or bush-cat which was chasing him. Months later, when the strange little beast lay down to die, as a result of a surfeit of coco-nut milk, after every conceivable remedy had been tried in vain, he cried like a baby on being abandoned because it was thought more merciful to leave him to die in peace; but settled down contentedly the moment one of us returned, and at 

[p. 45]

length passed peacefully away, his tiny black-gloved hand clasped trustingly round one of our fingers. [*1]

Again, there is the case of the splendid lion cub Fort Lamy, sent to us as a present from Ober-Leutnant von Raben, German Resident at Kusseri in the North Kamerun, with a letter in which the hope was somewhat quaintly expressed, "that the little lion might enjoy the ladies!" (presumably a translation of 'Die Damen erfreuen'). This beautiful creature, who, with his brother Kusseri, long welcomed visitors at the Zoo, was sent to England at about the age of six months, up to which time he had been constantly with us. A year's tour in Southern Nigeria and several months in England intervened before we were able to visit him. At last, one Sunday afternoon, we went with a friend. It was just before feeding time and the lion house was crowded, but Fort Lamy sat indifferent, alone in his cage, and with his back to the spectators. A single call, and he sprang to the bars--two great paws thrust through to clutch our hands, which he proceeded to drag inside, and stuff, with as much arm as he could manage, into his mouth. Then, still holding on, regardless of damaged gown or coat sleeve, the great beast flung himself upon his back and lay lashing the ground with his tail and exhibiting every sign of joy at meeting us once more. Perhaps natives would explain this unforgetting affection by saying that in past ages the spirit of the lion had been mysteriously linked with that of some mortal! Certain it is that for many years to come, the effort

[p. 46]

to disabuse the negro of his belief in "affinities" will prove useless. Hardly does one imagine that a little headway has been made in this direction than coincidence after coincidence happens to render the belief more deep-rooted than ever, and convince the black man of the mental blindness of the white in refusing to own even to the possibility of this and kindred subjects.

Then, too, the influence of dreams seems hardly to have been allowed sufficient weight as a factor in this and similar beliefs. In lands, where the dividing line between the so-called "real" and "unreal" shrinks to vanishing point; where water-sprites lurk beneath the surface of every pool or stream, and dryads flit through the shadows, visions of the night seem as real as the sights of waking hours.

To Primitive man the beasts are not, as to us, inferior creatures, but often superiors in force and cunning. The mystery and strength of huge, wise old elephants, the swiftness and force of the lion's spring, made these jungle folk objects of reverence, to be propitiated and, if possible, induced to act as patrons and protectors of the less powerfully built human denizens of the forest. In dreams the beasts play their part, beneficent or malignant, often, as with ourselves, changing and shifting shape; and primitive man made no distinction between sights seen awake or asleep. If he dreamed of a great snake or crocodile laying itself, bridgewise, across a stream, that he might pass over in safety, then it seemed to him that some such reptile must surely be the protector of his family, shielding it from danger as a father

[p. 47]

shields his children--possibly, therefore, the actual ancestor from which the tribe had sprung. To such men it must seem only natural to have the power of assuming the form of the brothers with whom they are mysteriously linked, and thus disguised sally forth as were-beasts, to snatch food in times of dearth, or wreak vengeance on an enemy.

A distinct likeness seems to exist between the present day "affinities" or "bush souls" of the West Coast and the idea which lay at the root of early Egyptian religion.

"Transmigration from one body to another, indeed, never presented any difficulty to the Egyptian mind. It could be effected by the magician by means of his spells; and there were stories, like the folk-tales of modern Europe, which told how the life and individuality of a man could pass into the bodies of animals and even into seeds and trees. The belief is common to most primitive peoples, and is doubtless due to the dreams in which the sleeper imagines himself possessed of some bodily form that is not his own.

"Egyptian orthodoxy found a ready way in which to explain the animal form of its gods. The soul, once freed from its earthly body, could assume whatever shape it chose, or, rather, could inhabit as long as it would whatever body it chose to enter. And what was true of the human soul was equally true of the gods . . . The soul of Ra, which was practically Ra himself, could appear under the form of a bird if so lie willed.

"It was only the cultivated classes to whom . . . the sacred animals were symbols and embodiments

[p. 48]

of the deity rather than the deity itself. The masses continued to be fetish worshippers like the earlier inhabitants of the country from whom most of them drew their descent . . . While the walls of the temple were covered with pictures in which the gods were represented in human or semi-human form, the inner shrine which they served to surround and protect contained merely the beast or bird in which the deity was believed to be incarnated for the time." [*1]

*    *    *    *    *

With regard to West Coast "affinities," many are thought to be hereditary in families, but at times a babe is born to a house, no member of which has ever before been known to bear the "mark" of any animal, yet the likeness of some such can be clearly discerned upon the new-comer.

The explanation for this was somewhat confusedly given me by a woman, who herself had borne a babe belonging to the baboon totem, although, as she sadly said, no "monkey soul" had ever before been known in her family. The endeavour to put into words ideas so mysterious and deep-rooted seemed to cause a painful mental effort, and even the greatest care in questioning left the matter still unclear. To those who have never attempted such a thing, it is hard to realise the difficulty of putting questions which will elicit the information which one is seeking without giving any indication which might bias the reply. It is of the utmost importance to avoid anything in the nature of a leading question, since native

[p. 49]

good manners, like those of old Ireland, necessitate a "pleasant answer," irrespective of veracity, should the least hint be given as to the tendency of the reply desired. It would appear, however, that the root idea of "affinities" is closely connected with totemism, but so near-linked in native thought with the belief in were-animals are both of these that the people seem incapable of making any clear distinction between the two.

My informant seemed to hold that the likeness to a baboon, clearly discernible in her son, though in no other member of the family on either side, so far as could be traced, was due to the fact that a "baboon soul" chanced to be awaiting reincarnation in the precincts of the sacred pool at the time when she went down thither to pray for the speedy coming of a babe. Under the term "baboon soul" she included both the ghost of a man who in a former existence had belonged to this totem, and of one who, during a long series of earth-lives, had been in the habit of sending out his soul into the form of a baboon "affinity," and so, by constant wearing of the were-shape his human body had gradually taken upon itself signs of likeness to its "affinity."

No very young child can send out its "bush soul." Only after about the age of ten years does the desire to do so begin to assert itself. Should the "affinity" be hereditary, the parents will be sure to notice signs of restlessness, and will then explain all that is necessary. Otherwise the "Drang"--to use a German word which gives the meaning of the Ibibio expression more nearly than any of our own--grows with the physical

[p. 50]

growth. First, in dreams, those possessed by animal souls see themselves wandering in were-form, and after awhile the desire to do so at will becomes so strong as to drive boy or girl to seek out someone to whom the secrets are known, in order to learn the rites necessary for the conscious taking on of animal shape. Afterwards they practise sending forth the soul into its were-body with ever increasing success, until they have at length acquired the power to bring this about at will.

Another way of becoming a member of an animal affinity is by purchase. This is usually brought about through negotiation with one of the Ekoi people, or some Kamerun tribe, among whom such strange secrets are said to have their home. These bought "affinities" will, however, be treated of in another place.

The most ordinary were-forms are those of leopards, crocodiles, snakes and fish. The following story was reported to Mr. Eakin of the Kwa Ibo Mission by one of his schoolboys named Etok Essien of Ikotobo:

"One day, a few years ago," he said, "I was sitting on the veranda of my house when I heard loud cries proceeding from another compound. I ran with others to the place whence the cries came, and saw a woman rocking to and fro, holding her hand to her throat and calling, 'I must die. I must die, for Akpan Nwan has shot me in the neck.'

"A crowd of people had gathered together, drawn like myself by the cries. Among them was a native doctor, who, at the woman's entreaty, cut open the place which she pointed out to him, and there, before

[p. 51]

us all, a lead bullet fell from it to the ground. When the woman was asked to explain how it came there, she said:

"'My soul dwells in a leopard, and, when I first cried out, Akpan Nwan shot this my 'affinity.'

"Enquiries were made, and it was found that the man mentioned had indeed shot at a leopard, which, at the very hour when the woman cried out, entered his compound to steal a goat. He: succeeded in hitting it in the neck, but it managed to escape to the bush."

Countless such stories might be quoted. We ourselves came across many people who claimed that, against their will, at certain seasons of the year their spirits went forth to wander in animal guise; but none was willing to own to consciously sending forth his soul, [*1] because such a power is thought to savour of witchcraft. In every town, however, there are some inhabitants suspected by their fellows of using this uncanny power in order to wreak vengeance on enemies, or for the unlawful acquiring of riches. Many such instances were brought to our notice, and are recorded in another place.

Sometimes there is no outward sign to show that those with whom one lives in familiar intercourse are capable of projecting their bush souls in animal form. Such was the case of four children, the story of whom is thus told by Udaw Owudumo of Ikot Atako.

"There was once a man named Eka Ete, who had three sons and a daughter.

[p. 52]

"One morning, very early, when the mimbo people [*1] were going toward their grove to collect palm-wine, they saw four pythons hurriedly crossing the road. As usual the men were walking in single file, and, on seeing the snakes, the first ran back to his house to fetch a gun; begging his companions to watch the quarry meanwhile, so that it should not escape.

"On returning, he found that the pythons had only gone a little way into the bush. He therefore followed the tracks and soon overtook them. At once he lifted his gun and was about to fire, when the biggest snake raised his head from the ground and cried, with a man's voice:

"'Do not kill us. We are the children of Eka Ete.'

"The hunter did not fire, but lowered the gun and asked:

"'How is it possible for you to be his child, seeing that you are a snake?'

"To this the reptile answered, 'Go to our father, and ask for whatever you may wish of his in exchange for our lives, and he will give it to you.'

"Then the man left his friends to watch the strange quarry, and himself went back to the house of Eka Ete and said:

"'Awhile ago I saw four long snakes and wanted to kill them, but as I was about to do so one of them lifted up his head and said that they were all children of yours. Can you explain the matter?'

"On hearing this, the old man was very much astonished, and asked to be led to the place where

[p. 53]

the reptiles lay; for he had no knowledge of the strange power possessed by his children. No sooner did he arrive than all four lifted up their heads and cried to him:

"'Father! Father Save us! We are your children. Last night we came out, in snake form, and enjoyed ourselves so well that we paid no heed to time, and did not notice that day was dawning. When the sun rose we tried to hasten home, but the mimbo men found us while crossing the road, and since then they have watched us so that we cannot escape. Now we greatly fear that someone may kill us.'

"Eka Ete was quite confounded by what he had heard, but he called his people and set a guard about the snakes that none might harm them. Then he himself went to the Idiong diviner and asked:

"'How is it possible that these snakes can be the children who have hitherto dwelt with me in the house?'

"To this the priest of Idiong made answer, 'The souls of your three sons and of your daughter have of a truth gone forth in this form, and, should the snakes be killed, your children would die also.'

"On hearing this, Eka Ete asked, 'What can I do to make them come back home?' To which the Idiong man replied:

"'Get goats, fish, and palm oil, and offer these before the Juju Anyang. Should the spirit accept the offering, the souls of your children will be able to leave their snake form and come home once more.'

Eka Ete did as he was bidden; then waited

[p. 54]

anxiously to see what would happen. During all this time his four children had appeared languid and mazed, as though their spirits were wandering far away. About a week after the sacrifice had been offered according to the command of the Idiong priest the snakes crept back home during the night time: and after this the four children recovered, and became just as they had been before their souls went forth.

"When the father saw that all was well again. he was very glad and gave a great 'play' to all the countryside. Afterwards a feast was prepared with 'chop,' in plenty and much palm-wine, so that all the people rejoiced with him that the souls of his children had returned."

Another story of a "snake child," the likeness of whose "affinity" was plainly to be seen, was told us as follows:

"There was once a woman who bore a girl piccan. For many years she carried the child in her arms, because it could not walk, since it was a snake soul, and therefore had no strength in its feet. When this woman wanted to keep anything safe, she had only to set it upon a shelf or even leave it on the hob, for the child could not stand up to reach it.

"One day, before going to market, the mother cooked 'chop' and placed it, as usual, on the low mud wall by the fireside, so that it should be ready for her husband on his return from the bush. That evening when she came back she asked her daughter, 'Is my husband here?' And the girl answered No.'

"The mother went to see if the food had grown

[p. 55]

dry during her absence, but, when she looked, lo, there was nothing but an empty plate! So she asked:

"If my husband has not come back who can have taken his 'chop '? To this the girl answered, I do not know.'

"The woman was very angry, and accused other people in the compound of having stolen what she had so carefully prepared; but could learn nothing further.

"Another day the same thing happened, and this time she was even more vexed, and went all round the courtyard crying:

"'Who is it who comes to a person's house and steals the food which she keeps for her husband?'

"To this an old neighbour replied, 'I believe it is your child who cannot walk!' To which the mother answered:

"'From her birth my daughter has been unable to stand upon her feet. How then can she go and take things from the fireplace where I have set them?' Nevertheless she told her husband:

"'One old woman says perhaps it is our child who is the thief.' To which the man replied:

'Let us hide ourselves and watch.'

Next day, therefore, the woman bought a fine fish, cooked it very delicately, and set it in the usual place. Then she told her daughter that she was going to market. The husband had already gone out, and was hidden in a little outhouse built against the kitchen wall, through which a small spy-hole had been made. There his wife joined him.

Not long after they had settled themselves to

[p. 56]

watch, the girl who could not walk crawled into the veranda, and looked carefully round to see if anyone were in sight. Then she went all over the house to make sure that she was indeed alone, and afterwards, believing herself safe, came back into the kitchen. Suddenly she reared herself up till her head was high above the hearth, then easily lifted the 'chop' from the place where it stood, and sat down to enjoy it.

At once the parents ran in and caught her, crying:

'We did not know that it was you who did this thing. When the old woman told us, we would not believe her; but now we have trapped you ourselves.'

"Then the father beat his drum to summon the townsfolk, and when they came told them all that had chanced. In silence they listened to the story, then said:

"'Such a girl as this is not good to keep in the house.' The father answered, 'I think so myself. I will go and throw her in the river.' To which all present replied: 'Yes, that is the best thing to do.'

"So the man put the snake-girl into a canoe, and when they reached mid-stream threw her overboard. He then paddled back to the bank, where all the people were waiting, and watched to see what would happen.

"Not long afterwards they saw a very long snake come out of the water and creep into the bush. The father wanted to go after it and kill it, but his friends prevented him, saying: 'Do not go. Perhaps some harm might happen to you.'

[p. 57]

"From that time onward no one saw either the snake or the girl again."

Beside "animal souls," the bodies of new-born children may be occupied by spirits of the great trees, such as camwood or cotton trees; or of climbing palms, lianes and even flowers. Among the Ibibios, however, we did not find so many, or so beautiful, legends of this nature as among the Ekoi of the Oban District--such, for instance, as "The Herb Daughters," "The Son of a Fruit," or "The Flower Child." [*1]

As a general rule, only those belonging to the families of powerful chiefs can join the "affinity" of the great trees. The mother of one of the principal men of Afa Atai near Eket was thought to embody the "spirit" of a climbing palm; and at death her soul is said to have gone to dwell in a splendid specimen of this strange growth, which springs by a sacred water not far from the town. Thither, each year an offering is borne by her son, who consults her upon all points of difficulty, and obtains answers through the rustling of the leaves amid which her soul dwells.

Beside the power attributed to human beings of thus sending forth their souls into animal or vegetable form, accident brought to light the belief that some beasts are also thought capable of assuming another shape. For instance, when the anthropoid apes called by the natives "Idiokk" have grown so old and feeble that they know their end is near, it is asserted that they can renew their youth by sending forth their spirits into the bodies of new-born

[p. 58]

baboons, a species of which, for this reason, also bears the name of "Idiokk."

The discovery of this point, hitherto unknown, I believe, on the West Coast, illustrates the importance of taking down all available stories and legends, irrespective of whether or no such may appear interesting at first sight. It came to our knowledge through Udaw Owudumo, of Ikot Atako, who one day told us the following tale:

"Once a woman went to fetch vegetables for the evening meal. It was very near her time to become a mother, and, as she neared the farm, she felt that the babe was about to be born. She looked round and saw no one who might help her, so she prayed to her juju, saying, 'Let someone come to aid me and guide my piccan.' Yet no one came; only, just before the birth of the child, a very tall 'Idiokk' stepped forth out of the bush and said:

"'I will help you, and would gladly bear the piccan home for you, but fear that, should I do so, you would tell someone to kill me!'

"To this the woman answered, 'Only do as you say, and no one shall harm you.'

"So Idiokk aided her, and afterwards took the babe and they set forth together. As they drew near the house, Idiokk said:

"'Do not let us go by the front way, lest someone should see us. Rather let us enter by the back.'

"To this the woman agreed, and the beast went within and tended mother and babe. Then, when all was finished, he turned to the woman and said:

'If you will name this piccan after me, I will

[p. 59]

bring you as much "bush meat" as you need.' To which she answered, 'I agree'; and, on this account, the child was called Akpan Idiokk Ikot (i.e. Firstborn Baboon of the Bush).

"Morning and evening the ape killed 'beef' which he brought and laid before the door; then, entering, used to take the child from the arms of its mother and look sadly upon it. One day, while holding it thus, Idiokk said, gazing mournfully down:

"'I am sorry for you, because no stranger will cause your death. It is your father and mother alone who will bring this about!'

"That night, after the ape had gone, the woman's husband came home, and, finding the 'beef,' thought that it must be the gift of a lover, so asked jealously, 'Where did you get all this?'

"The wife answered, 'It is a strange beast named Idiokk who brings it.'

"On this the husband asked, 'If the Idiokk comes back again can I get a chance to kill him?' To which the woman replied:

"'Yes. He comes every morning and evening to bring me "beef."'

"Next morning, when the poor ape came, he took the piccan in his arms as usual. Then the woman called softly to her husband who was hidden near by, 'Hist! He is here!' On which the man sprang forth armed with a cutlass to kill the great beast. At once the ape held out the babe to its mother that it might not be harmed, but the man slashed at the beast so cruelly that both ape and child died together."

[p. 60]

Two or three days later the following story was told us by a native of Ikot Abia:

"There were many hunters in our town. One day a party of these killed a young baboon of the kind named Idiokk. This they brought back to the Egbo house, and sat down to skin it, after which they took some of the meat and cooked it before the fire. While they were doing this the Idiokk mother smelled the scent of roasting flesh from the bush and came out to learn what had befallen her piccan. When she saw what was being done, she drove all the people before her into the Egbo house, then snatched the remains of her son from off the fire, picking up meat, bones and skin, and carrying all away into the bush."

These baboons bear the same name as the great apes, because old men tell that the spirits of the latter can be born again in the shape of the former.

This belief seems to be confined to a very few old men in one part of the district. When Chief Henshaw was questioned on. the subject he answered that no such idea had reached his ears, and continued:

"Also it seems to me contrary to reason, for, though it is well known that men have the power to send out their souls into the bodies of beasts, how can it be possible for animals to do such a thing, seeing that we are taught by the Bible that these have no souls? It is true that we see some creatures have the power to change the form of their bodies, as, for instance, caterpillars become butterflies and tadpoles frogs; but that great apes should send out their

[p. 61]

spirits to be reborn as lesser baboons I regard as a mere superstition of ignorant natives"!

A similar idea as to the power of some animals to transform themselves into other shapes is said to obtain among Malays, some of whom "refuse to eat the freshwater fish called Ikan Belidah on the plea that it was originally a cat. They declare that it squalls like a cat when harpooned, and that its bones are white and fine like a cat's hairs. Similarly the Ikan Tumuli is believed to be a human being who has been drowned in the river and the Ikan Kalul to be a monkey transformed. Some specially favoured observers have seen monkeys half through the process of metamorphosis--half monkey and half fish." [*1]

Footnotes

^45:1 He proved to be a new species, and was named galago talbotti, by the British Museum authorities.

^48:1 The Religion of Ancient Egypt," pp. 108-9. Sayce.

^51:1 Among Ibos, however, whom we are at present studying, no such reluctance appears to be shown. A man, who believes himself possessed of the power to take on animal form, appears proud of this uncanny prerogative.

^52:1 Mimbo = palm wine.

^57:1 "In the Shadow of the Bush," pp. 133, 134, 136. P. Amaury Talbot.

^61:1 Maxwell in Straits Branch, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, No. 7, p. 26.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

 

CHAPTER V

 

CHILDHOOD

THE child cult is by no means so much in evidence among Ibibios as with the gentler natured Ekoi of the Oban District, where unkindness to little ones is practically unknown, and parents vie with one another in tender care of these small atoms of humanity. Yet even among the Ibibios, despite the almost ceaseless drudgery of their lives, the women at least seem never too weary to lavish care upon their little round-limbed brown piccans, and no single case of a neglectful mother has come to our notice.

Under these circumstances it is only natural that mother-love should prove deeper rooted than all else in the hearts of Ibibio children. A somewhat pathetic instance of this was shown by a murderer of seven years old, whose case came before my husband in the spring of 1913.

Two small boys were playing together, the one richly dowered with worldly goods, for he owned a clasp-knife and a piece of string, while the other, a child of poverty, had nothing. In course of time the poor boy chanced to lay predatory hands upon the string, whereon the capitalist, resenting this attack upon the rights of property, struck him a blow with the knife. As ill-luck would have it, the blade

[p. 63]

pierced straight through the heart, and the small victim fell back dead.

The relatives of the murdered lad came to the Commissioner demanding a life for a life, and the question as to the fate of the aggressor became a somewhat difficult one. In the end a missionary of great experience was persuaded to undertake the reformation of the little malefactor, who chanced to be brought to him on May 24th, when the principal chiefs and people of the District had been gathered together for Empire Day celebrations.

The small criminal walked quietly up to his new friend, and in a voice low, but strangely pleading, begged leave to go back to his town, and bid a last good-bye to the mother he had left.

"Why?" asked the puzzled missionary. "Did you not do so before you came?"

"I did," answered the boy, "but then we thought only that I was to be separated from her by a few miles. Now, I see clearly, from the crowd which is gathered here, that the people have come together to see me die, so I beg to be allowed to go back once again to say good-bye, since afterwards I may never see her more."

Such an attitude is typical of the race. It is seldom that one of this people attempts to struggle against destiny, should the odds be overwhelmingly heavy. Rather, they seem soberly to acquiesce in the inevitable, meeting fate with the stoicism of despair, which often lends them unexpected dignity and courage when face to face with death.

As a general rule fathers, too, seem to treat their

[p. 64]

offspring kindly, though, unfortunately, cases of cruelty to children are not infrequent. Two instances, which happened within a few days of one another may be cited as typical.

In the first case the husband was incensed against his wife, whom he suspected of infidelity, though without proof. After brutally maltreating the woman, he broke their baby's thighs as a means of still further punishing her. In the second, the little one, who had just begun to toddle, was pushed on to the fire by its father, with like intent.

The first ornament given to a baby is a string of beads tied round the waist, and, a little later, it may possibly be further adorned by the addition of a snail shell, thought to possess magical properties, which is suspended round the neck.

In many ways the lot of small brown piccans born in these climes is an enviable one, in comparison at least with that of the children of our own poor. Ibibio babies are almost always well nourished, and roll and creep contentedly enough in the warm sand, playing together like a happy litter of little bush cubs. They take considerable part, too, in the life of their elders, proudly riding to market astride the hip of a busy mother, safe girdled in the curve of her arm.

At an incredibly early age these little folk begin to take notice of what is going on around them, crawling out at the sound of the tom-tom, or striving to follow the "plays" given by their elders.

In every Oron town there is a young men's society, the name of which is Ekung. The avowed purpose

[p. 65]

of the ceremony is to bring more children to the town. It was thus described to us by Chief Henshaw:

"At the beginning of the dry season, after the feast of the new yams, a great 'play' is given by this society, to which boys and girls of the town come robed in their best. For days beforehand little maids cry to their mothers, 'We must have fresh dresses for the Ekung play,' while the boys also beg for new singlets, shirts and loin cloths.

"On this occasion one woman vies with another as to who can lavish most care upon the children. Each daughter's hair is elaborately dressed. Anklets and bracelets are slipped over feet and hands, and even the Fatting-house girls are allowed to come out and join in the celebration.

"When the 'Image' is seen approaching, with the drummers going before, young boys pour out to meet him, singing also and rejoicing. Some run in front, some behind, some on either hand--shouting for joy. Little crawlers, who had never walked, try to follow when Ekung passes. The mothers would stop them but cannot, so eager are they. Thus little ones often walk for the first time on this day. Still smaller tots, who have never even crawled, are said to try to follow, thus creeping for the first time on Ekung's day.

"The people think that this ceremony brings 'plenty piccans' to the town, and, indeed, if you watch the 'play,' so sweet and gay it is, that you cannot but believe it may draw down some such blessing."

Possibly the soft curves of native babies, and the

[p. 66]

strength of their dimpled limbs, are due to the fact that they are not weaned before they are two years old; sometimes even, like the ancient Egyptians, as we learn from the "Maxims of Ani," they are suckled until the age of three.

When about four years old little maids of the tribe are given a curious ornament called "Nyawhawraw." This is made of twisted brass dangles, looped at the upper end, and ending in a small ball of metal. It is worn from the ceinture in front, and looks much like a row of very elongated little bells, which clash together with a musical tinkle at every movement of the wearer. We were anxious to buy a set of these, and, as they were not exposed for sale in the marketplace, asked a friend if he knew where they were to be procured. His efforts to secure some proved useless, and after awhile it was explained that it is forbidden by the "Woman's Law" to sell Nyawhawraw to any man, lest his possession, however temporary, should affect these in a way which would be felt by the subsequent wearer. Later, an old woman was induced to purchase a set on our behalf.

The prohibition would seem to have come down from a time when the maidens of the tribe were more carefully guarded than at the present day. It was confided to me by one of my women informants, with the explanation that this also was among the mysteries which must be kept from male knowledge; since, should a man of lowly birth who wished to secure for himself alliance with the family of some powerful chief learn the secret, he would only have to single out an infant bride from among the daughters of

[p. 67]

such a house, and after having secured a set of Nyawhawraw perform certain rites over them and rub them with a particular kind of "medicine." Afterwards he must bribe a woman of the household to see that they were worn by the little maid, and from that time forward it would be impossible for any other man to gain her love.

These little brass ornaments were, until a few years ago, worn up to about the age of ten, when the first real article of dress, namely a narrow sash, was usually given. A few years later an over garment was added. Of late the Efiks, and those Ibibios who have been brought most in touch with civilisation, have begun to give their children garments of European manufacture at a much earlier age.

The Ekung "play" already described, and those which are usually regarded as preparatory to it, and which small boys and maidens "practise" before they are allowed to join the more important society, would seem originally to have been given in honour of the spirits of vegetation. The "Image" of Ekung himself always wears a fringe of palm leaf or long grasses round his loins; while for the lesser festivals the youthful performers must dress themselves in palm or plantain leaves.

The story of such a play was once told me by an Eket woman. It has certain points of interest, as illustrating the life of an Ibibio girl, so is given in full. It is called "Plaintain Leaf":

"Once a woman went to market, but before setting forth she told her daughter to sweep out all the compound during her absence, to fill the jars with fresh

[p. 68]

water and to prepare coco-yams and other food in readiness for the evening meal. The girl said, 'All that you bid me I will do,' and at once set about the work.

"Not long afterwards two other girls came to the house and said:

"'We have heard that there is to be a fine play to-day in a town on the far side of the river. Come with us to see it.' But the good daughter answered, 'No. My mother bade me fetch water and food and clean all the house during her absence. Were I to come with you, I should not be able to do as she told me.'

"To this the two others replied, 'We will help you with the work, so that all may be finished before we go.' So the girl said, 'If you will first help me, then I will gladly come.'

"On this, all set to work. The visitors began to cook coco-yams and said, 'They are done,' when they were not done. Also they said, 'We have finished cleaning the yard,' when only a little piece had been swept; and, while the good daughter went to and fro fetching fresh water from the spring, they filled up the other jars with rainwater from old pots, which had been standing about for two or three weeks and was no longer pure. On their companion's return they said:

"'We have worked so hard that all is now finished. Let us therefore go.'

"The good girl asked, 'What should one wear for this play?' And the others answered:

"'It is a very special play for which every one must wear plantain leaves.' So they went out and

[p. 69]

cut these, then fastened them together skirt-wise round their waists, and so set forth gaily.

"Now when they had gone a long way, and the two visitors knew that there would be no time for the good daughter to return and fetch other garments, they ran into the bush and brought out the little waist strips that young girls used to wear, and also dresses to be worn over these--all from the hiding-place where they had concealed them in readiness some time before.

"The good girl said:

"'You told me that we were only going to wear plantain leaves. Now you are robing yourselves in fine garments!' At this they only laughed and answered nothing. The girl continued: 'My mother's house is too far-off. I cannot go back now to fetch other clothes. As I am, I must go with you to see this play.'

"Not long after they had crossed to the other side of the river, they saw a man cutting mimbo high up in a palm tree. For some time he gazed at them and then called down, 'Of these three girls, the one who only wears plantain leaves is more charming than both the others.' When the two gaily dressed maidens heard this they were filled with envy, and said:

"'Give us the plantain leaves to wear, and we will give you our clothes in exchange.' The Plantain Girl answered, 'Very well.' So she took their dresses and gave them her leaves instead. After they had changed they went on once more until they saw another man coming towards them on the road. As

[p. 70]

he passed he looked back and said to himself, but so that they could hear him:

"'Of these three girls, the one who wears a proper dress is far prettier than the two with plantain leaves.'

"On hearing this the others went aside and consulted with one another saying, 'I thought it was only the leaves which made her more admired than us, but, although we have changed, she is still preferred above us. What can we do therefore? At length one of them said, 'We must change again,' and they did so.

"When they reached the place where the people were playing, the three stood and looked on. When the first dance was over all the finest young men in the town came and crowded round the girl of the plantain leaves, asking her to come to their houses and eat and drink with them. The other two were left quite alone and unnoticed, since no one cared to invite them. Plantain Girl, however, said, 'Let us all go together, otherwise I will stay here with you.' So they went, and when they were seated a cup of mimbo was brought to the beautiful visitor. She drank some, then passed the bowl to her two companions, but they refused it.

"On seeing this, Plantain Girl was much astonished, and said:

"'You two brought me to see the play. Now the people here offer drink to me, and I wish to share it with you, yet you refuse. What is the matter?'

"They answered, 'Nothing'; but after awhile one stood up and whispered to the other, 'Come outside, I wish to speak to you.' So they went into a far-off

[p. 71]

corner and spoke together. Then they came back and said to Plantain Girl:

"'We are going away for a few minutes. When we are ready to go back home we will come for you and all return together.'

"Plantain Girl smiled, and said, 'Very well,' for she believed them, knowing no guile; but at once these false companions set out for home, leaving her there alone.

"On their way back the two girls came to a stream across the road which all had passed together earlier in the day. It was a juju water, and on the brink they bent down with hearts full of envy and hatred of the companion whom they had deserted, and lifting up their hands called upon the name of the juju and said:

"'We bade this girl wear plantain leaves that we might outshine her, yet all the people prefer her before us. When, therefore, she comes back and stretches out her foot to cross your stream, do not fail to seize her, so that we may be avenged.'

"Plantain Girl waited for her companions to return as they had promised, but when she saw that night was coming on, she could tarry no longer, but said to her new friends 'The other two must have forgotten me and gone home.' So she left the place and set forth alone.

"When she came to the small water which, on her way to the play had hardly reached ankle high, she thought that it would be the same now, so, though darkness had fallen, she stepped bravely in, thinking to cross safely. No sooner had she left the

[p. 72]

bank, however, than the water rose and rose till it overflowed her head, because of the cruel spell which had been wrought by those two envious ones, when they called upon the juju and begged it to seize her. For three long days she was kept a prisoner beneath the water. Then the same man who had seen her going to the play and was again cutting mimbo near the place, heard her voice crying very pitifully from out the stream. The juju would not let her go free, because of the cruel prayer that had been made. Only sometimes he raised her up to the surface, by the side near the bank, that she might look out for a moment, and see the green trees and the white sky again.

The mimbo man heard her weep and cry:

'I was in the house of my mother, happily working, when two wicked girls called me to go with them and see a play in a far-off town. I asked what dress they would wear, and they said, "Only plantain leaves." So I put on these at their bidding. When we reached the place where the play was held, the people invited me to go and drink. I asked the girls to go with me and offered them part of my mimbo cup, but they refused. There they left me, saying that they would come and fetch me when they were ready to go home. Long I waited, but they never came, so at length I set out alone on my homeward way. The small water rose and covered my head. Since then it has kept me fast held. When the water is full it raises me up so that I can gaze once more upon the white sky, but it will not let me get free, though I try my best both by day and by night.'

[p. 73]

When the mimbo man heard this, he came down from the tree and ran as fast as he could, till he came to the house of the girl's mother, and told her all that he had learned. At once the woman went round the town begging those who were strong swimmers to go with her down to the juju water and save her child. All of them tried to do this, but though they dived and swam their hardest none could free the girl, because the juju held her beyond their reach. At length they came back quite exhausted and told the mother, 'It is of no use. We have tried our best, but cannot save your daughter.' On this the woman wept more bitterly than before, while the girl's voice was heard crying from out the stream.

"Now in that town there was an old wife whose body was so diseased that her feet were nearly eaten away. So feeble was she that she could only creep along by means of the bent stick which women sometimes use as a staff."

(It may be not without interest to mention that these staves are made from the flat curved roots of the mangrove tree. The bark is stripped from them, and they are then pointed and sharpened along the edge, after which they are used for drying fish, being placed in long rows across a rack over the fire with the fish strung upon them. When they have served this purpose, and the dried fish has been sold, the pointed ends are cut off, and they are used as walking-sticks. According to all accounts these form no mean weapon of offence. In shape they are much like the wooden throwing weapons of the present day Bagirimi of Central Africa, or those occasionally found in the

[p. 74]

sand of the desert, or dug up now and again from ancient Egyptian tombs. The cutting edge of many of these staves is so hard and sharp as to inflict wounds almost as dangerous as machet strokes. Whether as weapon or staff, they appear to be exclusively feminine possessions; for, save in process of making or while in service for drying fish, we have never seen one in the hands of a man.) To continue the story:

"The sick woman crept up to the girl's mother and said: 'These strong ones have failed, yet by the power of Abassi I think that I may be able to bring your daughter up out of the juju water.'

On this the mother cried out:

"'If you are able to do this I shall be more glad than I can say, and will do all that I can to repay you.' The others, however, said:

"'Do not pay any attention to this feeble woman. We who are strong men have tried our utmost and failed. Do not therefore believe this foolish one.' The mother took no notice of them, and only said to her who had offered to help:

"'Let us go and try as you say.'

"Together they went to the water's edge, and when they reached it the sick woman began to plead:

"'I have suffered for many years, and no one could be induced to take care of me. Now, therefore, I pray you, O juju, send out this girl. Perhaps if I free her by means of my prayer her family will look after me for the rest of my days.'

"The juju heard, and lifted the girl up to the surface of the water so that the sick woman could

[p. 75]

take hold of her hand and draw her out until she lay high and dry upon the shore. After that, with much rejoicing, all went home together.

"When the house was reached the mother of Plantain Girl asked the sick woman, 'Tell me now, what do you want me to do for you in return for what you have done? The old crone answered:

"'Please keep me here and look after me.' The mother asked, 'Will nothing else content you?' But the woman answered:

"'If you want to do something else instead of this, I will only ask one thing. Kill and bring me seven large baskets full of biting flies.' To this the mother replied, shaking her head, 'I do not believe that anyone could do so much. I think, therefore, I had better keep you, and perhaps I can find medicine to cure your sickness.' So she did according to her promise, fed her and bought medicine for her, tending the sick woman till her life's end."

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

 

CHAPTER VI

 

MAIDENHOOD TO MARRIAGE

THE first great event in the life of an Ibibio girl is her entrance into the "Fatting-house," on the occasion of Mbobi--i.e. "The Coming of Small Breasts."

This so-called "Fatting-house" is a room set apart in the home of the parents for the seclusion of daughters while undergoing the process of fattening up, which among West Coast tribes is thought necessary for their well-being. During this time girls are not allowed to go outside the compound walls save on very special and extremely rare occasions. Theoretically they are not supposed to pass the threshold of the "fatting-room." They do no work, and are fed up and pampered on every side.

Before undergoing this seclusion for the first time, young girls are led down to the edge of some sacred pool or stream or that from which the village drinking water is drawn. A sacrifice is offered to the indwelling naiad, and the following prayer recited over each maid:

"Behold! Here comes your child who is about to enter the Fatting-house. Protect her that no evil thing may have power to harm her while she dwells therein."

[p. 77]

There is a beautiful appropriateness in this choice of the spirits of streams and pools as the special guardians of maidenhood. So close, indeed, was the tie that among Efiks, and indeed all Ibibios, as well as amid the Ibenos, a small tribe of Ibo race driven by persecution to leave their homes and settle in the southwestern part of the Eket District, a special day in every week was set apart on which none but pure maids might go down to the springs reserved for the drinking water of the village. This day is called in Efik "Akwa Ederi" or "Greater Sunday," to distinguish it from the lesser holiday called "Ekpiri Ederi." Should wives, or those no longer maids, have failed to provide a sufficient supply for the use of their household on the eve of the festival, they must either persuade some maiden to fetch it for them, or thirst till dawn of the following day.

A story in illustration of this ancient tabu was told us first by Mr. David Ekong, son of the former head priest of the chief Ibeno juju, Ainyena, and native minister of the church established by the Kwa Ibo Undenominational Mission in his native town. He stated that he had heard the tale from a very old man of Ibeno. In it the feminine water sprite, a male tree spirit--for among his people the genii of the great trees are thought to be male--and the leopard guardian of sacred spring and grove, all play their part. It was afterwards told us by an Efik woman, the sole difference being that in her account the tree spirit was feminine. It runs as follows:

"There was once a man who had two wives. The daughter of one of them was very sick, and in tending

[p. 78]

her the mother, whose name was Adiaha Anaw, forgot to go down to the spring and fetch enough water to last them over the sacred day of Idemm (fresh water). When the child thirsted and begged for a drink, the mother took some water from out a jar provided by her fellow wife, since she had none of her own. When the latter discovered what had been done she was very angry, and ordered the poor woman to go and fetch some with which to repay her; although, by so doing, she knew very well that the law of the juju would be broken. Since there was no other way to provide drink for her child, the poor mother was forced to take her water-jar and go down to the spring on the forbidden day. On the way she passed a place where a great tree stood, and, as she drew near, the spirit of the tree stretched out long branches over the road and blocked it so that she could not pass. In great terror and perplexity she waited a while, and would have gone back home again, but that the need of her child urged her on. Then she made a little song, stating her case before the genius of the tree and entreating help and protection. This was the song that she sang:

	 
		"'I know that to-day is the day on which only maids may go to the water;
		 But yesterday I could fetch me none, because of my small sick daughter.
		 I begged my friends for even a cup, but none would grant such a thing;
		 So now, I pray you, open the road, and let me pass to the spring.'
		
		 When the tree spirit heard the singing, he swept

[p. 79]

his branches aside and allowed her to pass on; but, a little farther along, she met a great leopard, who stood before her, blocking up the road, so that her heart again sank with fear. Indeed, so terrified was she this time, that she turned and ran back along the homeward path, but again the thought of her child gave her courage to face the terrible beast. To him also she sang, in a sweet, soft voice, bemoaning her hard case; and he too, moved with pity, let her go by. At last she came to the spring, and there, at its brink, she lifted up her voice and sang a third time, entreating forgiveness for thus breaking the rule of the juju. As she finished, the naiad rose from out the pool and spoke gently to her, bidding her take what water she needed without fear. Before she left, the spirit also gave her rich gifts to bear home to her child. So with these she came back laden.

"The first thing which she did after her return was to give back the water taken from the other woman. When the latter saw the presents which her fellow wife had brought back, so envious was she of the other's good fortune that she determined to go herself to the spring, although she very well knew that this was forbidden.

"As the second woman walked along no obstacle blocked her road. The tree spirit did not reach out so much as a twig to stay her, while the guardian leopard let her pass unhindered. Only as she stood on the brink of the spring and bent down to fill her jar did the water-sprite call upon the stream to rise around her. Over all the place it swirled, ever higher and higher, till it overflowed the lips of the terrified

[p. 80]

woman. In vain did she strive to free herself, for she was held by a force there was no resisting, and at length sank and was drowned in the spring which she had polluted--not, like her fellow wife, from dire need, but only through greed, because she was envious of the rich gifts bestowed upon the other."

It is on account of the cleansing and fertilising powers ascribed to water that maidens are led down to pool or stream before entering the Fatting-house.

In those families which regard a tree as their special guardian, young girls, before entering upon this period of seclusion, are led down to stand beneath the shadow of the mighty trunk while prayers are offered to induce the indwelling Dryad to look favourably upon this "child of the tree" and shed upon her the blessing of strength and fruitfulness, that she may grow up strong and tall, fair to the eye and fitted for motherhood.

As among the Ekoi of the Oban District, so in almost every Ibibio town of any age, there stands a gnarled specimen of Dolichandrone. This was brought as a young sapling and planted when first the town was founded, and ever since its great mauve-pink flowers have showered their fragrant beauty upon generation after generation of sturdy piccans, slender maids, round-limbed young mothers, and aged crones, who have come to pray beneath its shadow. It is called "The Mother of the Town" (i.e. the largest flower).

One of the best examples of such a tree is to be found at Ikotobo, in the midst of the town playground. So old it is, that the trunk is little more than a shell,

[p. 81]

though still bearing aloft brave branches of dark waving leaves, and great tufts of blossoms of a tint only to be described by the line in which Dante depicts the apple blooms of his own land:

	 
		"Less than of rose and more than violet."
		
		 From the gnarled branches of this ancient tree hang great trails of creamy white orchids, the fragrance of which lay like a benediction on the early morning air as we passed by. Within the hollow trunk stood native pots, filled with offerings; for this tree is the "Mother of the Town," and to it come wives, young and old, to pray that "plenty piccans" may be sent to bless their hearths. Hither, too, come ancient women to beg a like boon for their children and grandchildren. Should lightning shiver the aged trunk or tornado strike it down, loud would be the wailing of those who have grown up beneath its shadow.

In most Okkobbor towns stands a great tree, named "Ebiribong," to which offerings are made twice a year--at the planting of new farms, and during the yam harvest. This is done with the special purpose of drawing down the blessing of fertility upon the women of the place, as also upon farm and byre.

That something of the beauty of the nature symbols which they worship enters into the character of the race, however dimly felt or understood, is shown, I venture to think, by many an unexpected trait, and more especially by the touching gratitude evinced by some of the women, as well as by the humbler members of the community generally, at my husband's efforts to soften, as far as may be, the hardness of

[p. 82]

their lot and give practical proof that British justice is indeed no respecter of persons. Time after time attempts made upon his life in revenge for the discovery and punishment of evil practices were frustrated by warnings given, at the peril of their own lives, by such humble members of the race. It would be more than ungrateful, too, not to mention here the loyalty shown by some of the principal Oron chiefs, two of whom publicly risked their lives to save ours.

Such actions are beyond praise--especially when one takes into account the underlying antagonism to white rule ever present among peoples where witch-doctor and fetish priest are untiring in their efforts to stem the power of the white man, and prevent the suppression of those hideous rites which still obtain in little-known parts of the earth such as these.

In this part of the world it is easy, for those to whom the secret has been confided, to know how many maidens are undergoing the fattening Process, for, at the entrance to each town, before the market-place, bundles of little frames--such as are used for the carriage of fresh or dried fish--may be found tied together. Each bundle has been placed there by the family of a girl who is just entering the Fatting-house as an intimation to prospective wooers of the number of brides preparing in the town.

Among the Efiks, and those Ibibios rich enough to bear the expense, free-born girls of good family go twice, and sometimes even thrice, into the Fatting-house before the full marriage ceremony is performed. As already mentioned, the first occasion is called Mbobi, "The Coming of Small Breasts." This usually

[p. 83]

lasts for three months, during which time the girl undergoes circumcision.

We chanced to be at Adut Nsitt, a town on the upper reaches of the Ubium River, about the time when the daughters of the principal inhabitants were ready to leave the Fatting-house after undergoing this first period of seclusion. One of the chiefs stated that the girls were not due to emerge till a few days later, but that they did so in honour of our presence in the town. Some half-dozen of them came to visit us--the most charming of whom, a small mite of eight summers, unfortunately could not be persuaded to face the perils of the camera.

All wore massive bangles and bracelets of beaten brass or copper, and from a cord round the neck of each dangled a live white chicken, feebly fluttering against the bare brown breast of its bearer. It may be noticed that in the Efik ceremony on the death of a great chief, each of the women is said to wear a similar decoration. [*1]

The round brown limbs were painted over with elaborate patterns, in black pigment, made either from the fruit of one of the many Randias which abound in this district, or from the rhizome of the little wild hyacinth-like Ibiri Nsi, to be found in great quantities all over the neighbouring district of Oban.

The second time spent in the Fatting-house is the period in the lives of Ibibio women during which they may be looked upon as most indulged--and, indeed, spoiled to the top of their bent. This second seclusion

[p. 84]

is fixed at the point where "brook and river meet." For a period varying, according to the wealth of the family, from a few weeks to two years, girls of good position, and even those not "free born" who are looked upon as likely to repay the expenditure--by means of dowry money--are sent once more into the Fatting-house. During this time they again do no work, but are kept in one room, and fed up and pampered in every way. The result is that they emerge, to the admiration of their adoring relatives, and of the townsfolk at large, perfect mountains of flesh--naked, in most parts of the district, save for a few strings of beads and bells, or else decked out with an extravagant array of native ornaments, but always with an air at once arrogant and querulous.

A day is set apart for the first appearance of the girls of each town who are ready to emerge from the Fatting-house. On several occasions we have been present when these swollen specimens of femininity strutted through the market-place enjoying their brief hour of importance; while the men, who at every other period of a woman's existence are looked upon as of superior race, draw back admiringly, to give them passage.

On such occasions the whole charm of these women has temporarily disappeared--at least in the eyes of white people. Of the kindly, gentle air and friendly greeting to be found at all other times, there is no trace in this their little hour of triumph. Only an overweening vanity and bloated self-importance are now manifested.

The wooers, who stand during this parade

[p. 85]

praising the merits, and value, of the various debutantes, afterwards hurry to the parents with offers of dowry. A marriage is speedily arranged for each, and the young bride quickly finds her place amid the new surroundings; no longer petted, spoiled and pampered--the centre of attention, for whom her family stint and deny themselves--but, only too often, the slighted, hard-worked drudge of her new lord.

Among most Ibibio tribes all such rites are undergone in order to draw down the blessing of Eka Mbopo, the "Mother of the Fatting-house." Among Efiks, however, this is not the case. The second occasion on which a girl of the last-named tribe enters the Fatting-house is called "Abiana Abiana Nkuawhaw," "The Coming of the Full Breasts." The ceremony is also in preparation for marriage, and, should the girl be already betrothed, as is mostly the case, the bridegroom must now pay the first instalment of dowry, or bride price, called "Nkpaw Nkuawhaw Eyen Owon," i.e. "Small Gifts of Fatting."

About Christmastide an Efik bride usually sallies forth to visit her future husband and all his family. There is said to be a special significance in the time chosen for thus emerging from seclusion. It is just before the planting of new farms, and it is thought that the ceremonies proper to the season, which are offered with the object of drawing down the blessing of fertility upon the new crops, will not be without favourable influence upon the maiden who, in this case, stands with anything but "'reluctant feet,' where the brook and river meet." The great ambition of such a one is to become a mother at the earliest

[p. 86]

possible moment. As one of the tribe naively expressed it: "Young girls just out of the Fatting-house are always looking round the corner, eager to see their first babe."

Indeed, the ceremonies carried out throughout the Ibibio country in honour of Abassi Isua, the God of the Year, with the object of inducing the granting of plentiful crops, are so like those resorted to by the Ekoi to ensure fruitfulness in a wife, that the two ideas would seem to be closely connected.

After a short visit to the bridegroom's household the future bride goes back, loaded with gifts, to live in the house of her mother as before. Should the head wife of the prospective husband belong to a great family, rich and powerful, and should she be sufficiently kindly disposed toward the new bride as to invite the latter to stay with her, the invitation may be accepted for two or three days. Among the gifts borne back to the parents' house on return should always be a thousand wires--in value about one pound sterling--given, to use the Efik expression, "To wash juju." This is sent as a sign on the bridegroom's part of his recognition of the marriage tie.

After this visit rich Efik girls often go back to the Fatting-house, sometimes for as long as two years. During this time they never come out at all, but only walk round within the compound walls.

Should the parents notice that the girl is growing so fat as to endanger her health--to quote the words of my native informant--"they slack off with the 'chop,' and afterwards increase the quantity again."

[p. 87]

Just before a daughter leaves the Fatting-house, after this third seclusion, the father and bridegroom consult together and fix upon a date, saying:

"We will hold Etuak Ndum (i.e. 'Chalk Ceremony') on such and such a day."

On the date chosen the girl is dressed out in her best, though the robing may seem rather scanty to European eyes, and sits in state in the midst of one of the inner courts of the compound. "Thither great gifts are borne, sometimes as much as one to two hundred pounds in cash, with string upon string of the finest beads, great bars of coral threaded together, and the costliest of native ornaments. Next the bridegroom enters followed by a long stream of servants bearing 'dashes,' which are laid before the bride. Not for herself alone must such be provided, but for every member of the family down to the little maids, who sometimes get a penny only.

"Several moons earlier a fine house has been prepared in the husband's compound. A 'play' is given, and the bride is borne thither, the performers following. Friends and acquaintances stay until midnight, then at the coming of darkness leave her alone with her husband. Only the bride's mother lingers yet a little, trying to make friends with one of the 'big women' of the compound, begging the latter to instruct the new wife in her duty to her husband and in all native customs, teaching her everything that may pleasure their common lord.

"After a good girl has thus been married she will never leave the compound without her husband's permission. Woman friends may enter to visit her,

[p. 88]

but no man does so save the male servants sent to clean the rooms or sweep courts."

According to Ibibio ideas the actual marriage tie is entered upon after the payment by the groom to the bride's parents of the major portion of the so-called "dowry money." The first instalment of this constitutes betrothal, and is often paid when the little maid is still very young.

Infant betrothal and marriage are not uncommon. In the latter case the baby bride usually lives with her husband's family; but, save in very rare instances, her youth is respected by him. Should the contrary be proved against a man his conduct is regarded as reprehensible, and the girl's family can claim her back without returning the dowry.

In many cases child betrothal and marriage inflict undoubted hardships upon the unfortunate bride, who thus has no word to say as to her own fate. At the present day many such youthful spouses, on reaching years of discretion, claim the protection of Government to free them from an arrangement in which they had no choice.

A typical case is recorded from Ndun Ukaw town, where a girl, Nko by name, had been betrothed as a very small child. On the day after she came out of the Fatting-house her father said to her:

"The time has now come to carry out the marriage which I arranged for you long ago. Prepare, therefore, to go to the home of the husband to whom I have given you."

The girl pleaded that she did not like the man,

[p. 89]

and earnestly begged that she might not be forced to wed him; but the father answered:

"This is the one whom I have chosen for you. I will not allow you to refuse. Him you shall marry, and no other."

To which she replied, "Sooner than wed such a one I would rather die."

On hearing this, the father shouted in great anger, "If you do not accept the man whom I have chosen for you, I wish that you may die."

The daughter replied, very gently and with sad dignity, "I have nothing more to say. By your order, sir, I die."

With that she went quietly out, and next morning was found lying dead by her own hand.

The hardships to which unmarried girls among the Ibibios are sometimes subjected may be illustrated by another case, which was brought up before my husband on his first visit to the Native Court at Awa. On this occasion a young girl, daughter of one of the head chiefs of the town, claimed the Commissioner's protection against her father.

It appeared that two suitors were asking her hand, each of whom was in a position to pay the usual "bride price" or dowry of thirty goats. She herself seemed to have set her affections on a third wooer, whom, from some cause or other, her father did not favour. When, therefore, the latter ordered her to take as husband the man whom he had chosen, she refused, and pleaded that if she might not be given to the man of her choice she should at least not be forced into marriage against her will.

[p. 90]

In answer, the chief seized her and said:

"If it were not that this bad Commissioner is always going up and down in his district, appearing at all times when and where he is least wanted, I would kill you at once with my own hands for daring to disobey me"

Perhaps it should be remarked that the adjective "bad" has a secondary meaning of "strong," but in this case the circumstances forbid us to hope that the word might have been intended in the more complimentary sense.

The unnatural father bound the girl and thrust her toward the two suitors whom he favoured, saying:

"Take this woman and do to her whatsoever you may choose, that thus she may learn the penalty for having disobeyed me by refusing the man whom I had chosen for her husband."

Delivered over in this way to the mercy of men furious at her rejection of their suit, the wretched girl was dragged along the road to a waste place in the bush. There she was stripped of every garment, and with arms lashed behind forced to endure indescribable outrage. By a fortunate chance, before the last extremity had been reached, a court messenger happened to appear upon the scene. These men are natives employed by Government to serve summonses, make arrests, and generally assist in the carrying out of law and order. This particular one showed considerable courage, for, when drawn to the spot by the girl's cries, he not only ordered the men to desist from their ill-treatment of her, but arrested them when, on the plea that they were justified by

[p. 91]

the father's permission, in all that they had done, they refused to set the girl free.

The court messenger took them, with the girl, before the chief, and asked whether it was true that the latter had intended the men so to maltreat his daughter. On which the cruel father is reported to have said:

"You cannot touch these men. All that they have done was by my authority. May not a father now do as he chooses with a disobedient child?"

When the case was tried in court the advisory council of chiefs agreed that all had been done as stated, and that they were willing, as a concession to white prejudice in such matters, that some punishment should be inflicted upon the two men. When it came, however, to the question of penalising the chief himself, they pleaded, with a mixture of astonishment and indignation, that a father surely had the right to do as he would with his child, and must, therefore, on no account be punished! Later, when it was explained that whatever might have been native custom in such matters, these abuses could not be tolerated under white rule, the spokesman pleaded again and again--long after his request had been declared impossible--first, that an infinitesimal fine, and afterwards a slowly increasing sum, might be inflicted; but no imprisonment.

Another case, brought up before the Native Court at Oyubia in August, 1913, casts further light on Ibibio ideas of marriage.

A man had lately died, and two people came forward to claim his property, the value of which

[p. 92]

was computed at about L150. The first of these, Ensinini by name, demanded the whole sum plus the five wives, on the ground that the dead man had not been free born, but was a "member" of the family of which he himself was the head. The second claimant was chief wife of the deceased, and asserted that her late husband had been free born. Since, singularly enough, neither son nor brother of the dead man existed, she demanded that, in default of nearer kin, the goods should come to her. The second wife gave corroborative testimony to the statement that their common husband had been of free birth, and the third was called as a further witness on the matter. In answer a small girl of some eight years appeared. Afterwards the Commissioner asked to see the other two, and a little later a diminutive person of not more than five summers walked shyly up. The chief wife begged to be excused from producing the fifth on the ground that the latter was only just able to walk, and had been presented by herself, after her own payment of dowry, to her late husband only a few weeks before his death.

By native law the whole question turned upon the point as to whether the deceased was free born, or a "member" of the first claimant's family. An equal number of witnesses came forward to swear to positive knowledge as to the truth of each conflicting statement. In the end the bewildered "assessors" suggested that the property should be divided into two equal portions--one for the male claimant and the other to be distributed between the five wives.

Both sides vehemently objected to such an arrangement,

[p. 93]

the woman adding, "Why, at any rate, should the other four have a share?" The judgment was, however, upheld by unanimous opinion of the Court, and a long and difficult case seemed at an end, when a chief of great weight rose to propound a question which to native ideas was of first importance, but which, in all probability, would never have struck the white man who was acting as judge.

"To whom," queried the chief, "will the dowry of the five wives be paid on their re-marriage?"

At first sight, to twentieth-century eyes, this question seemed so simple of solution that the Commissioner answered, "Why not to the parents as usual?"

One of the jurors rose, horror visibly struggling with respect, to ejaculate, "Why should the father enjoy a double dowry? Were such a thing allowed the husband's family would lose from both sides!"

By native law in such a case one of two courses was open to the "widows." Either to remain in the family, "bearing children to the dead man's name," as was also decreed by old Jewish custom, or to pay back the dowry, and be free to leave their late husband's family and marry any man whom they might choose.

Although in the case above cited, a member of the Court rose to expostulate against the idea that a father should be allowed to "enjoy" double dowry on account of the same daughter, yet instances axe not unknown in which parents have so arranged matters that the marriage affairs of an only child provided them with a veritable gold mine.

Such was the case of Ama Awsawdi of Okuko,

[p. 94]

who, so soon as his daughter had left the Fatting-house, gave her in marriage to Obio Esio of Ubodo, receiving as dowry thirty "articles" and one cow-valued together at about L25. A short time afterwards this unprincipled parent inveigled the girl away. The two went on a journey, in the course of which the father arranged a second wedding with one Ukpon Uwe. From this new son-in-law he received eighty articles and one cow, the total value of which was about L50. After a few days, Ama coaxed the girl to leave her second husband and go away with himself to Calabar. She was undoubtedly attractive, and the father considered that a few shillings laid out on a gown and bead ornaments for her were likely to prove a good investment. For considerably less than one pound sterling he succeeded in attiring the girl so sumptuously that a well-known citizen named Asukwaw Etin was induced to offer a hundred articles and one cow, i.e. about L60, as bride price. Since this third son-in-law was a man of greater weight and position than the others of whom he had so easily rid himself, Ama probably thought it necessary to be a little more careful in his dealings on this occasion. He therefore went to consult one or two friends as to the next step in his career of crime.

"I am thinking of taking away my daughter to a far country," he said, "and there hiding her until I can arrange a fresh marriage. I do not want anyone to know that I am running away with the girl, lest she should be pursued and brought back; so please help me to hide our tracks."

The men consulted were too conservative to receive

[p. 95]

such revolutionary ideas with favour. They therefore protested against the plan, but Ama replied:

"I know what I am doing, and would not act thus in defiance of custom without pressing cause; but my debts are really too heavy, and I can see no other way of paying them! That is my reason for wanting to run away with the girl."

Since the friends on whose help he had counted would have none of his plan, Ama shrugged his shoulders and, being an energetic soul, proceeded to carry it out by himself. The daughter was abducted and concealed in what the father thought a safe retreat. Matters were progressing most favourably in the direction of her fourth nuptials when a cruel fate intervened with the news that the three defrauded husbands had joined forces and were on the way to demand a return of their dowries. Such a contingency was unforeseen and unprovided for. The excellent parti with whom the new alliance had been all but arranged, at a higher rate than ever before, had to be abandoned, and the pair disappeared in the direction of Mbukpo, where they were lost sight of, but are still in all probability, pursuing their profitable career amid "fresh woods and pastures new."

Viewed in the light of a provider of dowries, the story of the mother who, when faced by the necessity of giving up one of her children, chose to keep the daughter rather than the son on account of the high bride price promised by the former, becomes quite comprehensible.

Footnotes

^83:1 Journal of the African Society, April, 1914, p. 248.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 96]

 

CHAPTER VII

 

WEDDED LIFE AND MOTHERHOOD

PROBABLY most white men on first coming to Africa are inclined to look upon black women as prone to suffer beneath the oppression of their men folk.

It was with much this idea that my husband went to the Oban District, and the glee of its sturdy amazons, who had long ago reduced the male Ekoi to a state of becoming humility, on recognising this attitude on the part of the first Commissioner sent them by Government, can be better imagined than described! No one is quicker than these "unsophisticated" peoples to recognise any such bias, and the consequent pose adopted by the militant wives was pathetic in the extreme, and the more convincing in that their meek male folk hardly ventured upon a word of defence. When the "hideous cruelty" of which one wife complained was, however, found to consist in her husband's refusal to marry any other woman save herself, so that no secondary wife was available to help in the housework, and the tyranny of a father over his daughter, a child of eight, was discovered only to have been shown in making use, without her permission, of a cooking-pot which he had himself given her some time before, the Commissioner's

[p. 97]

point of view naturally changed somewhat.

Taught by such experience, we arrived in the Eket District with an open mind as to the relation of the sexes; but this philosophic attitude was to be rudely dispelled. The land of the Ibibios may be taken as typical of those where fetish and witch doctor reign supreme, and where woman is looked upon as a mere chattel of father or husband.

Left to themselves, the Ibibios may perhaps be considered, along certain lines, as a moral people; although the old idea, which lingered in mid-Europe until comparatively recent times, that a host should place all in his house, even to the honour of his wife, at the disposal of a guest, yet obtains here. To quote the naive statement of my informant:

"When a friend comes to visit him the husband will often go out of the house, leaving the new-comer alone with his wife, so as to give them a chance. . . . Afterwards the two men drink together in token of friendliness, and to show that no claim for compensation will be made by the husband."

In the old days crimes of unfaithfulness would appear to have been far more uncommon than at present, probably owing to the terrible penalties inflicted. At times the death of both guilty parties was exacted; while, as a comparatively mild punishment, the lover was often forced to sell himself into slavery in order to raise sufficient money to meet the heavy fine imposed.

The chiefs expressed themselves as unanimous in wishing the penalties for infidelity to be made more

[p. 98]

severe than the comparatively light damages exacted at present; but their attitude is very one-sided. All of them desire that, as in the old days, no woman should be allowed to claim divorce save on the grounds of grave ill-treatment, while many wish for the still older rule to be enforced, that it should not be allowed to women for any cause whatever. As one of them explained:

"Should a man beat his wife very cruelly she can always run away to her father, who will give her good advice, such as: 'Obey your husband in everything, and always strive to please him. Make his will yours; then you will no longer be ill-treated.'"

That many husbands still regard their wives as mere chattels is proved by case after case, of which the following, brought before my husband in the Native Court at Eket only a short time ago, may serve as typical:

Offong Udo Akpa Imo thought that he had reason to suspect his wife Unwa of infidelity. In order to induce her to confess to this he tied her hands to two stakes firmly driven into the ground and so far apart that she lay with arms extended as if crucified. He then proceeded to torture her by forcing native pepper into her eyes and in other ways, which, though recounted in Court as mere matters of everyday occurrence, are such as it is impossible to describe. Yet the man only acted within the rights given him by the law and custom of his tribe.

According to some accounts, it would appear that the usual torture inflicted under such circumstances was, after stripping and binding the woman in the

[p. 99]

way just described, to cover her with thousands of the fierce black ants which abound in the bush, and which the husband had previously collected for the purpose.

Such cases are not confined to the Ekets, but might be repeated ad nauseam in connection with every tribe in the district. The Orons, as nearest to Calabar, and therefore most in touch with civilisation, should show some advance in the treatment of their women, yet the following case brought before the Native Court in August, 1913, is quite typical. During the course of the evidence Eyo Okon Mbukpa, stated on oath:

"Mbit Ese Ewan was my husband, but I wish to be divorced from him. Last year he wounded me, but afterwards took a lot of trouble to cure my wound. Later he asked me to come back. At first I refused, to do so, but afterwards agreed. Through his roughness he broke one of my bones, on account of which, when my child was born, I nearly died. For two months afterwards I could hardly walk. A third time he came, but I refused him. On that he knocked me down and dragged me, naked, before the townsfolk. . . . Next morning he flogged me very cruelly."

There was no question by the husband.

Ating, a fellow townsman, stated on oath:

"I am no relation of Eyo Okon's, neither am I her 'friend.' I saw Mbit Ese come to her. He stripped her, lifted her feet in the air and beat her head upon the ground, then dragged her along it. The girl kept shouting to me, so at last I went to her help. My

[p. 100]

cousin's wife told me that the bone was broken, and Eyo was very clever to have got her child safely born."

Mbit Ese Awan, the husband, sworn, stated:

"I did not hold her feet in the air nor beat her head upon the ground. I only dragged her along it."

There were, however, too many witnesses against him, and the charge was proven in all respects.

While many women have taken advantage of the protection afforded by white rule to break away from the old stern code as to marital fidelity, many are still faithful to their husbands, as has been proved by no inconsiderable number who have resisted to the last extremity outrages sought to be forced upon them. Not only this, but that a distinct desire for monogamy does exist among Ibibio women is shown by the frequency of cases in which wives have 'administered love philtres to their husbands in the hope of thus capturing the whole affection of their dusky lords. This will be more fully treated of later, in the section devoted to magic.

In those few cases when a much-married man of the tribe has been denied the blessing of children, the "medicine doctor" consulted as to the cause of the misfortune has been known to advise the putting away of all wives save one. The following story, illustrating such a case, was told me by one of my women informants--a Christian convert--as a proof of the advantage of monogamy over polygamy. In all save names, it bears a striking resemblance to a tale recounted by Mr. Elphinstone Dayrell in his collection of "Ikom Folk Stories." [*1]

[p. 101]

"Once a very great chief named Ekpenyong Abassi dwelt among us. He was so rich that his house was filled with treasures. His flocks and herds multiplied beyond those of other men. His palm groves produced their golden clusters in such numbers that the gatherers grew weary of cutting, and when he sent out his slaves to fish in the rivers they brought back catches so heavy that they staggered beneath the weight.

"While still young, Ekpenyong married many wives; but in spite of his great wealth he was not happy, for no babe was sent to bless his hearth. His days were therefore spent in sadness, lest he should die without a son to bury him with due honour and pour libations to his ghost.

"To and fro in the land went the chief from one famous juju man to another, seeking a 'medicine' which might take away his curse and cause a child to be born. To each he gave great gifts, but no matter what was paid for charm or magic rites, all proved of no avail. At length word came of a medicine man, said to be very strong in the knowledge of secret things, who had come down from the Kameruns, where much magic dwells, and was now staying in a part of the district far away from the home of Ekpenyong.

"No sooner had the chief heard of the fame of this stranger than he set forth, taking with him a great 'dash' of wires and cloth. Spears, too, he took and cattle, with other fine things borne by a train of slaves. When he reached the house of the juju man he told the latter all his trouble, and asked what he must do in order that a son might be granted him.

[p. 102]

"The priest consulted his oracle and at length announced:

"'All your wives you must put away from you save one only, Adiaha by name. Then you must raze to the ground the houses in which the other women used to dwell. Press down and smooth the earth over the place till none may see that dwellings once stood there. Then build a quite new home for Adiaha and offer in sacrifice before it a white goat, a white fowl and many eggs. From the door-lintel of the new house, on the inside, let a piece of white cloth be hung. Then go yourself to the riverside, and, casting away the clothes which you have formerly worn, go down into the water, taking care that it laves every part of your body and flows even above the crown of your head. After this, dress yourself from head to foot in new garments and, returning, sleep alone in your house.

"'Meantime, let Adiaha go to the pool where the great juju dwells, and, after likewise casting from her her garments, let her slip into the water until it flows above her head. After which bid her put on a white gown never before worn, so that she should be an entirely fresh woman, and, thus robed, let her go silently into the house prepared for her and there await your coming.'

"On hearing this, Ekpenyong thanked the medicine man, and after leaving his offering went home with new hope in his heart. No sooner did he reach the compound than he sent to call all his wives before him. From farm or cooking-hearth they came trooping forth to welcome him home; but when they heard the news which he brought their joy was turned into

[p. 103]

wailing. Some pleaded that they should not be driven forth; some reviled Adiaha, and said that it was but the trick of a jealous wife, who had bribed the juju man to give her husband this advice, so that they might all be humbled while she alone reigned in their stead. Adiaha wept bitterly at their hard words, for, indeed, she was fond of many of them and sorry to lose their companionship, but she comforted herself at the thought that at length a son was about to be born to her.

"Ekpenyong sent to his farms to fetch yams and plantains in great quantities, and took from out his storehouse chains and anklets, with bracelets and other rich gifts, all of which he gave to the discarded wives; so that they went forth well dowered and could easily find other husbands. When all had left the compound, everything was done according to the advice of the wise juju man. The houses where the old wives had dwelt were pulled down, and the place smoothed over and planted, so that none might see that a dwelling had been there. Then a new home was made for Adiaha, after which husband and wife went down to bathe, and did, to the very least thing, as they had been bidden. Before many moons had passed the woman felt a stirring beneath the breast, and told her husband, whereon they both rejoiced greatly.

"Next day husband and wife went together before the juju which dwelt under the sacred water in which Adiaha had bathed. With them they took a goat as offering, and prayed to the spirit of the pool to watch over the unborn babe. The blood of the victim was then poured over Adiaha's forehead, while Ekpenyong

[p. 104]

sacrificed white fowls and eggs that she might not suffer greatly when her child should come. [*1]

"On the birth of the boy the chief gave a 'play' for all the young men and women of his town, that they also might rejoice in his good fortune. A few months later he got together a great 'dash' and sent it to the wise juju man, thanking him for the advice which had proved of such advantage, and asking that the oracle might be consulted as to whether this child would live, and also how many further children would be granted him. The answer was returned that the first son would certainly thrive, and that twenty-one children in all might be hoped for.

"On learning this good news the chief gave another great feast. Afterwards he summoned all his slaves before him and bade them cut bush and clear the land in readiness for the planting of very large farms, since now he must begin to make provision for so numerous a household.

"In course of time other children were born to the couple, until they were surrounded by a large family of sturdy sons and daughters. Always Chief Ekpenyong guarded Adiaha tenderly and saw that she was well served, for he feared that some of his old wives might be jealous and seek to do her a hurt.

"After many years the twenty-first child arrived, and the chief knew that no more were to follow. So he said to his wife, 'You must be weary from bearing so many babes. Now, therefore, rest, for the juju so wills.'

[p. 105]

"Always when the chief went on a journey to a neighbouring town, or even but a small way to visit his farm or make sacrifice in the juju house, all his children accompanied him. In their midst he walked, rich and happy, and many of the townsfolk envied his good fortune.

"Now, in the same town there dwelt a lesser chief whose heart was very sore when he considered the prosperity of Ekpenyong. Long he pondered as to how he might best wreak vengeance upon his prosperous neighbour, and sometimes in crocodile form--for he was full of witchcraft and could send forth his soul in this guise--he used to creep up a little stream which lay near the back of Ekpenyong's compound spying out how he might best injure the man whom he hated. Only he never dared go very near to the house because he feared the juju which was hung therein, since it was very powerful, and he dreaded lest it should kill him on account of his evil witchcraft.

"Now among the 'witch company' to which this man belonged was one of Chief Ekpenyong's former wives. To her, therefore, he opened the matter, asking if she had never heard of a way by which the power of this particular juju might be circumvented. The woman demanded why he wished to know, and he answered that he, together with many of the townsfolk, was weary of seeing the continuous prosperity of Ekpenyong, and therefore wanted to get rid of him and all his family, so that the latter's great possessions might be divided up among themselves. To this the woman answered that she also was jealous of Adiaha, because the latter had been preferred before her, and

[p. 106]

also because so many children had been born to this woman, while she herself remained barren. They therefore consulted together and made a plan-------." But that is another story. [*1]

In the foregoing story both Ekpenyong and Adiaha were bidden to go down to the water and bathe so that their bodies might be laved from head to foot. This would appear to have been ordered, not only on account of the fertilising powers ascribed to water in this region, but also as a means of breaking the curse of sterility under which both were suffering.

Such an idea seems not unconnected with the ancient Babylonian belief in the power of water as an antidote to evil spells, mentioned by Mr. R. C. Thompson in dealing with charms and magical preparations. He says:

"Of these the simplest was pure water, which was sprinkled over the possessed person at the conclusion of an incantation, and this had a double meaning, symbolising as it did the cleansing of the man from the spell, and the presence of the great God Ea, whose emanation always remained in water and whose aid was invoked by these means."

To a similar belief in the purifying power of water the ancient Roman lustral ceremonies may also be ascribed.

*    *    *    *    *

An Efik woman once expressed her ideas on the advantage of monogamy in quaint, halting English as follows:

"Among our people, if a man gets plenty wives

[p. 107]

and then goes outside and brings in yet another, the first ones get vexed at this, so trouble comes in that family. Perhaps one wife goes out and finds another man. For this the husband flogs her. She then takes out a summons against him and says, 'I will not stay with that husband any more.' The custom of marrying many wives brings trouble for all women in our country. Women themselves sometimes keep as many as four 'friends,' 'well hidden.' If the husband finds out, he goes bring palaver. Sometimes he flogs the offending men. Sometimes he summonses them. Sometimes a big man has many wives, and one of them wants him to love her past all others. Then she makes medicine and gives him. He says she wants to kill him, and therefore brings her before Court. Some men get wife for house, but no be fit to buy clothes for her. Then another man brings clothes and gives her and the woman takes some of these and 'dashes' to her husband, on which he accepts them and lets her go her own way. At times a husband says he will go walk. Then he goes out, but turns back when out of sight and goes to another place. On his return the wife asks, 'Whence do you come?' He answers, 'I only walk.' Wife says, 'What time did you come back from walk?' He says, 'No ask that. I no be boy.' On which the wife begin to vex. Sometimes a wife is good woman, but no get piccan. Therefore husband says, 'No want you any more.' Some men say, 'If wife goes church will not have her again.' Some women for this part refuse to marry man if he no go church. Say, 'No want to marry you.' To which man reply, 'Very well, no want you--another man

[p. 108]

can marry you.' Men like to have plenty wives because each can do certain things and then more work is done.

"Sometimes if husband flogs wife she summonses him. Then he goes prison and she goes for another man. When husband comes out of prison he goes kill the woman. Takes the other man's other wife in exchange, and goes to his house. He does not kill the man, because it was the first woman's fault!

"If a man gets plenty money women like to marry him, but when the money finishes wife runs away and says, 'Do not want you now.' To which the man replies, 'Cannot go. You married me, and must stay whether I have money or not.'

"One woman, her husband went for some place to another man's house, because he loved other man's wife. Leopard caught him and killed him. Then wife began to cry. Said, 'If husband had stopped with me he would not have died so.'

*    *    *    *    *

Among some Ibibios a custom still obtains through which it is hoped by sympathetic magic to ensure fruitfulness to a bride. When for the first time the new wife enters her husband's house he leaves her so soon as she has crossed the threshold and goes to the compound of some friend to whom a "fine piccan" has been granted. He then hastens back with the babe in his arms, and, entering the bride chamber, says, "Look! This is my piccan." This is done in order that many children may be born to them also.

Again, when the young wife is about to bear her first babe, the husband often goes out and invites

[p. 109]

other small folk into the house. A meal has been prepared, and while the little guests are busily feasting he calls to his wife, "Just as many piccans are now in our house so may you bear plenty for me, that in time it will be filled with our children!"

A juju of special renown as the protector of women and the bestower of fertility is that called Isemin. Pools sacred to this spirit are to be found in all the country round Awa. One of the most celebrated of these lies near the border of the town of Mkpokk, and thither one early September day we went, about the time of the new yam harvest. Through the town playground we passed, then turned to the right beneath a screen of boughs which had to be held aside for us to enter a path, almost invisible at first, but later showing a track deep-worn by the feet of worshippers, who for centuries had followed this road to the sacred water. Beneath a continuous archway of overhanging boughs we passed, low bending of necessity, under leafage so thick as to produce a soft green twilight, till the edge of the holy pool was reached.

Thither, at the new yam festival, all the women and girls of Mkpokk go in procession at dawn. "Naked as the breeze" they pass to bathe in the stream. All men must keep in the houses during the performance of this rite, and should one be found hiding in the bush during this, one of the most sacred of the feminine mysteries, the old native law condemns him to death. Even now a fine of one goat and a hundred manillas would be exacted by the angry women; while the chances of that man living to see the dawn of another Isemin day would also not be very great,

[p. 110]

for even the protection of Government would hardly avail to save him from the thousand and one subtle poisons which are still unknown to white men. It is believed that, should male eye gaze upon these women as they go by unveiled to show themselves before Isemin, the object of the rite would be brought to naught, and the blessing of fruitfulness which it is designed to draw down would in consequence be denied to the town.

Later, one of my women informants explained the matter to me more clearly than such things would seem usually to be formulated in the minds of primitive people such as these. She confided the matter with a charm and delicacy of expression hardly to be expected from a woman typical of those of this region.

"As a bride on her wedding night," said the narrator, "yields herself in all ways to the will of her new-made lord, so at harvest time maids and matrons present themselves before the great juju, Isemin, unrobed and awaiting his will, that perchance he may enter within those whom he chooses, thus shedding the blessing of fertility upon our town."

The eldest of the band, low bending, presents a sacrifice of corn and fish, symbolising fertility on earth and beneath the waters. In every town throughout this part of the district a shrine of this juju may be found, and when a girl marries away from her native place she joins the Isemin of her husband's people.

Great pythons are thought to guard the dwelling-place of the deity--a little hut overlooking the stream. Many snakes, as we can testify from our experience, have their homes near by, and these no man may

[p. 111]

kill. To the inhabitants of Mkpokk and the neighbouring village of Okat snake flesh is tabu "because snakes are sacred to Isemin," and were this law broken the juju would avenge himself by withholding the blessing of fertility from the town, while a devastating pestilence would fall upon the sacrilegious inhabitants. For these great serpents, set as guardians to the mysteries of Isemin, like the famous snakes of Aesculapius, also bestow health upon the countryside.

Some half-mile off is to be seen the shrine of the juju Okwu Okat, before which girls of the aforementioned place must show themselves on entering the Fatting-house. On this occasion custom ordains that they should wear ornaments made from young palm leaves.

Footnotes

^100:1 Second Series, No. 12.

^104:1 A similar ceremony is carried out by Efik women in a holy water near Creek Town, which is thought to be sacred to a juju very powerful for the protection of women in childbirth.

^106:1 See <page 168>.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

 

CHAPTER VIII

 

DOMESTIC LIFE

FOR some reason or other Ibibio women seem to be, on the whole, of higher type than the male portion of the community. So marked, indeed, is the difference in appearance that at first sight they might be taken to be of another race from the men. Professor Keith, F.R.S., informs us that this difference is very strongly shown in those skulls submitted to him for examination.

The men are fairly industrious as regards occupations which custom has decreed should fall to their share; such, for instance, as cutting bush for the new season's farms, tending palm trees, and collecting nuts and kernels. They also build the houses, raise the heavier fishing nets, and, as a general rule, paddle the canoes. On the women, however, falls by far the greater proportion of labour. They do the principal part of the farm work, much of the fishing, often undertake the smoking, and always the marketing of the "catch," together with the making and selling of the great water jars and other native pottery.

To give a typical day in the lives of these overworked drudges:

At dawn the wife chosen to share the couch of her lord during the past night rises and brings him

[p. 113]

water in which to wash. It is in this water, by the way, that she sometimes pours a few drops of the love-potion which she trusts may steal away his affection from the other wives and rivet it upon herself.

Next she goes to the small shrine where stand the row of rude fetishes, often no more than rough sticks driven into the ground, with possibly a slit cut across near the top to represent a mouth. These are the "gods of the week." Before the one which represents the guardian of this particular day she lays an offering, praying that the indwelling spirit will be with her till the morrow's dawn, shielding and prospering her throughout all her undertakings. After this she begins her share of the day's toil, fetching water and firewood, cooking the morning meal and other house or farm work.

Later she loads herself with the palm nuts, oil, yams, cassava, native pots, or other merchandise got ready for the purpose, and sets off either for the native market or the European factory. After a march of anything up to fifteen miles, or even more, she must dispose of her wares and return on her weary tramp, laden sometimes, according to statements made by agents of some of the principal firms on the coast, with a load occasionally as much as sixty pounds in weight, for which she has exchanged her produce. She arrives at home in time to prepare the evening meal for her lord, whom she finds, more often than not, idly awaiting her return amid his gossips in the village "palaver shed."

When it is remembered that in many districts all merchandise is borne by hand, for not even the roughest

[p. 114]

of carts exists for the conveyance of goods, and that by far the greater proportion of native produce is carried on the heads of women, the opening up and improvement of roads becomes a matter of the greatest importance. On our first visit to the eastern part of the Eket district the main roads were found to be blocked before the entrance to every village, as well as to the more important of the farm plantations, by stockades which stretched right across the thoroughfares. The only means of surmounting these was to climb by two trunk sections set on end and firmly driven into the ground. The lower of these was about one and a half feet, and the second almost double that height. When one stood upon the latter, one had to step over the fence on to a similar block on the other side, and so down--only to be met by a like obstacle at the other end of the town. The difficulty which these stockades added to the task of weary, over-burdened women-traders can be imagined. Happily the roads are now open and so improved that, according to the testimony of merchants at the principal commercial centre of the district, trade has shown a very large increase in consequence.

In spite of the drudgery of their lives many of the women seem bright and kindly, and nearly always have a pleasant smile and word of greeting as one passes them on the road.

To the feminine portion of the community, as has already been mentioned, is owed the one Ibibio fine art--that of pottery. Without a wheel, or any aid save their own hands and a fragment of broken sherd, these women build up, from the blue clay of

[p. 115]

the locality, richly ornamented bowls and giant jars, which in beauty of line and decoration rival those which we discovered at Abijang and Nchopan on the Cross River, made by Ekoi women potters. In the Duke of Mecklenburg's book, "From the Congo to the Niger and the Nile," the pottery of the Mangbatu is mentioned as far superior to that of any other negro race. I venture to think that this opinion would hardly have been maintained had the surely far more graceful examples to be found among Southern Nigerian tribes been brought to the notice of the distinguished author.

Among Ibibios this talent is given widest play in the creation of new forms for the vases and bowls placed upon burial mounds or within the erections built as memorials to dead chiefs. It is true that no trace of the graceful flying-buttress-like handles and slender necks of the Ekoi water jars has come to our notice here; but the forms of the vessels themselves and the care expended on the raised decorative motifs are surely as fine as any in Africa.

The difference in the Ibibio estimate of the value of life between men and women was poignantly illustrated on one occasion when we were passing along the Oron-Eket road.

Suddenly on rounding a corner not far from the eighth milestone we saw a body lying prone. The feet were upon the grassy border, but the head lay in the full glare of the pitiless sunshine, so near the middle of the path that care was needed in passing on the motor bicycle. As soon as it was possible to stop we went back to give what help we could, and

[p. 116]

found the body to be that of a youngish woman, but so shrunken by sickness or neglect that the limbs were little more than sticks, while the breasts were like those of an aged crone. She lay face downwards, shaken by shuddering sobs; but though a stream of wayfarers was passing, none took the slightest notice--a fallen log would have excited more, since that would in all probability have been carried away for firewood. We did what we could for the moment, and commandeered two of the passers-by to get the loan of a native bed from a neighbouring compound. On this the little shrunken form was carried back to the sleeping-sickness camp. There, as we well knew, the kindest care awaited her, but alas! it came too late to save this pitiful piece of human jetsam, and she died at dawn.

By a strange coincidence, for never before in our many journeys up and down had we found anyone stricken upon the road, hardly a mile farther we came upon the body of a man apparently felled by sunstroke. He, however, had been carried beneath the cool shade of a wayside clump of bamboo, and the passers-by, both male and female, had set down their loads and were eagerly doing all in their power to restore him.

Many Ibibio women are stunted in growth, while some are positively dwarfs. This is possibly due to the heavy loads which they carry in youth. Once while staying at the rest-house at Ikotobo we noticed a woman turn the corner of the Uyo road. On her head she bore a section of tree trunk at least eight feet in length and two in girth. The late Dr. Foran, who was spending the evening with us, remarked as to the extraordinary weight which these people seem

[p. 117]

capable of bearing. Not long before he said he had met a man carrying a load of firewood which he computed could hardly have been less than 150 pounds in weight. Since the bearer was not of robust appearance he stopped to caution him as to the risk he was running by so doing, but the old man refused to listen, and passed on. Before his destination was reached he sank to the ground, and subsequent investigations proved that he died from a broken neck caused by the strain of his load. It is comparatively rare, however, for men to undertake such services, the burden of which almost invariably falls upon the women.

A particularly diminutive specimen ran up to us one evening on our arrival at the seashore town of Ibeno. The sunset glow still lingered in the sky, and through the clear air the great peak of the Kamerun Mountain was clearly to be seen; while farther off the islands of Fernando Po and San Thome were silhouetted against the evening light. It is so unusual for the atmospheric condition to make it possible to see these points that my husband sprang ashore and set up the theodolite in all haste that angles might be taken towards the distant heights. These had, for us, associations almost sacred, since they were so closely connected with our friend, the late Boyd Alexander.

When the small dusky figure first approached and stood humbly waiting, we thought that she had only come to bid us welcome, and, as each moment of light was precious, would have dismissed her with the word "Echiro" ("Greeting").

The answer "Echiranda" was, however, given

[p. 118]

in so faint a voice and with such a sobbing catch of the breath, that we turned to see what was the matter.

It was a pitiful enough sight on which our eyes fell. The woman's right car was all but cut off; while her cheek, throat, and side were cruelly gashed and clotted with blood. All for so small a thing! Merely a quarrel over a few feet of yam patch, which was claimed both by herself and a fellow wife preferred before her in the affection of their common husband.

By rights the following account should be included under the heading of "Juju," but it illustrates so poignantly the estimation in which women are held among this people, that I have chosen rather to give it here. It was told us by Idaw Imuk of Idua Eket.

"In olden days, before Government came to our country, there was a great juju in our town, the name of which was Abo Abom.

"Year by year sacrifices were made before it. First of all the members gathered together in the Egbo House and the chief priest of the cult announced: 'Now is the time for sacrifice.'

"Then, from all the countryside, the people collected yams and fowls and brought them before the juju to induce him to protect them, so that none might die within the year. Then, when the provisions had been stored within the Egbo House and the members were gathered together, the head priest sent forth messengers to seek a man with neither father nor brothers. It did not matter whether or no he had sisters, because, should these come making a fuss and weeping, the members had but to answer, 'Even if we show you your brother's blood, what can you do?'

[p. 119]

"When such a man had been led before the meeting, with hands tied behind the back with cords well tested as to strength, his body was rubbed all over with dye from the camwood tree. Next he was placed before the juju and there tightly bound by throat and ankles to a stout stake. No further harm was then done to him; he was just left to die of thirst and starvation.

"After making this offering, the members went forth to that part of the sacred bush where the juju dresses were kept. There they robed themselves, and then came back, clad in full dress, to give their play in the town.

"No woman might see this play, but all were curious, even to the young girls, and talked it over among themselves, saying, 'What is there in these rites which it is forbidden us to see?'

"Now, one woman of the place, Adiaha Agbo by name, thought, 'If I hide myself in the bush, no one will know of it, and then I shall learn this great secret which the men keep from us.'

"So she hid, and spied upon the company as they returned.

"When, however, the juju image passed the place where she lay concealed, he called to his followers in a terrible voice:

"'I see one woman named Adiaha Agbo hiding in the bush, in order that she may learn what it is not lawful for woman to know.'

"On hearing this, Adiaha was so terrified that her limbs failed her, and she could not even attempt to escape.

[p. 120]

"The juju called to his followers: 'Go to that spot. Drag forth the woman, and bring her before me.'

"All was done as he said. The juju members surrounded the woman, brandishing their machets and shouting. One cried, 'She must be killed.' But another, who was a kinsman, answered:

"'If you want to kill her, you must first ask permission of her owner.'

"(The woman was free born, but married, and, according to our rule, a husband is the owner and possessor of all his wives.)

"To this the juju answered: 'Since you speak thus impertinently we will first kill the woman, and then see what further should be done in the matter.'

"On this the members began to consult together. Those who wished her to be killed drew on the one side, those who were in favour of asking her husband as to her fate on the other. The first party said:

"'We play this play as our fathers played it hundreds and hundreds of years ago. So far as we know, no woman has ever seen it before. We remember those who have witnessed other jujus without permission and were killed for it. Therefore she also must die.' Whereon they fell upon the woman and slew her on the spot.

"When the other side saw that she was already dead, they said: 'We will no longer belong to this juju. It is wrong to kill a woman without her husband's permission.' On that they fell upon the murderers and slew seven of them; after which they ran and hid themselves in the bush.

[p. 121]

"When a little time had passed, the fugitives talked together over all that had happened, and said to one another:

"'Now that we have killed our brothers of the juju, of what use to live any longer? Let us rather slay ourselves also.' To this they agreed, so each man fell upon his machet and died in the bush by himself.

"When the catastrophe was noised abroad, the people of neighbouring towns came to Idua and asked the surviving townsfolk: 'What is the cause of this that we hear? Never did we see such a thing before! If, therefore, you do not pay a fine of one cow to each town all of us will join together and kill the remainder of you; because you Iduans have offended against our rule. If there was a dispute about a woman who had kinsfolk to take her part, you should not have killed her, but have bidden her family ransom her at the price of another who was kinless and about whom, therefore, there would have been no trouble. Had you done so, all the men now dead would have been alive to-day!'

"So Idua was forced to pay a cow to each of the neighbouring towns in order that the palaver might be settled, for the Iduans were not strong enough to withstand all those who had joined together against them."

Ibibios are perhaps unusually bloodthirsty, for crimes of violence were so frequent that for months after our arrival scarcely a day passed without a man or woman running in to claim the protection of the District Commissioner--often with hideous gun or

[p. 122]

machet wounds to show in plea. Should a day fortunately have gone by without such incident the morrow usually more than restored the average.

One evening just as dusk was falling a woman crept up the steps which lead to the veranda of the station bungalow. Her skin showed that curious grey pallor which intense fear substitutes for the warm brown of the native, and out of her drawn face the dark eyes gleamed, large and terror-filled. Her name, she said, was Unwa of Efa, in the Uyo District. She was now on a visit to a friend at Ikot Atako some few miles off on the far side of the river. To her, hot-foot, had come a brother with the news that Chief Ikombo of Efa had slain their sister Adia Inaw, who was one of his wives, and had afterwards cut off the head and arms of the corpse. According to the testimony of a friend, Amaw Ima by name, Ikombo had "fled to bush" immediately after the murder, and was lying in wait for Unwa herself in order to slay her because she had formerly advised her sister against wedding him.

The reason given for the crime was that the chief had quarrelled with his wife about some small matter, and then charged her with placing poisonous leaves in his food and pipe. Well knowing the danger of such an accusation, the unfortunate woman went before the chiefs of the town and asked what she should do. By their advice she took out a summons against her husband, claiming divorce. His answer was to slay and mutilate the woman who had dared appeal to the protection of the law. Then, knowing himself outcast, he took to the bush, determined to glut

[p. 123]

himself with vengeance, and trusting that the difficulty of capture might save him from paying the penalty of his crime.

Unwa came in terror of her life to beg protection, for she dared not return to her town so long as this peril was abroad. She appeared grateful for permission to remain until it was possible to arrange with the Commissioner for her safe return. Her story is uninvestigated, and how the matter ended we never learnt, owing to our unexpectedly early departure from the District.

*    *    *    *    *

On another occasion when my husband was visiting the Awa Native Court, a woman, splendidly built and with a fine air of courage and resolution unusual among those of her race, stood forth in Court and called to him.

There was a stir among the men present, several of whom busied themselves in persuading her to sit down and keep silence. Among these a lean old man, with one glittering eye--the other had been closed by a machet stroke--and a most malevolent expression, was particularly prominent. Another case was beginning: plaintiff and defendant were already in the box, so the judge went on, apparently unconscious of the woman, but keeping her in view all the time. Many efforts were made to entice her outside the building; but she resolutely refused to stir, and, at the end of the case in hand, sprang forward again--this time right to the front of the Court. On her hip, encircled by the right arm, sat a sturdy piccan, while the left was flung out towards the Commissioner, 

[p. 124]

and from her lips demands and entreaties poured forth in a flood of excited eloquence.

It transpired that the woman, Nwa Udaw Uko by name, had been put into prison for no fault at all, but merely on demand of the hawk-eyed old chief, named Etesin, who had busied himself in trying to suppress her when she first strove to draw attention to her case. His plea was that "Some white man or other at some time had ordered her piccan to be given up to him so soon as it was able to walk alone; and that, since she refused to do so, he had induced the Native Court clerk to imprison her. He was unable to give the least indication by which the alleged judgment could be traced; she, on the contrary, pleaded that the chief had no authority over her or any of her people, save that he had seized several of them and sold them into slavery, the last occasion being only three years before. Since there were no witnesses on either side, save the woman's husband, who came forward, at her call, to corroborate what she said, the case had to be adjourned; but the woman was, of course, freed, and a few weeks later the matter was fully investigated.

In the course of the trial Nwa Udaw Uko stated on oath:

"About three years ago Etesin sold my brother-in-law, Umana Isong, to a man whose name I do not know. Many years ago he had already sold him to someone in the Opobo District. Umana ran back to our town, and three years ago accused sold him again. We do not know where he is now. The reason accused gave for selling him the second time was that Umana

[p. 125]

had committed adultery with Etesin's brother's wife. A long time ago accused also sold my first husband. I do not know where the latter was sent. He has never been seen again."

Akpan Nkana (witness for prosecutor), sworn, stated:

"About three years ago accused sold Umana Isong to some place. Since that time Umana has never returned to his town. He was a relative of accused's. A long while before he had been sold, it was said by his own father, but escaped and came back to Iton, his native place. During the time of the war at Ikot Ebokk accused sold Nwa Udaw Uko's husband, Eduok Adiaha Ekkpo by name. He has never returned. I am a relative of the woman."

Etesin stated:

"Once, a long time ago, I went to another country to get Idiong. On my return I heard that Umana Isong's father had sold him. I said nothing, but went to my house. Umana escaped and came back. The people who had bought him came and caught him again. This was a long time ago. I cannot mention the number of years. It was at the time that his sister, Adiaha Isong, whom I am calling as a witness, was in the Fatting-house. She has now borne five children. I never sold Eduok Adiaha Ekkpo."

Question by Nwa Udaw Uko: "Who sold my husband?"

Answer: "Essien did."

Adiaha Isong (called as witness for accused) stated on oath:

"It is three years ago since accused sold my brother

[p. 126]

Umana Isong. About a year before that accused had also sold my elder brother Eduok Adiaha Ekkpo."

Question by accused: "Who sold Umana Isong first of all?"

Answer by Adiaha: "My father did."

Udaw Eka Etuk Ikpa (called as witness for accused), sworn, stated:

"It is three years ago since Etesin sold Umana Isong. He also sold Eduok Adiaha Ekkpo several years ago. I am a relative of Umana Isong's. Nearly everyone in our family was sold as a slave."

Question by accused: "Did not Isong Akpabio sell your half-brother Akpan Isong?"

Answer: "No. You sold him also."

Not a single witness could be brought forward to testify in favour of the accused, and, as a result of trying to extort Nwa Udaw Uko's latest piccan from her, and inducing the clerk to imprison her until she consented to give it up, he himself was awarded two years' hard labour.

After Court, according to my husband's usual practice, all prisoners were called before him to ask if they had any complaint to make. Besides the one whose case is given above, there were five women prisoners, and of these all but one were found to have been sentenced without due cause.

The case of the second on the list, Ekkpo Udia of Ekott Ibokk, was perhaps the most characteristic. She had been convicted before the Native Court by a council of chiefs and sentenced to two months' imprisonment with hard labour for the terrible crime of having put her daughter into the Fatting-house without

[p. 127]

first obtaining her husband's permission, and for not taking her out again immediately on learning his opinion that she should wait for some months before starting the course of feeding up, for which, by the way, the mother provided nearly all the necessary food.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

 

CHAPTER IX

 

MARRIAGE PROBLEMS

FROM a case brought before the Ikotobo Native Court it would appear that among the Ubium Ibibios the death penalty was inflicted upon a woman who married a man from another town. In the course of his evidence the defendant, Okonnor Asom, head chief of Ikotobo, stated on oath:

"Three years ago Etuk Udaw Nwa Mbiam came and told me that the plaintiff, Obot Udo, refused to remain as a wife with her former husband Akpan Idui, and had said to the latter, 'If you can find a new husband for me to marry, I will wed him instead of you; for I would rather be a sort of sister to you than remain as a wife.'

"On learning this I said to Etuk Udaw, 'If you think that plaintiff would like to marry me, please bring her to my house so that I can see her.' After four days, he brought the woman to Ubium market, and called me to come and look at her. I did so, and she told Etuk Udaw, 'I should like you to take me to defendant's house.' Three days later, therefore, he brought her with her sister Ema and, Udaw Etuk Ukpon. When they came I gave them palm wine. They drank, and plaintiff said, 'I am willing to marry you.' I answered, 'Very well. I will come to your

[p. 129]

town, Ndukpo-Isi, and see your former husband and your mother. If they agree, I will refund the dowry.'

"I went according to promise. Akpan Idui said, 'If the plaintiff agrees to marry you, you can repay the dowry to me, and after that she will be to me as a stepdaughter.'

"On the same day I went to the mother and spoke of marriage, but she answered, 'The townspeople of Ndukpo-Isi have a law that should a girl from their town marry a stranger she must die.'

"Next morning the mother came to my house and said: 'Akpan Idui has quarrelled with me, asking, "Why have you prevented the girl from marrying a new husband, so that the dowry might be repaid to us?'"

"Five days later a messenger came from Akpan to call me to Ndukpo-Isi. On my arrival he said, 'Plaintiff's mother has now agreed for you to refund the dowry.'

"I therefore took manillas to the value of thirteen goats, and on that same day gave one fathom of cloth and one gown to the girl's mother, saying, 'Take and give these to your daughter as a sign that she is my wife.'

"After two weeks plaintiff and Ekkpo Manga came to my house. The woman slept there for two nights, after which she went back to her mother. Two weeks later Udaw Etuk Udaw came to me and said, 'Have you heard what has happened to your wife? 'I answered, 'No.' He said, 'Udaw Afaha Ama told her that if she continued married to you she would not be allowed to five.'"

[p. 130]

From this case, and the still more horrible penalty exacted, even to the present day, among the Okkobbor people as related in another place, [*1] it would appear that the regulation as to endogamy was enforced against women marrying out of their own town or clan; but no trace of any custom restricting men in like manner has come to our notice.

Many indications seem to point to the probability that among the tribes of this district communal marriage was practised at no very distant date.

Once when we were about to leave Okon Ekkpo (Jamestown) a deputation of chiefs under the leadership of Efa Abassi of Ibaka came up to say that they wished to go back to the old custom by which not the husband alone, but his "age class" or "company" might claim damages from the co-respondent in case of unfaithfulness on the part of the wife of a member.

This custom of claiming common damages for infidelity would seem to indicate a former state of affairs in which wives of members were regarded as the common property of the whole "society." In such a case the idea which prevails, not in this district only, but also among the Ekoi and many other tribes, that a wife's unfaithfulness entails misfortune, sickness and even death upon her husband, may in earlier days have extended until it was supposed to affect the "age class" as a whole.

Should a husband fall ill, his first idea is to suspect his wife as the probable cause. The case of Nka Anang, heard in Awa Court, on August Ist, 1913, is typical of many. In this the complainant stated that he

[p. 131]

had fallen sick, and, thinking that the illness must have been sent as a consequence of his wife's unfaithfulness, taxed her with this: on which the woman confessed to having three lovers.

As will be found related under "Burial Customs" (p. 232), the oracle was usually consulted after the death of a chief in order to discover whether this had been brought about through infidelity on the part of one of his wives. When the answer was in the affirmative, the unfortunate woman charged with the crime was either entombed alive or impaled above the grave of her dead lord. [*1]

*    *    *    *    *

Two things arouse the hatred of Ibibio women beyond all else, namely when one steals from another the love of a husband, or when one wife is fruitful and another barren. In such a case the favoured woman is always in grave danger; for her childless rival will usually go to any lengths in order to destroy her. Many such seek out a juju man or famous witch-wife, and at the price of all their possessions buy themselves into some terrible "affinity," such as crocodile or water snake. Once capable of assuming this were-form, the jealous woman is supposed to build herself a house beneath the river, and when all is ready, lure her rival to the spot on some pretext or other, and there drown her.

A case showing the savage jealousy of a childless wife to one more favoured was reported by an Efik woman informant. Owing to our sudden removal

[p. 132]

from the district the facts are unconfirmed, but even so they are so typical of the state of feeling among childless women that it seems worth while to give them.

A man had two wives, the last married of whom showed signs that a babe was about to be born to her, before hope of such a thing was vouchsafed to the elder wife. One night, therefore, the latter took a small penknife, like the cruel mother in the old northern ballad, [*1] and crept into the room where her happy rival lay sleeping. So savagely did she slash at the victim of her spite that the unborn child was killed and the prospective mother died not long after. The murderess is reported to be still undergoing punishment.

So rooted is this hatred on the part of barren women that they are said to wreak it even upon the children of dead rivals. Such a story was told by a very old Ibibio woman:

"Once a man had two wives, one of whom bore him a fine piccan, while the other was barren. After a few years the fruitful woman died, leaving her son to the care of her fellow wife. Now it chanced that the latter, whose name was Afia, went out to her farm to gather the ripening corn, but lo! birds were eating it. So she hired someone to make snares for her and set them in the farm for the protection of the crops.

"Next day she went to visit these and found a bird caught in one of them. Its plumage was very gay and fine, so she determined not to kill it, but

[p. 133]

made a cage of split palm stem, and therein bore it home.

"When market-day came round, before setting out she called to the small boy, her stepson, and said, 'Look after the bird while I am gone.' No sooner had she left the house, however, than the child set the cage upon the grass, and took the bird in his hand, whispering to himself, 'I wonder if such a small bird is old enough to fly away.' So saying he unclosed his hand a little, on which the bird flew up and settled upon a plantain leaf outside. At first the boy was frightened, but comforted himself saying, 'I do not think it can fly far. It is so small. Surely I shall soon be able to catch it again." Then he ran out and tried his best to do so, but the bird spread its wings and flew away into the bush, where it was hidden amid the dark trees so that the boy could not follow.

"When the stepmother came back, she went straight up to the cage and looked at it, but saw no bird. So she asked, 'Where is the bird which I told you to guard during my absence?'

"Tremblingly the small child answered, 'I did not think that he could fly away, so I took him out to see if he had yet learnt to move his wings!' To this the cruel stepmother replied angrily, 'Go out and recapture my bird. Without him do not dare to come back to the house.' Shaking with fear the little one answered, 'The bird has gone so far! I cannot catch it any more.'

"On this the stepmother seized him and beat him very cruelly, hitting him on the side so that he

[p. 134]

died. She did not want her husband to know that she had killed his son, and therefore took the little body and hid it under the bed. Then she began to cook 'chop,' not knowing that a neighbour had witnessed what she had done.

"When the husband came back from mimbo-cutting he said: 'Bring "chop"': on which the woman brought what she had prepared and placed it before him. Then he said, 'Call my son to come and eat with me.' She answered, 'The boy has already eaten.' On this the man fell to. After his hunger was a little satisfied he said, 'My son always "chops" with me. Call the boy. I will not finish without him': to which she replied, 'He has gone out to play.' So the husband said, 'Very well, I will keep some of the food until he returns.'

"A long time passed and yet the boy did not come, so the man asked further: 'Where is it that my son has gone to play?' To this the wife answered, 'I do not know.' After waiting yet some time the man said, 'I must go myself to seek him.' So he set out and searched all around, but could not find the child. On his way back he saw the old neighbour sitting by her door, and asked her, 'Have you seen my son?' She answered, 'Have you asked your wife?' To which he replied, 'Yes, and she told me that he had gone out to play.'

"The old woman said, 'I heard what she said to the boy about the bird which he let fly. Also I watched her kill him and hide him under the bed. Go, therefore, and look at the bottom of your wife's bed and see what you find there.'

[p. 135]

"In silence the man did as she bade, and there found the little dead form. Gently he carried it out to his own room, then called to his wife and asked, 'Who did this thing? Whoever has done it must wake up my son again for me.' The woman replied, 'If you want to have the boy again, give back my bird which he let fly.'

"On this the man sent to fetch his wife's father and mother, that they might see what their daughter had done to the dead woman's child. On their coming they said, 'Never have we known such a thing as this. Do, therefore, what you choose with the woman.'

"On that the husband turned to his wife and asked, 'Can you give me back my son?' To this she replied, 'Get back my bird, and perhaps I may think of bringing back the child of the woman whom I hated.' This so angered the husband that he slew her. After which he went out to the bush and hanged himself: for he did not care to live now that his only child was dead, since there was none to bury him or pour out the ghost offerings over his grave."

A terrible revenge sometimes taken by discarded wives upon husbands who have rejected them was confided to me by an Efik woman.

"When a man took a dislike to his wife without cause," she said, "he used to drive her forth from his house, giving merely, as sufficient reason, that he did not want her any more. Often the woman would cling to him, praying that he would relent and not send her away. Sometimes the neighbours, knowing her to be innocent of any fault, would come and

[p. 136]

beg him to take her back. Should entreaties still prove vain, in the olden days, unless she cared to seek another husband, she had no course but to go sadly away, alone and outcast; since by marriage she had lost all part or lot in her father's property, and was no longer considered of her former family, but as belonging only to that of her husband. Driven thence, therefore, she was without refuge, alone and empty of heart, for the husband kept all children whom she had borne him."

In such a case the only way "to bring repentance to her lover, and wring his bosom" was "to die"--not alone, since that would have been but a matter of indifference to her callous lord, but in such a way as might indeed "wring his bosom." Evening after evening, therefore, the outcast wife. would creep round the compound whence she had been thrust, waiting until chance came to inveigle one of her own piccans out from its sleeping-place. When she had succeeded in this, she bore the little one down to the river, and, standing on the brink, gazed out over the swift-flowing water. Cold, deep and black, it swept by, tenanted by crocodiles, water snakes and a hundred unknown terrors; yet to the outcast less terrible than the life which would henceforth be hers. So with a bitter cry she fell forward, as a log falls, the babe tight clasped to her breast, and the cruel current sucked them under, to be washed up, perchance, on some far-off beach, or seen no more of men.

Next morning when the husband woke and found his piccan gone he mourned for its loss, and, perhaps, for its sake, cast a thought of regret to the woman

[p. 137]

whom he had driven away, wishing that he had been less harsh, so that their child might still have played in the sunshine. Then, when his turn came to cross that other river, and wife and babe were found awaiting him upon its farther shore, he might, it is thought, be moved to kindliness and take her once more for his own, so that she need no longer dwell husbandless and deserted in the world of shadows.

Not long ago a case occurred in which a man, grown weary of his wife, decided to put her away. The woman could not bear to leave him, and as she was young and pretty the pitying neighbours advised her to dance once more before her husband. She did so, and when the dance was ended and he still stood unrelenting, ran and threw her arms about him, crying: "I will not let you go! I will not let you go!" Alas! Her frail arms had no power to restrain the errant fancy or bring back to her the lost affection of her fickle lord.

Footnotes

^130:1 "By Haunted Waters." P. Amaury Talbot.

^131:1 Only a few years ago one of the present Provincial Commissioners, Mr. R. A. Roberts, in passing through the Eket district, came across one of these sad sacrifices set up by the roadside.

^132:1 "Fine Flowers in the Valley."

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138]

 

CHAPTER X

 

LOVE PHILTRES AND MAGIC

ONE morning, just as we were leaving Okon Ekkpo (Jamestown), a deputation of chiefs came to lay a case of some interest before my husband. The head wife of one of them had accused a fellow wife of attempting to administer a "love potion" to their common lord, the effect of which would be to draw his affection from all others to the giver alone. The potion had been bought from a noted witch-doctor of the neighbourhood. In this case the magician in question was a woman, young and singularly attractive in appearance.

At first sight the crime did not seem very heinous, but it transpired that love potions are by no means harmless, since they contain small portions of a powerful poison, repeated doses of which are said not only to affect the brain and render the recipient incapable of normal judgment, but even to bring death in the end. The principal ingredients in these philtres are the hearts of chickens pounded up to a smooth paste, together with leaves thought to contain magical qualities. It is not without significance that among the Ibibios, save when administered in "medicine" intended to weaken the will or destroy the courage of the recipient, the hearts and livers of chickens are

[p. 139]

carefully avoided as food, since it is thought that those who partake will become "chicken-hearted" in consequence.

In order to render the charm efficacious it is necessary to draw forth the soul of some person and imprison it amid fresh-plucked herbs in an earthen pot never before used. The vessel is then hung above a slow fire, and, as the leaves dry up, the body of the man or woman chosen for the purpose is said to wither away.

In the present case, a fellow wife, Antikka by name, was the victim chosen, and when my husband asked whether any evil consequences had been thought to result, the complainant drew forth the woman, remarking:

"Our District Commissioner can see for himself. Formerly Antikka was a very fresh woman, plump and beautiful. Now that her soul has been drawn into the pot and withered by slow fire it is plain to see that she has become dry and sapless."

The woman was very pale, of mixed blood, and it was easy to see from her drawn face and terror-stricken air that, however foolish such a story sounds to twentieth-century ears, it was no idle tale to her.

In view of the importance attached to such cases by no less an authority than Dr. Wallis Budge, of the British Museum, it may be well to give the proceedings in full.

During the course of the trial a fellow wife named Ikwaw Eyo stated on oath:

"I was in my house when Ikwaw came and said,

We are all three the wives of one husband. Let us

[p. 140]

make medicine that our husband may not love his other wife, Antikka.' Afterwards I went to him and reported: 'Ikwaw has asked me to join her in preparing a love philtre so that you will not be able to care for any other wives.'

"Another time the same woman came to me and said, 'Aret knows all about magic leaves.' After this she asked me to come into the house where the magician was, but when the latter saw me she said, 'It is not a good thing to have called Ikwaw Eyo into the presence of the medicine. She may tell her husband about it.'

"All this also I reported, and told, too, that Aret had bidden Ikwaw buy a little clay bowl in the marketplace of the value of four wires. This she did, and later, when all was prepared, they asked me, 'Whose soul do you think we should call into the pot?' I answered, 'I do not know.' On this Aret said, 'Let her alone. To-day we will grind the medicine and afterwards we can settle whose soul it will be best to call.'

"Next Ikwaw was sent out to get an egg. She begged me to bring one also, and I went to Antikka and asked her for one, which she gave, and I in turn handed it to Ikwaw. Then Aret and she made the medicine, and called Antikka's soul. Long they called, very softly, and in words which I could not understand. After a while they sent me out, bidding me fetch some yellow ogokk powder, and on my return Aret said, 'We have already called Antikka's soul into the pot.' Ikwaw then begged Aret to call our husband's soul also before the juju, but the medicine

[p. 141]

woman said, 'If I should do this the soul of your husband would go wandering, and he himself would fall sick of his body.'

"Ikwaw told me that Aret had also stated, 'We may not beat this medicine in one of the fu-fu mortars. Should we do this the vessel could not be used again.' Ikwaw then sent me to bring one of the old mats from before Antikka's house. I refused, but afterwards fetched one in secret from her own house instead of that of Antikka. Aret gave me a piece of root to hang up over my hearth, but Ikwaw advised her not to let me have it, as should our husband come to my house and see it hanging in the fireplace, he would be sure to ask about it, and I should then very likely tell him of the secret thing they had done. In my presence Aret also said to Ikwaw:

"'When you bring your husband water in which to wash in the morning take a little of the liquid from out the pot of medicine, and mix with the fresh water. Also spread some upon the side of the bowl, and at night before you go to lie in his bed, rub some of this juju over your own arms, feet and neck.'

"Later Ikwaw bore the pot of medicine into her bedroom and I went away, but that same day our husband went to visit her. He saw the medicine and carried it off to his house. Next day he called a meeting of the chiefs, then summoned Aret and Ikwaw before them and asked, 'What sort of medicine is this which you have been making?' They answered, 'It is a love philtre.' So the chiefs said that the case must be brought to Court."

Ikwaw stated on oath:

[p. 142]

"One day I asked Aret to come and give medicine to my little daughter who was sick. About this time Eyo said to me, 'Akon Abassi, our fellow wife, is making love philtres for our husband. That is why he loves her more than us. Let us therefore find someone who can make such medicine for us also.'

"I answered, 'I have no money'; but she said, 'I will bring some.' Later she brought five shillings, which she asked me to give to Aret. I showed the money to the latter, who said, 'I cannot accept it, as I do not know why it is given.' Afterwards Eyo, came secretly to the back of my house and said, 'Arrange with Aret about the love philtre.' Later I asked Aret to come and see me again. We met Eyo outside the door of my house. She asked Aret, 'Have you brought the medicine?' Aret answered 'Yes.' Eyo questioned further, 'What must one do with it?' Aret replied, 'Bring a fu-fu mortar.' This Eyo did. The magic bark was laid in it, and at her request I beat this to powder. When all was prepared I asked Eyo to take the medicine to her house. She said, 'I cannot, because no one is sick there, and should our husband see it and ask the reason for my having it I should have nothing to say in excuse.'"

Only a short time ago an epidemic of such "love poisoning" was said to have broken out in Calabar, and to have caused the death of many chiefs.

The following case in which a love philtre also figures came before the Native Court at Awa on April 25th, 1913. In this the prosecutor, Ayana Etuk Udaw, sworn, stated:

"About a year ago I went to Ikot Etobo where one

[p. 143]

Udofia Nwa by name told me that Akpan Nka had asked him to make a medicine to give to my wife Owo, so that she might leave me and go to him. Udofia also said that he had given the medicine to Akpan Nka."

Udofia Nwa stated on oath:

"About a year ago the accused asked me to make medicine for him. I inquired to whom he was going to give it, and he said it was for the prosecutor's wife Owo, to cause her to leave her present husband and come to him. I made the medicine. Afterwards prosecutor came to my country and I asked him if his wife was still with him. He said, 'No, she has gone away.' On hearing this I reported that the accused had bought medicine from me with the intention of taking the woman from him by this means. First the accused had said that he wanted it for his sister, and afterwards that it was for prosecutor's wife."

The accused stated

"About a year ago I asked the witness Udofia Nwa to make a medicine for me. He asked to whom I was going to give it, and I mentioned my sister, who is living at Afia Nsitt. I wanted her to take the medicine so that she should return to me and I should then be able to give her in marriage to anyone whom I chose. I did not mention the name of prosecutor's wife, nor have I given medicine to the woman."

A third case in which a love philtre played a part, came before the Court at Idua Oron. This time it was a jealous mistress who sought to administer the potion. The account is given by a woman well known to all those concerned.

[p. 144]

George Offong, a former Native Court clerk, had married two wives at his own town, Okatt. When he was transferred to Idua as clerk of court, he met an Oron woman named Emiene whom he induced to come to his house. After a short time he sent to fetch his two wives, and one came while the other remained behind. Now the one who answered his call was his best-loved wife, Etuk Udaw by name, and before long it was clear to the Oron woman that Offong cared far more for the new-comer than for herself. This angered her, and she determined to steal away his affection so that he might be led to divorce his wife.

With this end in view she got together her most valued possessions, and went to a famous witch-doctor to purchase a love philtre. The necessary potion was given, and she was instructed as to the rites to be carried out in order to ensure its efficacy. For this she had to go alone to a waste place, and there, hidden from all eyes, carry out the prescribed ritual. While thus engaged a friend of her lover chanced to pass through the bush, near the spot which she had chosen. Attracted by light and sound in so lonely a place the man crept near and hid behind some trees, where unseen and unsuspected, he could witness everything. Only when the last rite was finished and the woman, exhausted by the frenzy of her petition, lay prone upon the ground did he steal away to tell Offong what he had seen. In consequence both men made investigations and succeeded in learning all that was to be known.

Not till long after dark had fallen did Emiene creep

[p. 145]

back to her lover's house. When she appeared before him he charged her with the carrying out of evil rites in order to turn his love away from Etuk Udaw and transfer it to herself. She denied all knowledge of this, saying, "I never did any such thing." To this Offong replied, "There is a man who witnessed all that you have done. Also we know from whom you bought the medicine, and the price which you paid."

On hearing this Emiene said, "Send for this man that I may know who accuses me."

When the witness came forward and told of the very place where she had practised the charm, and of all she had said and done there, as also the name of the witch-doctor from whom the love philtre had been bought, she realised that further denial was useless; so hung her head and said never a word. After the accuser had gone the poor woman held out her arms toward Offong and pleaded that what she had done was but because it was hard to live in his house day by day and see another woman preferred before herself. She entreated, therefore, that he would forgive her and let her stay on as before, but he answered, "That cannot be. I must bring the matter before court."

So this was done, with the result that the members pronounced her guilty and sentenced her to three months' imprisonment.

Afterwards Offong would never see her again.

Other magic rites in frequent use are practised by jealous men or women to wither up the vital powers of those who have fallen under their displeasure and prevent such from the procreation of offspring. Such

[p. 146]

a case happened not long ago and is thus related by Udaw of Ikot Atako.

"A woman of Ikot Akpan Udaw, by name Adiaha Ntokk, was given by her parents in marriage to a fellow townsman named Udaw Nka Nta. For some years she lived quietly in her husband's house and bore him two babes. Afterwards she grew weary of him, and seeing another man who pleased her better, said to Nka Nta:

"'I am tired of you, and have seen a man whom I like better. He is willing to repay the dowry which you gave to my parents, so I shall leave you and go to him.'

"Now Nka Nta loved this woman with so strong a passion that, because of it, he cared for no other wife; so he begged her not to leave him. She, however, only laughed at his entreaties, gathered together her possessions, and prepared to go to the house of her new lover.

"When Udaw Nka Nta saw that she had determined to leave him he went before the juju and made sacrifice, calling upon the spirit to hear his prayer. Then he came back and stood before the woman and said:

"'Since you will no longer be my wife you shall henceforth be barren. Never shall you bear a babe to another man.'

"For the moment Adiaha Ntokk was startled, but she soon rallied and answered with a laugh and a toss of the head, 'You are not Abassi to give or withhold children.'

"To this the man replied, 'I know very well that of myself I have no power, but the spell I have wrought

[p. 147]

is a very strong one, and in time you will see whether or no my words are vain. Once again I tell you, if you leave my house for that of another you will never bear piccan more.'

"In spite of this Adiaha persisted, and went to her new lover. Yet the curse held, and though she lived with him for several years, Eka Abassi sent no babe to their hearth.

"After a time the faithless wife again grew weary and thought: 'I will seek out a new husband by whom I may bear a child, since this one is of no use to me.' So she married a third man, named Anam Okut, and still lives at Afa Eket; but the juju which her first husband put upon her yet holds. Never a babe has been born to her, and no new husband will take to his house a wife so accursed."

Another method of bringing barrenness upon those against whom a grudge is harboured came out in a case heard at Idua Oron on July 14th, 1913. In this a man, Ekpenyon by name, accused his wife Isong Edigi Owo of invoking the great Mbiam juju, Ita Brinyan, or as it is sometimes called Atabli Inyan, against him.

The plaintiff stated on oath:

"Three weeks ago I gave my wife thirty wires and asked her to go and buy fish and palm oil for me. She took the wires, but when later I sent to ask for what she had bought she answered that she had nothing. I therefore went to her house and inquired why she had not purchased the fish. First she would not speak, then answered that she had only bought oil. I caught hold of her and drew her out of the house, telling her

[p. 148]

to go and buy the fish. She refused, whereupon I pushed her and she prepared to fight me. I struck her and she caught hold of me . . . so I threw her down, and my other wife ran out to part us. Afterwards Isong Edigi went out and cut leaves, praying that no other child might be born from me, and that Ita Brinyan might kill me. To make the curse more sure she washed a certain part of her body, then threw the water before my door, crying out that I must never more become the father of a babe. She asserted that while we were fighting I had wounded that part of her, and that this was why she called upon the juju against me."

Thereupon the Court asked accused: "Did you hold the leaves in your two hands?"

Answer: "Yes."

Question: "When a person holds leaves in both hands and calls upon the name of Atabli Inyan, what is meant?"

To this the accused refused to reply, whereon one of the Court Members, deputed to speak for the others, rose and said:

"Atabli Inyan is the strongest of all Mbiams. He dwells by the waterside and beneath the water. Had the woman not meant to invoke this juju against her husband she would not thus have held the leaves in her two hands while calling upon his name."

Another case in which a magic potion figures came up before the same Native Court on July 15th, 1913. In this the plaintiff, Anwa Ese, stated:

"Defendant went to a medicine man named Umo Ekkpe, and asked for a juju which would kill me or

[p. 149]

destroy my reason, so that he might be able to marry my wife. The chiefs of our town questioned him about the matter in the presence of several people and he never denied it."

Abassi Anse, brother of plaintiff, sworn, stated

"The accused went to Umo Ekkpe, to get a medicine with which to kill my brother or make him mad, so that the latter's wife should become his own."

Ekpenyong Ata stated on oath:

"I heard that accused went to buy a love medicine to give to complainant's wife in order that the woman might love him."

Okon Udaw stated:

"I admit that I went to buy a medicine from Umo Ekkpe, but it is only a love potion. It cannot kill anyone. I wished to give the medicine to complainant's wife, because I love her and do not know whether she loves me or not."

Some Ibibio women know the secret of a "magic" which will attract a husband's love to them alone, and guard the thoughts of their lords from straying to rivals. The following information was gleaned from women informants, one of whom stated:

"A very famous medicine is one that is only known to witches, and must be purchased at a great price from a witch-doctor. This is never used save when a woman has grown tired of her husband and wishes to rid herself of him in order to marry another man. It is a terrible potion which, once administered, goes straight to the head and destroys all will-power, placing the victim under the control of her who has administered it. So soon as a man has eaten or drunk of the fatal

[p. 150]

mixture the faithless wife has but to say 'Now go,' and, no matter how strong, young or wealthy he may be the husband must rise at once, and, abandoning all his possessions and everything that life holds dear, go straight down to the river, there to drown himself--leaving his cruel witch-wife free to marry another man.

"Some men know how to make a medicine which will turn to them the heart of any woman whom they may desire, and also kill her former husband, should she be married. Some possess the juju Ibokk Ima, which they place in a little niche in the mud wall above the lintel. To this object, which is usually in the form of a ball made of twisted tie-tie, a cord is fastened, and at night-time the man goes and pulls it gently seven times, calling upon the name of the woman and crying, 'Come! I want you! Come! I want you!' until she rises in sleep, even from her husband's side, and is forced to go to the house of the one who thus summons her. Arrived at the door, still in her sleep, she knocks softly, and her lover opens and leads her within. . . . When she goes back to her husband next morning perhaps he will ask her, 'Where have you been?' She is quite dazed and knows not what to say, so to avert suspicion, usually answers, 'I come from my mother's place.'"

A very old woman, strongly suspected of possessing uncanny powers, said one day:

"The juju Ikoruben can make doors fly open before a man at night-time so that such a one can enter unseen and unheard, and bear off any sleeping woman in his arms. Afterwards he can carry her back in the same way, and the woman never know

[p. 151]

what has been done to her. Should she chance to wake and find herself in a strange room she will cry, 'Where am I; afar from my house, in that of a stranger?' Usually, however, she falls asleep once more and does not wake up again until she finds herself back in her own home. Then, if she tells anyone of the strange dream which she had in the night, the friend in whom she confides raises a warning finger and says, 'Hush! Tell no one! It is the juju Ikoruben or Ibokk Ima that has taken you, and it is not good for your husband to know of the matter.'

The juju Etuk Nwan is also said to confer the power of passing invisibly through locked doors and thus entering houses at midnight. By its help men are said to obtain the favours of women who had scorned them by daylight, and also to steal whatever goods they may happen to covet. Such a case was brought before my husband in the Native Court at Oron, where an Akaiya man was accused of having practised the juju to the great loss of all his townsfolk.

In order to ensure efficacy for this particular "magic" the presence of a confederate is needed. The latter must stand outside the house which is about to be burgled, holding in his hands the skull of a sheep or of an "Ebett," sometimes called the "sleeping antelope." Should the attention of the watcher be distracted, or should he lay down the skull even for a moment, the spell would be broken, and the thief, no longer invisible, is liable to be seized. Strange as such a belief may seem, it is no more remarkable than that which survived until lately in our own land, namely, that a candle fastened into a hand cut from the body

[p. 152]

of a murderer as it swung from the gallows-tree would confer the same immunity upon burglars. It is somewhat singular that a belief similar to that of the Ibibios obtains among Zulus, only with these latter the skull of another species of antelope is used.

The secrets of all "invisible jujus" were thought to have been confided to mortals by evil spirits, whose underground dwellings, according to local belief, are entered through the curiously shaped ant-hills which abound in this part of the world, and before which small sacrificial bowls and other offerings may usually be seen.

The origin of the "invisible juju" is given in the following legend which, in a slightly different form. was also found among the Ekoi.

"Once, long ago, a hunter went out into the bush to snare animals. He set his traps, and then climbed up into a tree to watch for prey. Near the place was an ant-hill, which in this part of the country is supposed to be the home of evil spirits.

"While the hunter sat watching, safely screened from view amid the branches, he saw seven such spirits come out. They all wore human form, and one of them bore a vessel full of juju. This he sprinkled over himself and his six companions, rubbing it well over all their bodies, until one by one they became invisible; but before quite fading away, the last of them hid the bowl of medicine in a secret place.

"After a while the hunter climbed down, took out the basin, rubbed its contents over himself, and then, assured of invisibility, followed the spirits.

The way led to the market-place, and arrived

[p. 153]

there he saw the seven genii and they saw him. They wondered greatly how this 'earth child' had become possessed of the invisible juju, so they said to one another, 'Let us go back and see whether our medicine is safe.'

"When these evil beings reached their home once more they searched for the bowl of juju, but could not find it. On this they grew very angry and threatened to kill the hunter, who by now had hastened back to his hiding-place in the tree. After searching a long time the spirits looked up and saw him there. Then they called out:

'Is it you who have stolen our medicine?'

The hunter owned to having found the bowl, whereon the evil beings said:

"'If you will come down and give it back to us we swear to give you a portion for yourself.'

"On this the man climbed down, took the vessel from the place where he had hidden it, and gave it back to its owners. The latter put a part aside for him saying:

"'This will confer great power upon you, for by its use you may become rich. Only take care not to use it too often, lest you should get into trouble.'

"Before re-entering the ant-hill one of the genii turned toward the hunter and added:

"'Should you tell anyone the secret of the medicine or of its use we shall come for you and kill you.'

"The man promised to keep the secret, and went home well pleased. After awhile he began to grow rich, for by means of the invisible juju he could enter into any house and steal whatsoever he chose.

[p. 154]

"At last the townsfolk rose up, called a meeting of chiefs, and asked:

"'Whence does this man get all his cows, goats and sheep, with money and many rich things, while we grow poor through continual thefts?'

"The chiefs called the hunter before them and asked him to give the reason for his changed circumstances. At first he refused to reply, but they said:

"'If you do not answer we will put you to death.'

On this the man feared greatly, and at length confessed how he had become possessed of the power. Hardly had he finished than he fell down dead."

There is a very efficacious way by which a woman may enlist the help of the evil spirits who dwell within ant-hills. This also is one of the woman's mysteries, which must be carefully guarded from the knowledge of man. In order to carry out the rites a woman should go herself, or send a magician of her own sex, hired for the purpose, at about the time of the full moon. Then, standing so that her shadow falls upon the mound, she must recite certain incantations proper to the occasion. After awhile some small creature will be seen to creep out near the base of the hill. This must be caught and enclosed in a little receptacle prepared in readiness. After binding it round with strips of cloth, preferably white, it should be worn beneath the garments, and will confer magical powers upon its owner, both for good and ill.

Though far less elaborate, this rite is in some ways like that by which Kedah ladies seek to obtain possession of that strange little familiar the "pelsit," so

[p. 155]

inimitably described in the fascinating pages of "In Court and Kampong." [*1]

"Polong and pelsit are but other names for bajang, the latter is chiefly used in the State of Kedah, where it is considered rather chic to have a pelsit. A Kedah lady on one occasion, eulogising the advantage of possessing a familiar spirit (she said that amongst other things it gave her absolute control over her husband and the power of annoying people who offended her), thus described the method of securing this useful ally:

"'You go out,' she said, 'on the night before the full moon and stand with your back to the moon and your face to an ant-hill, so that your shadow falls on the ant-hill. Then you recite certain jampi (incantations), and bending forward try to embrace your shadow. If you fail try again seven times, repeating more incantations. If not successful go the next night and make a further effort, and the night after if necessary--three nights in all. If you cannot then catch your shadow wait till the same day on the following month and renew the attempt. Sooner or later you will succeed, and as you stand there in the brilliance of the moonlight, you will see that you have drawn your shadow into yourself, and your body will never again cast a shade. Go home, and in the night, whether sleeping or waking, the form of a child will appear before you and put out its tongue; that seize, and it will remain while the rest of the child disappears. In a little while the tongue will turn into something that breathes, a small animal, reptile or insect, and

[p. 156]

when you see the creature has life put it in a bottle and the pelsit is yours."'

A still more gruesome recipe for securing this familiar is to "go to the graveyard at night and dig up the body of a first-born child whose mother was also first-born . . . carry it to an ant-hill in the open ground and there dandle it (di-timang). After a little while, when the child shrieks and lolls its tongue out (terjerlir lidah-nya) bite off its tongue and carry it home. Then obtain a coco-nut shell . . . carry it to a place where three roads meet, light a fire and heat the shell till oil exudes, dip the child's tongue in the oil and bury it in the heart of the three cross roads (hati sempang tiga). Leave it untouched for three nights, then dig it up and you will find that it has turned into a pelsit." [*1]

It is to propitiate the evil spirits which dwell beneath ant-hills that little huts are so often built above them, usually hung round with pieces of white cloth or other votive offerings.

As in so many stories of white magic among the ancients whether carried out with the object of acquiring wealth, regaining health, or inducing victory to crown a warrior's arms, the aid of a faithful wife is necessary for the success of most charms.

One of the most fantastic of jujus is called "Kukubarakpa." There are many magic rites for the obtaining of riches, but that of the python (asaba) is more powerful than all.

These magic creatures live in creeks or rivers, and are credited, according to popular belief, with bearing

[p. 157]

a great shining stone in the head, much as was "the toad ugly and venomous" among ourselves not very long ago. Many legends exist as to the power of this gem, by virtue of which riches beyond the dreams of avarice may be conferred upon those who enter the "python affinity," or purchase a share in its magic. People who long for wealth go to a juju man known to possess familiars such as these, and bargain with him for the sale of one.

The first step is to swallow a thread seven fathoms long "as a sign of the animal." Later, a tiny pad, in all save size like those which carriers wear upon the head beneath their loads, must also be gulped down. It is upon this little cushion that, when the rites are over and the thread has become metamorphosed into a snake, the reptile rests, "so as not to injure the body of its owner by pressing directly upon it."

One rule must be strictly observed. The first money gained "by the power of the snake" may not be used directly for the enjoyment of its possessors, but must be brought before the priest. Should this rule be forgotten, the man who thus made too great haste to be rich would die at once. Nothing could save him.

It was confided to us that the full law of the juju is as follows: The man who bears the snake within him goes home and tells the matter to that one of his wives whom he can trust above all others. Then together they build a small "secret court" within their compound entered by two doors, one of which opens into the room set aside for the private use of the husband. and the other into that of the trusted wife.

[p. 158]

In the midst of the hidden court a great earthen pot or bowl must be set filled with fresh spring water. Into this the couple throw leaves, together with roots and bark of magic potency, provided by the juju man for the purpose. Afterwards, with the point of a spear, a hole is driven through the bottom of the pot by which the water that is within might sink into the breast of Isong, our mother. Down and down it sinks, making by magic a channel right through to the riverside.

It is fatal to attempt to carry out this juju during the time of storms; for thunder and lightning would render it of no avail. December, January and February are the best months for carrying out the rites, since that is the season of Isu Akariku, i.e. the Face of the Fog. Beware of lightning, for Obumo is much to be feared in matters of magic; since he is a god very jealous of all powers which seem as if seeking to rival him in might.

When the pot has been placed in position during calm weather in the midst of the hidden court, after a hole has been driven through the bottom, the husband must wait patiently until the hour of low tide. So soon as this is reached he goes to his room, locks the door by which it communicates with the secret place, and sends all his "boys" away, saying, "Should anyone ask for me tell them I am away from home." Then he lays himself down upon his bed and falls into a deep sleep, while his trusted wife stays on guard by the magic pot, a fresh egg poised in her hand.

The woman may not lift her eyes from the bowl even for a second. So soon as the tide turns water

[p. 159]

begins to flow up and swirl round at the bottom. This is, however, not yet the time for the magic to work. At the exact moment of high tide, as the water rushes through, for one instant the head of a python is seen within the pot. At once she must fling the egg so that it strikes the reptile. Then the water rises and rises till it pours over the earthen rim and overflows the whole yard. When the woman sees this, she knows that her part is done for the time; so slips softly away into her room, where she locks the door and lies down to sleep.

This juju can only be carried out by a loving and faithful wife, for should the watcher at any time have had another lover her thoughts would certainly turn to him and she would miss the moment for throwing in the egg; in which case the husband would never more wake from his sleep. Not till next morning may the door of the secret court be opened. When this is done it will be found full of thousands of wires or brass rods, whichever may have been asked from the juju, piled so high as to reach far up the walls, and glinting in the early morning sunlight.

Before the treasure may be touched, magic leaves must be pounded into a fine paste and mixed with water. This medicine is called usuk, i.e. disinfectant, and should be sprinkled over the gift, to destroy all evil influences which might otherwise attach to wealth gained in so strange a way. [*1] Even so, after the "first fruits" have been borne as an offering to the

[p. 160]

priest, the actual wires or rods should not be used in direct purchase of anything for the personal use of those who have wrought the spell. As soon as possible the new treasure should be exchanged for coins or produce, which can then safely be bartered for whatever is desired.

Some time ago a well-known chief of Calabar was said to have obtained considerable wealth in this fashion. He was careful to warn his wives not to enter his room, or, at any rate, to take nothing thence. One of them, however, chanced to peep within and saw a heap of money lying in one of the corners, new and shining. The temptation was too strong, so she concealed a certain sum at the bottom of her market-basket and set out.

It happened that a great catch of crayfish had been brought in by the fisher-folk that day. The sight tempted the woman, and she bought a plentiful supply, which she took home, cooked, and set before her husband. All unknowing he ate of the dish, but no sooner had the first mouthful passed his lips than he felt the juju seize him, and at once knew what had happened. He cried aloud to the woman who had served him so ill: "What have you done? You have disobeyed the word which I spoke, and now I must die for your fault." Hardly had he finished speaking when he fell down dead.

My informant is a man for whom we have the highest esteem. Strange as it may appear he believed absolutely in the truth of every word which he related. The man whose death has just been described was a great friend of his, and one of his own "age class"--

[p. 161]

an association of those born within a few years of one another, the members of which hold together "closer than a brother." He finished his story very sadly:

"There is a man in the Kamerun to whom all such magic is known. He offered to teach my favourite brother the rites necessary in order to make him very rich. The latter came to me and said, 'If you will join with me in this business I will gladly enter upon it, but I fear to do such a thing alone.'"

To this our informant answered, "If it were now as in the old days, how gladly I would do so! As it is, I fear too much to enter upon any such thing, for to-day our wives are light of mind and unstable of heart, looking always here and there, from one man to another. Of all my wives there is none upon whom I can lean in full trust. The old order has passed away, giving place to new, and should I lay me down depending upon a wife's faithfulness, there would be but little chance of ever again awakening."

It is hard to forget the sadness of the patient voice as it uttered these words-not complainingly, but. merely as stating a fact beyond human power to remedy.

Footnotes

^155:1 Sir Hugh Clifford.

^156:1 Sir Hugh Clifford, "In Court and Kampong," pp. 230 and 244.

^159:1 Cf. the Malay custom of sprinkling "tepong tawar," which properly means "the neutralising rice-flour water," neutralising being used almost in a chemical sense, i.e. in the sense of "sterilising" the active element of poisons. A. E. Crawley, "Mystic Rose," p. 326.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 162]

 

CHAPTER XI

 

WITCHCRAFT

AS with ourselves in the Middle Ages, and, to the best of my belief, among all native tribes, there are more witches than wizards in Ibibio land; partly because there are more women than men, and should she have children a witch always passes her wicked knowledge on to one of her daughters, usually to the youngest born; partly also because it would appear easier for women to place themselves en rapport with the powers of the unseen world.

When a witch is either unwed or barren, she generally seeks out some child whom she may initiate into her secrets. For this purpose she inveigles some little one into her house and sets before it "chop" such as children love, in which "witch medicine" has been mixed. Several cases in which parents have charged suspected persons with putting witchcraft potions into their children's food were brought before my husband in the Native Courts. One such occurred just before we left Oron. The witch, a barren woman, famous for her knowledge of drugs, was accused of having administered "medicine" to a small boy in a dish of plantains mixed with palm oil. The magic having entered into him had caused him, against his will, to sally forth at night and join the unholy revels

[p. 163]

of a witch company. How such things are brought about is told in the conclusion of the story of Ekpenyong and Adiaha, the first part of which was given on pp. 101-6. It thus continues:

"Now when the enemy of Ekpenyong had consulted with the latter's discarded wife as to how the power of the guardian juju might be satisfied, she thought for a long time and then said:

"'This juju is a very strong one and would surely kill any of us who are possessed by witchcraft should we try to enter the house in order to harm those within. The safest way, therefore, is to seek to put witchcraft into one of the children. Then, when the latter has joined our company, we can send him to do our work, for the juju will not harm such a one, seeing that he is of the house. Let us therefore choose out the youngest for this service, and having invited Ekpenyong and all his family to a feast, mix witchcraft medicine with the portion of his last born.'

"To this the wicked chief agreed, and sent to beg Ekpenyong to bring Adiaha and all their children to visit his house. Now, the youngest of the family was named Offong, and for him at the feast a fine portion was set aside, in which beforehand a strong medicine had been mixed. Nothing was noticed at the time. The guests ate with enjoyment, and afterwards went home well pleased.

"A few nights later the wicked chief changed himself by evil enchantment into the form of a night bird, and flew hooting round the compound where Offong lay sleepless, for it was impossible for him to rest, because of the strange thing which had entered into him.

[p. 164]

"'Come out,' hooted the evil bird. 'Come out, and join those who are awaiting you.'

"On this the witchcraft that was within the boy drove him forth, and to his astonishment he saw a great crowd of people before the house flitting hither and thither in the light of the moon. He cried out in surprise at sight of such a multitude, but the bad chief cautioned him never to tell anyone of what he was about to witness. Then all went together, not walking upon the. ground, but floating a few feet above, until they reached a great cleared space in the bush, such as Offong had never seen before. In the midst of it was a cauldron simmering over a fire, and into this from time to time, to the lad's horror, gobbets of human flesh were thrown by one or other of the witch-company. After all had danced awhile in the light of the flame, they seated themselves in a great circle and the contents of the pot were distributed among them. To Offong was given a large piece of flesh and some yam. He ate the latter, but concealed the former, which he took home, placed in his mother's 'smoking basket,' and then hung over the fire.

"The poor boy dared not speak to anyone of what he had seen, but went in terror of his life, fearing lest any should notice the strange change that had befallen him; for, whenever the witches were playing, no matter how much lie strove to stay in the house, the witchcraft that was within him carried him through locked door or wall-chink to the meeting-place, without so much as foot set to ground.

"Every time that he was thus summoned a feast was held. and each time Offong hid his share of the human

[p. 165]

flesh as before. All through the night they danced, from nightfall to cock-crow, but just before dawn-break the unhappy boy always found himself once more safe in bed. By day he went in terror among his own kin; for, whenever Ekpenyong called his family together to make sacrifice before the juju which protected the household from evil powers, Offong feared that the spirit would catch him on account of the witchcraft that was within him. When, therefore, the others crowded round to join in the sacrifice, he kept to the outskirts of the circle, trembling lest what had befallen him should be revealed.

"Thus many moons passed, till at length one night the wicked chief said that it was now Offong's turn to provide a man for the feast. Shaking with terror the boy pleaded that he was too young to have men at his disposal, and that, indeed, he had no one to give.

"On this the evil beings rose gibbering around him, and with harsh voices and menacing hands cried that he must bring father, mother, brother or sister for them to devour; else, should he fail to do so, they would rend him in pieces and fling him into the pot.

"Offong knew not to whom to turn in his trouble, but at length decided to tell all to Akpan, his eldest brother, by whose side he slept at night. To him, therefore, amid bitter tears, he confided how he had been drawn into the witch-company against his will, and forced to attend meetings where human beings were devoured, although up till that time no morsel of the accursed food had passed his own lips.

At first Akpan could not believe so strange a tale,

[p. 166]

but Offong went out and brought in proof the meat which he had concealed and preserved in his mother's drying basket. When the elder brother had examined this he could no longer doubt, but comforted the boy as best he could, bidding him seem to consent to the demand of those evil beings, and plead for a few days' grace in which to provide a victim. Then he himself went out to a lonely place in the bush and sat down to consider the matter. After thinking for awhile he decided to seek out the juju man to whom his father had gone before his own birth. At once he set forth, and after marching for many miles reached the dwelling of this wise adviser. After laying the whole trouble before him, the suppliant was given a medicine so strong that no evil thing could withstand its power.

"Armed with this, Akpan returned home and bade Offong go to the head of his witch-company and say that he was now ready to sacrifice his elder brother, but, as he himself was too small to carry so heavy a body to the meeting-place, he begged that the chief himself would come at the head of the witch folk to bear it away. To this all gladly consented, suspecting nothing.

"Then Akpan strewed the strong medicine upon the ground and made sacrifice to the guardian juju, by which its power was increased, so that when at nightfall the evil creatures gathered round the compound, the charm held them and they could not flee away.

"At break of dawn the lads woke their father and bade him come forth with all his family. There,

[p. 167]

before the house, the witches were found naked and trembling. No sooner did these perceive that their evil nature could no longer be hid than they started screaming like bats and ill birds of night, running round and round seeking a hiding-place, yet could not escape because the juju held them. Then Ekpenyong beat upon the great drum, and summoned all the townsfolk together, and they bound those evil creatures, both witches and wizards, and dragged them forth to the juju house. There they sat in judgment and pronounced sentence that all the witch company should be burnt to death save their chief alone. Him they bound to a tree, and, while still alive, tore small pieces from his body, which they roasted before his eyes, then forced him to eat, crying:

"'Because he was more evil than all the others and has devoured the flesh of many innocent people, now he shall eat his own meat!'

"After awhile he also died in great agony. Since that day the townsfolk have shunned the spot, for in the tree to which he was bound night birds have made their nests and may often be heard hooting and crying through the darkness with ill-boding voices."

Many witchcraft rites are carried out by jealous fellow-wives, and especially by barren women in order to steal away the babe which a rival is about to bear. The means to this end are carefully guarded secrets, but several such cases were related to me by women informants, and the following may perhaps be quoted as typical:

"A barren wife says to herself, 'Why should

[p. 168]

I have this pain at my heart because our husband gives his love and his gifts to another woman! Why have I no piccan to hold in my arms while this other has already borne a babe and is about to bear again?

"Then the unhappy woman goes to a powerful witch-doctor, usually some ancient crone who has grown old in the study of secret things such as these. There she buys a strong medicine, and at night-time enters into the room where her happy rival sleeps by the side of their common husband. By magic arts she draws out the 'dream body' of the piccan, and bears it off to the bush, where a company of witches, brought thither by the witch-doctor, are waiting to devour it. Witches by their magic can feed upon the essence of things, leaving the tangible forms apparently unaltered. Next morning the babe lies dead within the womb, because it has no soul. Then the mother begins to cry 'Who killed my piccan? The barren woman sits in her house laughing low to herself, and her rival hears her laughter.

"After the small dead body has been laid in the ground beneath the earthen bowl which custom has decreed for such burials, the bereaved woman goes in her turn to a juju man and asks 'Who killed my piccan?' He is almost sure to know the circumstances, and usually answers, 'If a barren woman dwells in your house she it is who stole your babe's dream shape to devour so that the child died.'

"Then the mother comes home and goes round the compound perpetually wailing, 'Who killed my piccan? Let whosoever did this come before me!'

No one answers. So she walks up and down,

[p. 169]

to and fro, before the door of her rival, continually calling, 'Who killed my piccan?' At length the witch-wife grows weary of the constant repetition, and asks, 'You speak to me?' Whereon the mother, pointing against her an accusing arm, replies, 'You killed my piccan!'

"Whenever they meet the accusation is repeated until at length the witch-wife can bear it no more, so she takes money and goes to the Native Court, or before the chiefs, saying, 'Stop this woman from asking about the death of her babe.' Whereon they answer, 'If you are guiltless, why should you try to prevent her from crying?' Often a husband thus learns who it is who has killed his unborn child, and casts out the barren woman from his house."

One evening just as dusk was falling, one of my women informants began of her own accord, to speak of the belief in a ghoul, or elemental, whose principal object it is to destroy babes in the womb. She spoke in a low, nervous voice, glancing furtively every now and then over her shoulder into the deepening shadows, as though she feared that some evil thing might be lurking within them, ready to spring forth and punish her for revealing so dread a secret. To quote her words:

"There is a kind of devil which never sleeps at night time nor is seen by day. In the depths of the bush or in waste places he may be met gleaming from out the darkness with a pale light, but should one see him it is best to flee away lest one die of terror.

"At first he seems no taller than a man, but after awhile he swells and grows very big, as if made of

[p. 170]

smoke which rises higher and higher, and through which at times flames can be seen to gleam. I myself once saw such a one in the bush near Ndiya. There was a light amid the trees and I asked my companion, 'What is that?' But he answered, 'Let us run. It is the evil thing seeking unborn babes.' So we fled.

"After the smoke body has grown so high and broad that it reaches even to the tops of the great cotton trees, the spirit can condense at will till it becomes so small that it can creep through the narrowest door-cranny or wall-chink.

"When a woman lies sleeping with a babe near birth beneath her heart, this devil enters softly, softly, in the night time when all is very still. He draws from her that which was within, and bears it into the depths of the bush to devour in part, and partly to make a strong medicine from which his evil power is obtained.

"The woman sleeps on and knows nothing of the loss which has befallen her, but when she wakes at dawn pain rends her. Afterwards she finds out her misfortune, so her heart is very sore."

At Ikotobo some time ago a man died under strong suspicion of having perished as the result of a spell wrought by a woman of the same town. The dead man's friends sallied forth and captured the supposed witch. They bound her by strong ropes round wrists and ankles, then bore her forth to a place in the bush where there is a deep gully, shouting at intervals, "Abassi will punish you for what you have done! You are going to die to-day!"

[p. 171]

When the top of the bank from which they meant to throw their captive was reached, they made her call upon the name of Abassi, saying, "If I killed the man of whose death I am accused, may I die also! If I did not do so, may Abassi save me!"

After this, bound and helpless as she was, they flung the woman down the steep bank, watching till the bush closed over and hid her from sight. Then all went home again, saying that they had rid their town of an evil thing. Next morning, however, as they went on their way to farm work, lo! the same woman was seen going quietly about her house as if nothing had happened.

Then all the people rejoiced, saying, "This was no witch. She is cleared from all guilt. Abassi has helped her, as she prayed, therefore she is proved blameless."

Here, as in most parts of the world, the task of weaving evil spells is greatly simplified to witch and wizard if something closely connected with the intended victim can be secured. Such things are laid before the shrine of some bad juju, while prayer is made that the spirit will follow the trail of him to whom the relic belongs and destroy him utterly.

This course was much resorted to in the old days to prevent the escape of slaves, for many who would have run the risk of capture by their earthly masters dared not face the dread of being "caught" by the juju, upon whose shrine a lock of hair, nail parings, or a rag from a long-worn cloth had been laid as an aid to possible tracking.

An excellent example of the power attributed to

[p. 172]

such things is given in Dr. Haddon's "Magic and Fetishism":

"The potency of the hair," he says, "is shown beaded band in the beliefs about the long, narrow which is used to tie up the hair of a Musquakie woman. This, though a talisman when first worn, becomes something infinitely more sacred and precious, being transfused with the essence of her soul; anyone gaining possession of it has her for an abject slave if he keeps it, and kills her if he destroys it. A woman will go from a man she loves to a man she hates if he has contrived to possess himself of her hair string; and a man will forsake wife and children for a witch who has touched his lips with her hair string. The hair string is made for a girl by her mother or grandmother, and decorated with a 'luck pattern,' it is also prayed over by the maker and a Shaman."

An almost identical belief clings round the long, plaited bags which we found among the women of the Banana tribe on the Logone river, in French Central Africa. For each girl babe one such is woven by her mother or grandmother, and with it her life's thread is thought to be mysteriously linked. No bribe would induce a living woman to part with one, since with its departure her soul must leave her, but we were fortunate enough to purchase several which had belonged to dead members of the tribe.

A curious superstition concerning rags as an instrument of witchcraft was confided to me by an Ibibio woman, on the usual pledge that under no circumstances should her name be disclosed, for this also is among the women's mysteries which no man may learn.

[p. 173]

"When one of us hates a rival very bitterly," said my informant, "she desires above all things either to take the life of her enemy or render her barren. One of the surest ways of bringing this about is to touch the body of the intended victim with a piece from an old cloth long worn by one now dead, or if that should be found impossible, to lay some fragment of such a cloth among the garments or utensils used by the woman whom it is sought to injure, or to bury it just beneath the surface in some spot over which she is sure to tread."

A kindred belief as to the power of such rags to inflict the curse of sterility is recorded from our own northern climes. To quote Dr. Haddon, "In Germany and Denmark . . . to hang rags from the clothing of a dead man upon a vine is to render it barren." [*1]

Such beliefs are hardly to be wondered at when one considers that the dread of witchcraft is still so powerful in out of the way parts of the British Isles, that people suspected of having entered into league with the powers of evil are even now occasionally done to death. Comparatively recently, too, Father Praniatis, the "expert" called in to give evidence in court during the Beiliss trial at Kieff, calmly stated "That there was perhaps more witchcraft in the twentieth century than there had been in the Middle Ages."

Many superstitions which show a strong family likeness to those of the West Coast of Africa are still rife among us. In 1913, for instance, a verdict of manslaughter was returned at the Ulster Assizes against

[p. 174]

a man named Thomas Flynn, who had been charged with the murder of John Prior near Ballyconnell, County Cavan. Upon the neck of the corpse were found two gashes inflicted after death, in consequence of the superstition that were such wounds made upon the body of a man killed by accident, his ghost would not be able to return to plague those responsible for his death.

Among the Ibibios, also, elaborate precautions are taken to prevent the return of ghosts. Before burial the bodies of those suspected of witchcraft have nose, mouth, eyes and ears filled with native pitch extracted from a cactus thought to be an object of dread to beings possessed by evil powers.

More particularly do widows who have been consoled for the loss of their husbands, or such as had wished to be freed from the marriage yoke, fear the return of the shades of former spouses.

"Young men cut off before their time," so one of my women informants explained, "are often forced to leave their 'best wife' behind." To quote her words, spoken in quaint, halting English:

"The dead husband loved his wife so kind that he did not want to leave her in this world, since without her he was very lonely among the ghosts. So he strove to kill her that she might follow him to Obio Ekkpo," i.e. the Ghost Town.

When the thoughts of a widow have already turned to another wooer she is terrified lest the spirit of her former husband should return and seek to draw her after him to the ghost realm. Should she have reason to suppose that such is the case, she goes to an Idiong

[p. 175]

man who has a great reputation for second sight. By his advice, "chop" is cooked and placed in one comer of her room. The priest takes up a position immediately before this, and stands calling upon the name of the ghost. Close to the place where the food is laid some member of the family crouches, holding a strong pot, preferably of iron, tilted forward ready to invert over the one in which the food is served. When the Idiong man makes a sign that the ghost is busy eating, and that, in enjoyment of the feast, the latter has temporarily forgotten to look after his safety, the second pot is clapped over the first, and both are then bound firmly together, thus keeping the spirit imprisoned between.

If, on the contrary, a widow loved her husband very much, she will cook "chop" for him after his death and place it secretly in a comer of her room so that his spirit may be induced to return and enjoy it.

Footnotes

^173:1 "Magic and Fetishism."

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

 

CHAPTER XII

 

JUJUS

OF jujus there are two kinds, good and bad. The former are usually termed idemm by Ibibios and ndemm by Efiks, while the latter are called mbiam. By a queer turn of native thought all, or nearly all--for in spite of careful inquiry many details were probably concealed from us--idemms would appear to have female attributes, and most of these beneficent jujus bear the additional title "Bestower of Babes"; yet no authenticated example of an idemm priestess has reached our cars. The cult would appear to be served only by men. Of mbiam priestesses, on the other hand, the names of several could be given, though it is better not to do so, since the greater number of these appear as far as possible to seek to conceal their identity from the males of the tribe. To them, however, go women in trouble, especially those who wish to invoke the aid of the juju to remove a successful rival from their path, or inflict the curse of barrenness upon a more favoured fellow wife. Such a case came before the Native Court when a woman, Unang Obo by name, accused one Teahri of invoking mbiam against her. In the course of the evidence Ese Efiom, sworn, stated.

I am an mbiam priestess. The defendant never

[p. 177]

came to me to ask me to invoke mbiam on Unang Obo. The accused and other women came to the juju house and took an mbiam drum to beat round the town, calling people to assemble and give reason why a calabash was broken."

This last-mentioned action was usually taken by a wife who wished to divorce herself from her husband on the ground that he was keeping a woman who had already borne twins as wife or sweetheart. A calabash, or native pot, is always regarded as the feminine symbol, as is a spear that of the opposite sex. To break a calabash, therefore, signifies that a woman no longer regards herself as the wife of the man to whom she has hitherto been married.

Another example of this custom came before the Native Court at Ikotobo, in which the plaintiff stated:

"Defendant is my husband. I had no son. After he married me one of his wives took an empty calabash and ran round the market beating it with her hands, and shouting, 'My husband has married this woman, therefore I have nothing more to do with him.' By our custom, if the old wives were not satisfied with a new one whom their husband brought to the house, they used to proclaim publicly, 'My husband has married such a woman. I will have nothing more to do with him'--knocking at the same time upon the calabash. As she beat it she cried, 'The new wife has already borne twins,' after which she went away. Last year, however, she came back and was his wife once more. On that I told defendant to divorce me, but he replied, 'I cannot do so.' Some time later he wished to become a member of the Idiong

[p. 178]

Society, and I helped him to gather together the entrance money, but after the ceremonies were over he said, I can no longer be your husband.'

"Then, on account of the money which I had given him, I refused to go away, but he said, 'I am now a member of Idiong, and if you do not leave me Idiong himself will kill you.' At that time there were several Court Messengers present. I said, 'First you must pay me back what I gave to help you join this society'; but my husband said, 'You must keep yourself for the future, for if you do not go away from me you will certainly die.'

"In revenge for this treatment the woman went to an mbiam priestess and bought a bottle of juju medicine, which she buried in the yard, believing that this would bring about the death of her husband and that of her rival."

Beside its functions as giver of babes and bestower of prosperity on farm and byre, an idemm juju is thought to exercise a beneficent influence not only upon its worshippers, but even upon their descendants to the third and fourth generation, should such be reduced to poverty.

A story illustrating this gentler aspect of juju worship is told of a man named Akpan Adia Agbo, of Ikot Akpan, who died some fifteen years ago. While yet a small boy he had the misfortune to lose both his parents, first his father and then his mother, and was left with nothing to eat and none to care for him. When he went round to the houses of the townsfolk they drove him away, so he crept off by himself and slept in the Egbo shed. At dawn each day he left

[p. 179]

his sleeping-place lest he should be driven forth, and went out searching for something to eat.

When he came to the place where the juju offerings were laid before the shrine, sometimes a small chicken, and sometimes a few plantains were to be found.

Now his parents had been pious people who had always given of their best to the juju. Before the mother died she had gathered together all that she had and offered it as a last sacrifice, praying that the spirit might protect her son and be to him as a mother, since there was none other to care for him.

So the boy took what he found and ate fearlessly, cooking the food in a secret place, and trusting that the juju would do him no harm for the theft.

For several years he lived thus, but at length a sister of his dead father, who some years before had married and gone to a distant town, came back, and finding the boy deserted, took him to her home. There she fed him well, and showed him every kindness, but when he was grown up the longing came to go back to his own people. So the woman said, "Very well, if you are able to feed yourself you can go:"

On reaching his native town the lad asked to be shown the place where his father's mimbo farm was. When the people saw how big and strong he had grown they agreed to do as he wished, and led him thither.

At once he began to cut mimbo, and they found that his palm trees bore sap more plentifully than those of all the other townsfolk. He sold the wine for a good price, and with the money bought goats and sheep. These latter bore kids and lambs in great

[p. 180]

abundance, so that he soon grew rich and was able to marry a wife strong and tall, who bore him many piccans.

Whatever he undertook succeeded, so that those who had driven him forth as a boy began to come under him, and in the end he became head chief of Ikot Akpan. In his house dwelt threescore wives, and sons and daughters so numerous that he never counted them. All this prosperity came to him because the juju helped him, and blessed everything that he did from the time when he was lonely and deserted and had no sustenance save that which he took from the sacrifices.

A very different story, embodying the attributes more usually connected with the idea of juju worship, was told us by Idaw Imuk, half-brother of the head chief and most famous juju priest of the town where the events are said to have taken place. It may perhaps be called:

 

AN IBOIBO IPHIGENIA.

In the old days there was a very famous juju at Idua Eket. The name of this was Edogho Idua, and it was the dominant juju for many miles round.

"Only a little time before Government came to our country, one of the principal chiefs of Idua, Ukpon by name, wanted to join the cult, for the spirit was said to be strong to protect, and rich to bestow blessings upon its worshippers, as well as swift to avenge wrongs done them by enemies. In preparation for the initiatory feast many goats were brought, cows also, with yams and plantains innumerable; palm wine too and all that is necessary to make glad

[p. 181]

the hearts of guests. So soon as everything was in readiness Ukpon sent round to all the countryside to bid the people come and rejoice with him over his entry into the cult.

"In great numbers they came and ate up all the good things provided for their entertainment. Seven days they feasted, playing the play of the juju, and dancing and singing continuously both by day and night. When some of the dancers grew weary and went to rest, others took their places, so that the sound of rejoicing rose ceaselessly in the cars of the juju during all that time.

"On the eighth day they left off dancing and gathered round to witness the last and greatest sacrifice. A man who had been bought for the purpose was led forth and slain before the shrine. As the blood of the victim bespattered the fetish, Ukpon cried out boastfully, 'See, Edogho! This is but a dog! If you protect me well I will bring you far better offerings!'

"At once the juju answered, 'So ho! It is but a dog which you have sacrificed to me. If you do not at once therefore fetch me a man I will not help you at all.'

"On hearing this Ukpon repented of his boastfulness and was very sorry, for he had not counted upon the extra expense of a second offering; but the wrath of the juju was too terrible to be braved, so he went forth obediently and bought another victim, thinking that Edogho would be satisfied at last.

"To his grief, however, the juju announced, 'Because of the word you have spoken you must bring me a human sacrifice every year for seven years, and the

[p. 182]

one which I choose first of all is your first-born piccan.'

"To this Ukpon answered, 'Rather than sacrifice the little daughter who is my only child I will forfeit all the gifts which have already been spent upon you and leave your cult to-day'; but the juju answered:

"'Not so. If you leave me I will destroy the whole town this very night.'

"On hearing this cruel saying Ukpon turned round and called upon the townsfolk, crying:

"'The juju asks for my only child. I beg you, therefore, help me to collect the other sacrifices which he demands, so that this dear one may be spared.'

"On hearing this the people consulted together, and at length arranged that seven compounds should, each in turn, provide a man every year, till the seven years were over.

"Thus they did, but after that time was up they came to Ukpon and said, 'We are not able to pay this toll any more. For a long time now we have given a man each year, but now we can do so no more.'

"So Ukpon went before the priest and put the case to him, begging that his foolish speech might be forgotten, and that all might now be well. Through the mouth of his servant, however, the spirit made answer:

"'You called upon the townsfolk to help you, but in vain. In spite of all that you have done I will take your piccan in my own way.'

"Now in the meantime the girl had grown up to be a maiden so beautiful that she was sought in marriage by many youths. She was still the only

[p. 183]

child of her house and the pride of both her parents. Yet, knowing that it was useless to struggle further, when the time came round for the annual sacrifice Ukpon led her before the Juju.

"Bitterly the girl wept as she went to the shrine, and bitterly wept the mother, but it was all of no avail. Her young blood gushed forth and the reek of it was sweet in the nostrils of Edogho Idua.

"In despair at the sight of his pitiful dead, Ukpon cried out, 'If I had only known the ways of this juju I would never have had anything to do with it! Should the juju keep on like this I will take it and throw it into the water!'

"Then the spirit announced in a terrible voice, through the mouth of the priest his servant, 'Before you throw me into the water I will destroy you utterly with all your house.'

"That night the compound of the unfortunate man burst into flame, and himself, his wife and all within were utterly consumed.

"After that the other townsfolk feared 'too much' to place themselves in the power of so terrible a juju. No fresh members joined the cult. It lost its power, and since Government came to our country, it has had no more authority within the town."

Chief Ansa Ekang Ita Henshaw told us of a place called Eise, which, according to his account, lies opposite to Akuna-Akuna on the Cross River. Here there is said to be a very powerful crocodile juju, in connection with which is a priestess. There appears to be no mystery about the celebration of the rites of this cult. Anyone, so we were told, either white

[p. 184]

or black, may witness them, which is fortunate, since otherwise it would be difficult to believe that Chief Ansa's story was of actual present-day happenings, rather than a page torn from some as yet unpublished novel by Sir H. Rider Haggard.

Coming across this tale in a place so reminiscent of scenes through which in the days of our youth we hurried breathless, led by the author's magic, the thought forced itself upon us as to the ingratitude with which we regard many writers who, all unknown to us, had so great an influence in determining the course of our lives. To the great authors of old we are forced to yield some tithe of their due, because they have marked us so deeply with their mark that we see to a certain extent at least through their eyes, and even when coming suddenly upon a scene of surpassing beauty find ourselves repeating their very words, because none other seem fitted to describe it. We could not forget them if we would, for from Homer and his great brothers of song, from Virgil, Herodotus, and many a less-known Roman and Greek, sayings, forgotten till the moment, suddenly come to mind at some fresh sight as if spoken anew in one's ear. So it is too with Beowulf and the Maldon Poem, with the sweet haunting rhymes of old ballads and the great moderns: Dante, Shakespeare, Goethe, Keats, and Shelley--all demand a gratitude which we could not withhold if we would; but as for men of the present day--to how many of these do we offer adequate tribute for having first turned our thoughts to adventure or research, to the glory of man's work on the edges of Empire, to the fascination of seeking for old-world

[p. 185]

treasures, hidden in forgotten glades and amid long-buried cities, or the joy of penetrating secrets behind the back of beyond?

With something of all this in mind we accepted the offer of one of our kind friends at Oron to take with us on a six hours' canoe journey a copy of "The Yellow God."

In a country where every tree and stone hides a story which is simply crying out to be written down, it seemed almost wrong to give any time at all to the reading of one safely printed; but the temptation to see how a writer, who to one's youthful fancy seemed to breathe the very essence of Africa--the terrible and mysterious--would stand the hard test of reading in an open canoe, amid scenes so near to those which he describes, was irresistible. The accuracy of description and the convincingly real language of the wonderful Jeekie came as a surprise. It was pleasant to slip back again into the atmosphere of childhood, even at the cost of finding a description of the fall of one of the great trees, witnessed by us a little while before, given almost word for word as we had written it down on reaching camp some half hour after the occurrence. A pencil stump soon erased the passage from our manuscript, and a few days later Chief Ansa's story was told us. It is given as nearly as possible in the words of my informant.

"To the left of the town of Eise lies a river in which live crocodiles of many kinds--big, mighty ones, and others very small. The people honour these as their juju, and of this cult a woman is always chosen to be the head. When the priestess grows too old

[p. 186]

to serve fittingly any more, the King Crocodile himself chooses out a new one. The way in which the choice is made is as follows:

"In the night-time the lord of all the crocodiles goes himself or sends a messenger into the town. Through the quiet streets the great reptile creeps, straight for the house of the woman who has been chosen. Arrived there he lays him down by the wall behind which glow the 'seeds of fire' kept alive for the cooking of the morrow's meal.

"When people come forth at dawn they see the great beast lying before the house, and know at once the meaning of the sight. Where there is but one woman in the family she is forthwith acclaimed as the new priestess; but as this is hardly ever the case, the townsfolk go round and try to find out which of the women in the house is the one chosen for the service. All are led before the diviner, and trial made of each in turn, until one is named for the honour.

"When this has happened the old priestess knows that her time has come, for it is the will of the lord crocodile that she should die. Uncomplainingly, therefore, she hands over everything to her successor, teaches her all the lore of the cult which has been handed down to herself from a long line of predecessors, and, when all is ended, quietly lies down never again to rise.

"Whenever anyone in the town has offended against the law of the juju, a sign is given so that the evil-doer may be sought out and punished. So sure as the chief crocodile is angered he sends forth one of his breed as a messenger, who goes up into the town

[p. 187]

and catches a dog in his jaws. This he carries to the water, and then swims up and down with his prey held aloft, so that all the people may see and take notice.

"Then the townsfolk know that one of their number has transgressed against the law of the juju, and that, because of this, trouble is about to fall upon them. So they consult the oracle, and try to find out which is the sinner, and begin to get together a sacrifice in order to appease the wrath of the sacred reptiles.

"Only the priestess may offer sacrifice. At the edge of the water she stands, calling upon the name of the juju, a live chicken held aloft in her hand. After awhile one of the holy crocodiles is seen swimming slowly towards her. He lays his head on the bank by her feet, waiting until the prayer is finished, after which she bends down and sets the chicken close by his cruel jaws. Sometimes he swallows it at once, sometimes lets it run a little way, then dashes after, but always catches it in the end, and dives with it beneath the water. Next, rum or palm wine is poured into a horn or into one of the long cucumber-shaped calabashes. The priestess chants a new invocation and the beast comes to the surface again. Then she cries aloud, 'Behold! I bring you your drink offering,' at which he opens his mouth and receives the libation. After that he waits until the last rite is over, on which land-dwellers and water-dwellers alike all go back to their homes.

"One of the strangest things about this strange cult is that the crocodile is said never to accept any chicken which has once been owned by a 'twin mother.' No matter how cunningly people may seek to deceive

[p. 188]

him in the matter by passing the bird through many hands, or however long a time it may have been kept in other compounds, should it ever have been in the possession of a 'twin woman' the crocodile will know this and refuse to appear at the call of the priestess to receive the polluted offering.

"On great occasions a ram or goat is sacrificed. This is too heavy for the priestess to hold up by herself alone, so two men usually help her, standing one on either hand.

"So soon as her cry is heard ringing out from beneath the uplifted ram, nine crocodiles are said to be seen hastening down stream. In the midst of them swims their chief, the King Crocodile, a big mighty beast, very old, with the others stretching out, four on either side, as if to guard him. Straight to the feet of the priestess swims the central figure, while the rest stay a little way off. Then the ram-bearers step to the edge of the water into which they fling their burden. This the great reptile seizes in his jaws and drags under, while his eight companions dive beneath the surface in order to share the sacrifice with him.

"Such were the rites of this juju ordained to our fathers before the great trees of the forest were yet formed as small seeds in the heart of the flowers which bore them, and such are the rites which last unchanged till to-day."

This account is quite unconfirmed, but we hope some day to visit Eise and make the acquaintance of its priestess.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

 

CHAPTER XIII

 

WOMAN AND SECRET SOCIETIES

THERE are still one or two secret societies among Ibibio women, though none so powerful as the great Ekoi cult of Nimm, or the famous Bundu of Sierra Leone. One of these is Ebere, a play which was started among the Ubium Ibibios, but was thought so beautiful that it was copied by other tribes. The principal rule of this society concerns the dress of the members, which is rather costly, so that only the wealthy are able to join. A large number of silk handkerchiefs must be bought and pleated. The corners are gathered together in a rosette and knotted along the ceinture so as to overlap slightly, while the lower end floats free. Bands of tanned skin, three to four inches broad, are then cut, and on these cowries and coloured beads are so thickly sewn as almost to hide the foundation. Two such bands are bound on each leg, usually above the ankle and below the knee. Sometimes a like adornment is worn on each of the forearms, while round the firm brown throats and over the breasts hang chains of bright-hued beads. Beneath the ankle-band hang dozens of the little twisted brass ornaments called nyawhawraw, such as are worn by small girls in front from a string round the waist. These ornaments are sometimes spoken of as "bells," but

[p. 190]

they are really more like little clappers. Ebere women say that they wear them round their ankles, "so that they should clash together and sing sweetly in the dance."

Such associations strike a note midway between Freemasonry and Trade Unionism, and form the only safeguard of Ibibio women against the tyranny of their men-folk. Should a member consider herself wronged the matter is laid before the heads of the society, and action taken according to their decision.

Not long ago a ease was brought before the Native Court at Idua Oron, in which a woman, Nse Abassi by name, took action against Odiong Ete, as representative of the local Ebere Society, for unlawfully demanding money from her.

The plaintiff stated on oath

"Accused came to my house accompanied by Eyo Inyan and also Eurpe and Atati. With them they bore the Ebere drum, and when they came in they sat down and placed it upon the table. They said they were going to fine me one goat and one demijohn of rum because my goats had spoiled Nteyo's farm. I gave them one small demi-john and two small bottles of rum on the first day. Four days later I bought a goat and paid it over to the accused, also another demi-john."

Nku Ita, called as witness, stated on oath:

"I was not present when the accused demanded the goat and rum, but plaintiff came to me and bought rum, saying that it was to pay a fine inflicted by accused as head of the Ebere Society."

In every town both among Efiks and other Ibibios

[p. 191]

there is a branch of the Than Isong Society, i.e. the Women of the Land. For the rites of this cult members gather together at certain times of the year, and not one man may be present. At Calabar it is called Ndito Iban, and it is in connection with this that warriors' wives dress in male attire and go about gaily dancing and singing, while their men-folk are on the war path.

The rites would seem to bear some faint, far-off echo of those of the Alruna wives who, with locks arranged beard-like, prayed All-Father Odin from over the Swans' Bath to bless their men's arms.

The Pangwe woman's secret society, Mawungu, also shows points of resemblance with the Ibibio Than Isong. Not only is the dance with which the festivities close called "Eban," according to Herr Gunter Tessmann, but the performers dress in male attire, while their leader marches gun in hand and sword girded.

As night fell on the day when Efik warriors left the town, the wives who remained behind used to go to their sleeping-rooms and there don the garments of their absent lords. With his clothing the head wife also took the name of her husband, and while the ceremony lasted might call herself, or be addressed, by no other. Once clad in this strange attire, the women sallied forth to visit the chief compounds of the town, drinking palm wine, laughing and jesting at each. No matter how heavy and anxious might be the hearts beneath this manly guise, they dared not show the least sign of sadness or anxiety, but must appear happy and brave, that by sympathetic magic the courage of their absent husbands should be upheld.

[p. 192]

The ceremony was called "Ikom Be," and it was most strictly forbidden that any man should witness it; for this also was among the women's mysteries, and destruction would have fallen upon the race should any male have profaned the rites by his presence. All night long the women danced round the town to prove their courage and endurance. Only after dawn-break might they creep back to rest, and even then tears were forbidden lest indulgence in such weakness might magically affect their absent lords--turning to water the hearts within their breasts and causing their strength to melt away.

Somewhat similar precautions are recorded from Borneo, where "When men are on a war expedition, fires are lighted at home, the mats are spread, and the fires kept up till late in the evening and lighted again before dawn so that the men may not be cold; the roofing of the house is opened before dawn so that the man may not lie too long and so fall into the enemy's hands. Again when a Dyak is out headhunting his wife, or, if he is unmarried, his sister, must wear a sword day and night in order that he may be always thinking of his weapons; and she may not sleep during the day nor go to bed before two in the morning lest her husband or brother should thereby be surprised in his sleep by an enemy." [*1]

As an example of the way in which native customs are sometimes misunderstood by even the best-meaning of white men, it may perhaps be mentioned that a missionary of great experience and high standing on the West Coast who had heard something of the Efik

[p. 193]

rites above described, related them in somewhat garbled form as proof of the joy of these women on being temporarily released from the control of their men-folk!

Although these two societies, Ebere and Than Isong, are the only ones which we were able to trace as still existing among Ibibio women, yet accident brought to light a very different state of affairs which had obtained in former days.

While collecting information concerning the ceremonies which custom had decreed should be performed on the deaths of Efik chiefs who had held great positions in the Egbo Society--the most important secret cult among Efik and Ekoi men--my husband discovered that when "the Egbo" flees the town, as he is usually supposed to do after such an event, should the surviving members fail to catch and bring him back in triumph, they are forced to enlist the services of an ancient woman who must belong to one of the ruling families. At her call the spirit usually returns, although he has refused to pay attention to the summons of any man. This need to ask the help of a woman seemed strange in a society from which women are excluded on penalty of death from witnessing the rites. My husband therefore inquired as to the origin of the custom and was told, after considerable hesitation, that feminine aid was necessary because Egbo was originally a woman's secret society, until the men wrested from them its secrets, learnt the rites, and then drove out women from all participation therein. [*1]

[p. 194]

To-day, save in the depths of the bush, where many of the old ceremonies are still carried out whenever there seems a chance of eluding the vigilance of "Government," death can no longer be inflicted on women who have trespassed, either accidentally or with intention, on places set apart for the carrying out of Egbo plays. One such execution, however, happened just before our arrival at Oban, and is thus described:

"The sacred images, etc. are carried to a part of the bush where a little hut of green boughs has been built to receive them. Sentries are posted to keep all intruders from coming within a mile of this spot. On one occasion, however, two young girls, sisters, happened to have missed the patrol and trespassed unwittingly within the sacred precincts, probably in search of nuts or bush fruits which abound everywhere. They were caught by the sentries, brought before the Egbo, condemned to death and hanged almost immediately. Their brother, who was a member of the highest grade of the society, was allowed as a great favour to be present at their death, and afterwards to carry home the bodies to his family. Of redress in such a case there could be neither hope nor thought." [*1]

Later we learned that the original discoverers of Egbo were some women of the Kamerun who went at dawn one morning to fish in the river. There, by the waterside, they found the first Egbo which had been brought thither by a divine woman who

[p. 195]

had come down to earth on purpose to teach the secrets of the cult to her human sisters. After learning the mysteries the women bore the image in triumph to their town, where they built a hut in which to shelter it and practise the rites of the cult. After awhile the men noticed the importance of the new institution and persuaded the women to admit them to its mysteries. No sooner had they succeeded in learning these than they rose and slew all those to whom the secret had first been revealed, and made a law that for the future only men might become members of the society or be permitted to witness the rites.

A vivid account of the death of a woman who peeped at Egbo is given by the Rev. Hope Waddell:

"Making her sit on the ground," he says, "they danced round her, leapt and capered hither and thither, ringing their bells, beating their drums and flourishing their swords over her head, or, occasionally as they passed, touching the back of her neck with the cold edge to make her shrink and shudder. At length, at a signal, the fatal stroke was given."

Such was the "justice" meted out by the usurping male to women who dared intrude upon the secrets of a cult the mysteries of which had once been exclusively their own.

That the most dreaded of all Ibibio secret societies, Ekkpo Njawhaw, i.e. Ghosts--The Destroyers, [*1] was originally also a woman's society is proved by the following story compiled from three accounts, only varying slightly in detail, which were collected from different parts of the District.

[p. 196]

 How Men Stole the Secrets of the Woman's Society Ekkpo Njawhaw

 In the old, old days Ibibio women were more powerful than the men, for to them alone the mysteries of the gods and of secret things were made known. By such knowledge they were enabled to keep all males as servants, employing them to do the heaviest work. Especially because of the strength of their limbs and greater endurance were men found useful as fighters.

Now at first women greatly outnumbered men upon earth, but after awhile the latter began to multiply, and in course of time grew discontented with their lot. "Why," asked they, "should the hardest work fall to our share, while the women lord it over us? Yet, body for body, they are weaker than we!" To this others answered, "So long as the secret knowledge is theirs alone, we shall never prevail against them." Thus the men whispered together, striving to find a way by which they might cast off the women's yoke.

Then, on a day very long ago, the people of Oduko went out to fight those of Urua Eye, whom after a hard struggle they overcame and drove forth into the bush. The victors began to burn down the town, but in a house built for the meeting-place of one of the women's secret societies they found abandoned strange masks and fetishes, together with fringed robes and all else necessary for carrying out the rites of the terrible cult Ekkpo Njawhaw (Ghosts--The Destroyers). These things the warriors bore back to their town, and showed to the old men who, by our

[p. 197]

custom, always stay at home during war time. Long they consulted together as to the meaning of the things and of their hidden powers. Yet, of all that they wished to know they could guess nothing. Then one very wise old man said:

"Let us get together an offering of goats and palm wine and take it before the women, begging them to teach us the mysteries that we also may know them and grow strong."

To this all agreed, and a great feast was made. Then, after they had eaten and drunken together, that old man, the wily one, went apart with some of the elder women such as were leaders among them, and spoke cunningly to these saying:

"Better to tell us the reason of Ekkpo Njawhaw, and teach us the rites of the cult, because all the men of this town want to join with the women in the matter, that together our people may become strong beyond all others."

Then the head priestess said to another old woman of Oduko:

"Let us draw apart from the men so that the women can consult alone and in secret upon the matter. It seems to me that much whispering should take place behind closed doors or in the hidden parts of the bush, for soft and slow should our steps fall upon this new road by which the men seek to lead us."

To this the second old woman answered:

"As for me, I am against it altogether. I do not want to teach our mysteries to the men, for I think that they are trying to deceive us, and wish to take [p. 198] Ekkpo Njawhaw away from us so that we should not be able to rule them any more."

Then these two wise ones spoke to the younger women and said: "We will give the men no part in our society." But the others cried out upon them, saying that they were foolish and over slow, caring only for the things of yesterday and taking no thought for the morrow. In the end the younger women announced:

"It is good that the men should know these things. Are they not our own men, who have always served us? Why, therefore, should we keep the secrets hidden from them?"

So with loud and eager talk they beat down the advice of the old ones who would have stayed them, until the latter said:

"Be it as you will, since you do not choose to listen, we say no more. Nevertheless we know that when the men have learnt the secrets they will take Ekkpo Njawhaw away from us so that we can never rule them as before."

Then the younger women explained to the men all the mysteries of the cult, with the full rites and every secret by means of which they had formerly held dominion. Afterwards the men called a great meeting and announced:

"From now on a law is made that should any woman try to join in the play of Ekkpo Njawhaw, the men will lead her to the market-place and there cut off her head in the sight of all the people."

On hearing this the women were very sorry for what they had done, but they dared not disobey,

[p. 199]

because the men were stronger of limb than they and also very cruel. Only the two old women who had not agreed to tell the secrets said:

"We were never willing to open up these mysteries to the men, so we shall continue to play our play alone for ourselves as before." To this the men answered:

"If any woman plays Ekkpo Njawhaw again she shall be bound to a stake in the market-place and be beheaded before all the townsfolk, that other women may see her fate and learn to play no more."

In spite of this the old women still continued to carry out the rites as before, hidden in the bush in a secret place which they had made. After long searching, however, the men found them and bore them off to Oduko market-place where their heads were struck off in the sight of the trembling women.

That is the reason why none but men may join the play of Ekkpo Njawhaw, or even witness the rites of this society.

After this change had been made therefore, all the inhabitants of a town who did not belong to the cult were ordered to keep within their houses, behind shut doors and windows, while the images ran up and down.

Not long ago at Ndiya, a woman, Adiaha Udaw Anwa by name, dared to sit on her veranda and watch the forbidden sight. The "image" ran in to catch and punish her for her temerity. Terrified at the consequences of her curiosity the poor woman ran inside the house and fastened the door, but the followers of Ekkpo soon forced open this frail barrier. Adiaha

[p. 200]

looked round for a hiding-place, and, in default of a better, climbed into the cupboard over the hearth where pots and pans are kept and meat is laid for smoking. The bottom of this receptacle is never solid but made of palm stems, laid crosswise, so that the smoke may pass through the interstices. After Ekkpo Njawhaw had forced an entrance he could not for the moment see where the woman was hidden but heard the palm stems creaking beneath her weight, so slashed upward with his machet and cut through the bottom of the cupboard, so that she fell down.

He then struck her twice across the head, making two wounds, one running from above the root of the nose to the back of the skull, and the other from ear to ear across the crown, thus marking her with a great cross.

Later a native doctor took the woman in hand, and cured her wounds after a long course of treatment, but the hair has never grown again over the scars, which are still clearly to be seen.

Another case concerned a little girl about eight years of age, also named Adiaha, who was rescued from being offered up to Ekkpo Njawhaw, after the sacrificial dress had been actually placed upon her. [*1]

This Ibibio story of the revolt of man calls to mind a similar state of things, the memory of which is celebrated at the Fuegian festival, Kina. This was instituted to commemorate the rising of the males against the women "who formerly had the authority and possessed the secrets of sorcery." [*2]

[p. 201]

Just as behind the whole Ibibio pantheon looms the awful figure of "The Great Creatrix," so behind the cult of Ekkpo Njawhaw looms the still more terrible presence of Eka Ekkpo--Eka Abassi's dread counterpart--the source of all evil, the Death Bringer and Fount of Terror. The word Ekkpo does not only mean "ghosts," it also signifies "devils," and just as in Isaiah, chapter xlv., verse 7, we read "I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things," so here, amid these rude Ibibios, where woman is now regarded as a mere slave of her overlord man and one would least look for such a state of things, we get not fatherhood but motherhood--"motherhood, immaculate and alone. a virgin birth"--as the source of the powers both of light and of darkness, of good and evil, of life and of death.

"Terrible indeed to look upon is this Mother of Ekkpo Njawhaw. Often of colossal size, ill proportioned and coal black in colour, she looms from out the darkness at the back of her sons' shrine, surrounded with the dreadful insignia of the cult, and with arms outstretched as if to welcome fresh victims. Around her flat, misshapen feet lie skulls, some new and ivory tinted, some blackened with the smoke of many sacrifices, and others carved with astonishing care and fidelity from solid blocks of wood. Two sons she has Akpan Njawhaw, the first-born, and Udaw, the second-born; also two daughters--Adiaha, the elder, and Angwa-Angwa, the younger.

"At the planting of farms the lesser rites of the cult are carried out; but the greater ceremonies take

[p. 202]

place at the New Yam Festival. Eight days before the first of the new season's crop may be eaten, in any town where this society has gained a footing, the images must be carried forth in solemn procession and set up in the public square." [*1]

On such occasions the figure of Eka Ekkpo stands in the midst, with a son on either hand. Sometimes the effigies of the two daughters are placed there in addition, one at each end of the family line. For the first seven days, at dusk each evening, fowls and other offerings are brought and offered up before the fetishes, while the club drums are beaten to warn non-members among the passers-by from venturing too near the sacred spot. No yams may be brought on this occasion, and as is but meet, victims are first offered to Eka Ekkpo, seeing that she is the fount from which the others have sprung. Akpan is the next to receive offerings, then comes the turn of Udaw, and lastly the two daughters, though these are sometimes neglected altogether.

On the eighth day the images are carried back to their usual abode, that of "the Mother" being borne in front. Should anyone chance to meet this terrible procession upon the road, the first thing that a native would do would be to look whether the fetish was represented with one ear or two. In the latter case there would be a chance of life, because the goddess might possibly listen to the victim's frenzied prayer for mercy. In the former case prayer would be useless, because with one ear (Una Utung) she cannot listen to anyone. Only with two ears is it possible for her to have compassion.

[p. 203]

To primitive races, and indeed the world over, death must always be one of the great mysteries, and it is the less astonishing that for Ibibios the supreme ruler of the Ghost Realm should be feminine when we consider that according to some peoples, for instance the Yaos and Wayisa of East Central Africa, death itself "was originally brought into the world by a woman who taught two men to go to sleep. One day, while they slumbered, she held the nostrils of one of them till his breath ceased, and he died." [*1]

As has already been mentioned, if a woman chanced to witness an Ekkpo Njawhaw play, no matter how unwillingly, a member was singled out, and robed with all haste in the special dress of the cult executioner. After the poor woman he crept, "softly, softly," and exacted a terrible penalty for her unwitting trespass. No Ekkpo "image" may go forth without a machet in his hand. Each, therefore, is ready at a moment's notice to fulfil the behest of the "Great Mother," and, like the devotees of Kali Ma, bring to her shrine "Gobbets fresh and fresh!"

Chance also brought to light the fact that even over the "Great Warriors Club"--Ekong--(i.e. War) woman was once the dominating influence. This is shown in a curious survival.

At the time of the new yam harvest the members of "Ekong" assemble for an interesting ceremony. Across a corner of one of the town "playgrounds" a line of forked sticks is driven into the earth. This is so arranged that at the beginning and end of the row a great tree may usually be found. At the

[p. 204]

height of about four and a half feet from the ground, between the supports, palm leaves are hung, and against the terminal tree on the left-hand side is to be seen a little arbour made of the same leaves. In this a member of the society, chosen on account of his sweet voice, sits singing during the greater part of the ceremony. He is clothed in women's garments, and represents "The Mother of Ekong"; "For unless the latter be present on such an occasion, no blessing can be hoped for during the coming year."

So far as could be ascertained, Ekong also had no father, but sprang in full strength, it would appear, from beneath the heart of a virgin. It was very difficult to obtain any information on this subject, the tradition of which seems all but to have died out in the present day. Two very old women were, however, induced to relate what their grandmothers had told them as little children, and the account tallied in almost every particular, the only difference being that in one case my informant asserted that Ekong sprang forth "fully armed," Athene-like, from the body of his mother, and in the second case it was only said that he issued "in full strength, able to bear arms." The latter account was afterwards corroborated by Akpabio of Awa.

Footnotes

^192:1 "Magic and Fetishism," p. 12. A. C. Haddon, F.R.S.

^193:1 A full description of the ceremony of "recalling the Egbo" will be found under the heading "Burial Rites" in my husband's book "By Haunted Waters."

^194:1 "In the Shadow of the Bush," pp. 43-4. (Heinemann, London; George Doran, New York.)

^195:1 A full account of this terrible society will be found in "By Haunted Waters."

^200:1 "By Haunted Waters." P. Amaury Talbot.

^200:2 "Les Origines du Mariage et de la Famille," p. 448. Giraud Teulon.

^202:1 Edinburgh Review, July, 1914. P. Amaury Talbot.

^203:1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxii., 111-12. J. Macdonald.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 205]

 

CHAPTER XIV

 

WOMAN IN WAR TIME

IN war time, even now, strong women on both sides act as scouts. They know that they will not be killed, so go before the main body fearlessly spying upon the enemy. As soon as the first sign of the latter is seen they cry out to warn their own men, and then run aside so as not to be in the way.

At times a band of Amazons comes across and captures a single foeman. Then these women, usually so gentle and kindly, seem to change their whole nature. They fall upon the luckless man, bind, and often cruelly wound him; then hand him over in triumph to be slain by the men of their own party.

Perhaps the most important service rendered by the women of the tribe in time of war is the carrying out of the secret rites decreed by ancient law for the burial of a warrior. As much as could be learnt of the matter from the men of the tribe is thus recorded:

"When a man in the prime of life is cut off in battle, the body is carried home to the dead man's town by wedded women who are his next of kin. No man may touch the corpse. Weeping and singing sad songs, it is borne by their gentle hands to a place of thick bush called owok afai--the forest of those

[p. 206]

slain by sudden death. . . . No maiden may be present at these rites; only to wives may such sad mysteries be revealed." [*1]

Later, an ancient woman was induced to confide to me part at least of these strange rites. I had not intended to publish them, nor, indeed, much of the information already incorporated in the foregoing account. Certain English scientists, however, of the highest distinction, have been good enough to point out that the matter is not without ethnological interest, and also that it is most improbable that this little study will ever reach those in any way concerned. Save for one detail, therefore, all that could be gleaned on the subject is given here.

After the bodies of dead warriors have been borne into the shadows of that part of the forest set aside for this purpose, they are gently laid upon beds of fresh leaves, high piled to form a last couch, not far from the place where an open grave has been prepared. Young boughs are next picked from sacred trees, the names of which, unfortunately, my informant could not be persuaded to reveal. These boughs are drawn over the bodies of the slain amid low, wailing chants and fast-falling tears. The chants are said to contain a prayer that the virility of the warrior thus cut off in the pride of life and strength may not be lost, but rather should go forth to bless with increase the hearths, farms and byres of his own townsfolk.

My informant explained that she was only able to give vaguely the meaning of the chants sung on

[p. 207]

such occasions, since these have been handed down in a tongue so old as to be practically forgotten in the present day. It is a matter of great regret to us that the expense of transport in countries such as this, where all impedimenta must be borne upon carriers' heads, had hitherto kept us from adding a phonograph to the already somewhat long list of scientific apparatus which we are in the habit of carrying about with us. Lady Frazer, who has herself rendered such inestimable services to science, had urged us to do so, and had we but been able to follow her advice it might have been possible to secure records of these old songs, the chance to obtain which may in all probability never occur again. Alas! "Our Lady Poverty" is a hard task-mistress, and often places a stern veto upon the garnering of much of the rich harvest which, in Africa, lies on every hand awaiting gleaning.

Though the exact meaning of the ritual chants has now been lost, the idea underlying the ceremonies is indicated by the actions accompanying the song, as, for instance, when the sacred boughs are drawn over that part of the body regarded as the seat of virile energy, with the avowed purpose of withdrawing the spirit of fertility into the leaves. Before interment, small portions of the body are also cut away and placed, together with the sacred leaves, in earthen pots never before used. These are wrapped up in the garments of the celebrants, and borne forth by them in silence, to be secretly interred in farm or byre, or hidden away in holes dug beneath the hearth or bridal bed.

[p. 208]

The reason that knowledge of such rites must be kept alike from men and maidens of the tribe is said to be that this secret was among those entrusted to women in the days when woman, not man, was the dominant sex, and that these were not disclosed at the time when males were initiated into the mysteries of the secret societies, because it had been revealed that on the guarding of this secret depended the strength of the tribe. Were the rites once disclosed the power of the juju would be broken, few or no babes would be born, farms and herds would yield but scanty increase, while the arms of future generations of fighting men would lose their strength and hearts their courage--until the Ibibio people were either enslaved or had vanished from the face of the earth.

During our last leave in England we had the privilege of talking over those primitive customs and beliefs which seemed to us of special interest with so great an authority as Dr. Wallis Budge, of the British Museum. Among other incidents he listened to that above given, and when the little account was finished pointed out the striking similarity between this still surviving rite and the strange story of the origin of Horus--that seed of life and love snatched by the widowed Isis from death itself. Indeed, were the account of this Ibibio rite given in full detail it might almost seem as though intended as a re-enactment of the ancient tragedy of the Nile, when the mighty goddess Isis found the body of the slaughtered Osiris, and by her knowledge of the mysteries of birth and death "the Great Mother" wrung a

[p. 209]

new life from out the very jaws of desolation and despair. [*1]

At present there seems little danger of a falling off in numbers among Ibibios, for the greatest pride of both men and women is to become the parents of many children. The head chief of Oyubia, Enyenihi by name, has a family of thirty, all of whom he proudly claims as his own offspring. Large as the number seems, however, it is quite outdone by the crowd of children which surrounds many chiefs. Akpan Udaw Ibomm of Ikotobo, for instance, who died in 1913, had a hundred and sixty sons and daughters, of all of whom he claimed to be the actual father. Ofeok Oyo of Ikua Ita too, who has only lately died, was the mother of twenty fine children. Yet, almost to the day of her death she carried herself as straight and well and was as tall and good to look upon, according to native ideas, as many a woman who had borne but a single babe. Indeed the Ibibios and neighbouring peoples would seem to be a standing contradiction to the theory that polygamy tends to restrict the race. We were informed on the authority of Mr. John Bailey, a well-known native Government official, who was present when Sir Claude Macdonald went up to Afikpo, on the Cross River, that one chief

[p. 210]

alone brought ninety sons to salute the Chief Commissioner! True it is that the distinguished administrator himself, whose memory is held in grateful remembrance by European and native alike throughout the length and breadth of the colony for whose prosperity he did so much, thinks that nineteen would be a more probable number to give; but owing to the marriage customs and rules as to family membership it is by no means impossible that one chief should be able to produce the number stated.

Among some of the more civilised Efiks of Calabar the growth of the family seems to have been restricted, to a certain extent, from motives of vanity on the part of the women, who fear that much child-bearing might spoil their beauty. Yet, even here, there does not seem to be cause for anxiety as to the danger of racial suicide. The late Chief Esonta of Old Town, for instance, had forty-five wives, who, between them, are said to have borne him a hundred and sixty children!

Chief Essien Etim, who died in 1910, and was a well-known Calabar chief, is stated to have had ninety-nine sons and daughters. After his death, a dispute arose as to the distribution of the property, and the family marched into Court to lay the matter before His Honour Judge Weber. It was fortunate that the disagreement was only among themselves, so that litigation did not extend to another family of like or superior size.

Another well-known chief, Efa Etung Effion by name, had sixty wives and ninety-five piccans; while Chief Abassi Okun Abassi of Creek Town had a mere

[p. 211]

thirty-five to show; but then he had only seven wives all told! The aforementioned numbers are given on the authority of Chief Daniel Henshaw.

To a certain extent large families may be accounted for by the custom which, on the death of a chief, caused the wives to be divided out among sons and brothers, who henceforth assumed towards them the position formerly held by the deceased; care being taken that a woman should not thus be given to her own son. Before death a man usually "makes his will," under which term is included the disposal of his wives and female dependents. The women of the household are called before him on his death-bed, and he there and then decides to which relative each should be given. Often in this way a grown woman is allocated as "wife" to a small boy of eight or nine years old. In such a case all children which she may bear to other men, while the child-husband is growing up, are looked upon as his. So that, supposing some half-dozen women are bequeathed in this manner to a boy of eight, the latter on reaching the age of twelve might easily find himself titular "father" of a dozen or more children.

A case illustrating such a "marriage" came before the Native Court at Idua Oron. In this the plaintiff, Akon Abassi, stated on oath:

"My former husband died and left behind him a young brother of about ten years of age. According to his will I was betrothed to the latter, but as I was over twenty years old and already a mother I asked the parents of the child-husband to receive back their dowry, because the boy was too young for me."

[p. 212]

A similar case occurred at the same sitting in which a woman named Kadu claimed divorce from a small boy, Affion Usuk Inyi by name. In the course of her evidence the plaintiff stated:

"About six and a half years ago I came out of the Fatting-house and was married. Not long afterwards my husband died, and I was told to become the wife of a boy about twelve years of age. I am now almost twenty-five years old, and therefore summon the defendant to receive back his dowry and set me free, as the child is too young to be my husband."

Many cases are known, however, in which young and attractive women have refused the advances of other wooers, and preferred to wait until the youth, to whom they have been given by the Will of their late husband, should be of sufficient age to wed them.

Footnotes

^206:1 "By Haunted Waters." P. Amaury Talbot.

^209:1 Since writing the above, it has been our good fortune to have the opportunity of studying the customs of Ibo and New Calabari women. It would seem that the lives of these latter are ruled, even more markedly than those of their Ibibio sisters, by rites of which nothing may be revealed to the males of the tribe, or indeed, to any man.

As an instance may be mentioned the secret rites carried out by every New Calabari widow during the seven days of mourning following the death of her husband. These strange ceremonies entail almost incredible self-denial, pain and discomfort on the unfortunate celebrants, but, according to unanimous testimony, no word of what transpires on such occasions has as yet reached male ears.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 213]

 

CHAPTER XV

 

WIDOWHOOD AND BURIAL CUSTOMS

AMONG the Ibibios different funeral rites are prescribed according to age, position, and manner of death.

To begin with the youngest. The bodies of babes who die within a few days of birth may not be buried like those to whom a fuller span of life was given, but are laid in an earthen bowl which is then placed, inverted, in a shallow hole scooped out by the side of the road.

A somewhat similar custom is reported from among the Baganda for the burial of a twin. "The embalmed body was wrapped round with a creeper and put into a new cooking-pot. When the preparations were complete, the relations assembled, a man called the 'Mutaka' took the corpse to waste land near a main road, dug the grave, and laid the body in it; on the grave he placed a cooking-pot mouth downwards, but put no earth in. Then everyone who passed by knew the place to be the grave of a twin, and avoided it lest the ghost should catch them. Women especially avoided the place and threw grass upon the grave to prevent the ghost from entering into them and being reborn." [*1]

[p. 214]

any such upturned pots may be seen along the paths near Akaiya, especially those leading through parts of the bush which are carefully shunned at nightfall, for there the bodies of all who have died of smallpox, leprosy, or other infectious disease are flung and left without burial. An almost similar fate befalls those of women who have died in or immediately before childbirth, since these, too, are regarded as unclean. Should such a one die before giving birth, her body is cut open and the foetus carefully removed and interred in an inverted pot in the manner described. As with those who died in childbirth, the corpse is propped against a tree and left, with sunk head and hanging hands, until the luxuriant vegetation mercifully covers the pitiful remains with its green mantle.

The ghosts of such are greatly feared, as much here and now as amid the ancient Babylonians, among whose most dreaded wraiths are mentioned:

	 
		"A woman that hath died in travail,
		 Or a woman that hath died with a babe at the breast,
		 Or a weeping woman that hath died with a babe at the breast." [*1]
		
		 When the bearers come back after disposing of these pitiful dead they may not enter their houses, but must wait outside that of the dead woman, until the members of her family have brought out and sacrificed a dog, a cock, and some eggs. Magic leaves are ground between stones and rubbed upon the bodies of the corpse bearers, while the kinsmen pray that this so sad a fate may never again overtake one of their

[p. 215]

house. The fowl's head is struck off, and its blood sprinkled over the bearers, who chant meanwhile:

	 
		"Let not the evil thing pass from me to any woman."
		
		 Until the sacrifices have been made and the prayers offered, none who took part in carrying the corpse may touch a woman lest that which cut off the newly dead should be communicated to the living.

The attitude of mind which thus denies gentle burial to those who have known the pangs, without the joys, of motherhood, is far as the poles asunder from that expressed by the old northern ballad in which so different a fate is meted out:

	 
		Their beds are made in Heaven high,
		 Full lowly down by our dear Lord's knee,
		 All girt about wi' gilly flowers,
		 A right fair company for to see." [*1]
		
		 Yet, though among Ibibios but little sentiment is wasted on these unfortunates, their lot, in the old days at least, was happier than that of women unlucky enough to bear twins. The fate of such has already been described, and the ill-results of the cruel superstition do not cease with life, but are thought to continue even after death. A woman who dies in giving birth to twins, or before the end of her year of purification after such an event, may not be carried to her last resting-place through the house door, any more than she may go out by it on leaving home to spend the prescribed twelve moons in the twin women's town. Such sad exiles must pass through a hole

[p. 216]

purposely broken in the wall, by which exit the unfortunate babes are also carried forth. Further, the body of a twin mother may on no account be borne along a road by which ordinary people pass to and fro, but only by a little path specially cut through the bush to the place where it is to be flung.

The reason for this prohibition is much the same as that given in Cambodia for carrying a dead body feet foremost, i.e. "that it may not see the house, in which event other sickness and other deaths would result." Ibibios say, too, that should the ghost return and try to enter her former home she would be unable to do so since the place by which the body was carried forth has been blocked up, and wraiths can only enter by the same way through which their bodies were borne forth-the converse of that law of the spirit world explained by Mephistopheles to Faust--

	 
		"For goblins and for spectres it is law
		 That where we enter in, there also we withdraw." [*1]
		
		 In the country round Awa, a superstition obtains much like that of the Malayan "langsuir," a description of which is thus given by Sir William Maxwell:

"If a woman dies in childbirth either before delivery or after the birth of a child, and before the forty days of uncleanness have expired, she is popularly supposed to become a 'langsuyar,' a flying demon of the nature of the 'White Lady' or 'Banshee.' To prevent this a quantity of glass beads are put in the mouth of the corpse, a hen's egg is put under each armpit, and needles are placed in the palms of the

[p. 217]

hands. It is believed that if this is done the dead woman cannot become a langsuyar, as she cannot open her mouth to shriek (ngilai) or wave her arms as wings, or open and shut her hands to assist her flight."

It was only with great difficulty that any information could be gleaned as to this terrible wraith, since it is a matter of firm belief that even to mention her might lay the speaker open to an unwelcome visitation. No entreaty or inducement which we could offer availed to persuade any informant to confide to us the appellation by which these ghastly and malignant spirits are known. The utmost we could prevail upon anyone to impart on the subject was that among some tribes she was called Ekwensu; we have since learned that this is the Ibo term for these sad wraiths. It was stated from several sources that, by simply calling aloud the dread name, a discarded wife had succeeded in drawing down upon her husband the curse of such an uncanny housemate. After long seeking we learnt, however, that in this part of the world when a woman has died in childbirth, the mouth of the corpse is closed with pitch, and this mixed with thorns is sometimes also placed beneath the armpits, while the hands are occasionally bound to the sides. To be efficacious this service should be rendered by an old woman, "who must be such a one as had brought many children into the world but has now long ceased from bearing." No mention was made of other precautions, such as beads, eggs, or needles placed in the palms.

These sad wraiths are thought to be filled with

[1. Straits Branch, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. No. 7, p. 28.]

[p. 218]

enmity against the whole human race, because they have been robbed of offspring and denied burial, in consequence of which last misfortune they are forced to wander up and down over the length and breadth of the earth, racked with hunger and parched with thirst, with no resting-place in the ghost town amid kindly kith and kin. With the idea of avenging themselves upon men for this dreary lot they sometimes take the form of a beautiful woman in order to attract the regard of a lover. To such the wraith may bear elfin children, and is even said to be capable of so well disguising her evil nature as to live among mortals unsuspected for years. Only one peculiarity does she show. She cannot join in the merrymakings of her town, for, should she once be inveigled into a circle of dancers, her feet skim the earth so lightly that she can no longer keep to the ground, but is forced to spring--ever higher and higher--till at last, with a blood-curdling shriek, she flies away, and is even said at times, to the horror of the spectators, to have changed before their eyes into the form of an owl or vampire bat.

When a man has fallen under the spell of one of these terrible beings he is lost indeed, for at death the ghoul-wife and her demon offspring gather round his bed, mopping and mowing, and their unclean presence keeps off the kindly spirits of those ancestors whom he would fain join in the ghost town.

Further details of the "langsuir," corresponding in many points with those given above, may be found in the fascinating pages of Skeat's "Malay Magic." The passage is quoted in full on account of its charm

[p. 219]

The original langsuir, whose embodiment is supposed to be a kind of night owl, is described as being a woman of dazzling beauty who died from the shock of hearing that her child was stillborn and had taken the shape of the pontianak or mati-anak--a kind of night owl. On hearing this terrible news she clapped her hands, and without further warning flew whinnying away to a tree, upon which she perched. She may be known by her robe of green, by her tapering nails of extraordinary length (a mark of beauty), and by the long jet black tresses which she allows to fall down to her ankles--only alas! (for the truth must be told) in order to conceal the hole in the back of her neck through which she sucks the blood of children! These vampire-like proclivities of hers may, however, be successfully combated if the right means are adopted, for if you are able to catch her, cut short her nails and luxuriant tresses, and stuff them into the hole in her neck, she will become tame and indistinguishable from an ordinary woman, remaining so for years. Cases have been known, indeed, in which she has become a wife and a mother, until she was allowed to dance at a village merrymaking, when she at once reverted to her ghostly form and flew off into the dark and gloomy forest from whence she came."

Of the pontianak or mati-anak, i.e. the ghost of a stillborn child, no trace could be found among the Ibibios, and no special precaution save that of burying face downwards beneath an inverted bowl, seemed taken to prevent its return.

The following story was told by an Efik woman

[p. 220]

to whom it was related by a friend who lived near the Opobo border:

"Many, many years ago a very beautiful woman lived upon earth. She married a great chief who loved her beyond all his other wives. To her alone he gave the gifts which should have been shared between all of them, and neglected the rest for her sake. This made the others so jealous that they consulted together and bought a strong juju which they buried one night beneath the path by which the favoured wife went to her farm. Further, they tied pieces of tie-tie into strong knots and hid them beneath her bed, and locked and clasped door- and box-locks, that by this magic the portals of birth should be closed against the coming of any babe to her.

"By this means the woman was kept childless for many years, but at length her husband collected great gifts and took them to a very strong juju, thereby purchasing a medicine which he brought back and gave, in all secrecy, to this best-loved wife. By its strength the bad jujus were overcome, and the fellow-wives saw that their envious plots were vain.

"Now among the number was a witch. Full of malice therefore, she went before her witch company and told how her rival had triumphed over the magic knots and other spells wrought against her, and was about to bear a babe. Then all the witches plotted together to weave a most evil charm, by means of which the babe should meet death on life's threshold. Thus it came to pass, and when the little dead form was shown to the mother she gave but one cry, and striking out with her hands as though to fend off the

[p. 221]

cruel fellow-wives, without further warning flew up into the branches of a tall tree, upon which she perched in the guise of a white owl, uttering plaintive cries. So embittered was she by the treatment she had received that whenever one of her enemies bore a babe she used to come down at night time and, vampire-like, suck its essence, so that it also died."

It is interesting to compare this Ibibio version with those from the Malay States given previously.

Little children from one to seven years of age are laid in the grave on their right side, as if sleeping, with hands folded palm to palm and placed between the knees. Should it happen that several piccans have died in any family one after the other on reaching about eight to ten years, the next child to expire at this age is also buried face downwards, "so that he may not see the way to be born again." It is thought that his spirit is one of those mischievous sprites who only reincarnate to bring grief to parents, and would never grow up to be a comfort to them in later years. The mother or grandmother of such unwelcome revenants usually breaks a finger or slits an ear of the corpse before it is laid in the grave, that, when it is born again, they may know it at once because it will bear this mark. The spirits are said to dislike this treatment so much "that they often give up their bad habit of dying, and on the next reincarnation grow up like other people."

When such a boy or girl has died the parents usually wash the feet and hands of the corpse and pour the water into a bottle which is kept in a corner of their sleeping-room. When the wife feels that she is once

[p. 222]

more about to become a mother, the liquid is sprinkled over the floor of the room, while the parents cry aloud the name of the ghost, saying, "You must not be born into our family again."

Among the Ekets the father of a child is held responsible for its burial. It is a breach of custom for the mother to lay it in the grave. A case illustrating this came before the Native Court at Eket early in April, 1913, in which the plaintiff stated:

"Defendant married my daughter. They had a child who died. Just before its death defendant came in and found the dying child in my arms. At once he caught up a machet, and with the flat of this struck me across the mouth. I said to him 'What have I done?' He did not answer, but took up a jar of palm wine which stood near by and flung the contents over the `Mbiam juju crying, 'Let me die for my child!' I said to the people who stood around, 'He thinks that I am killing the child, but never have I heard of a grandmother who harmed her grandchild!' Then I got up and went away, leaving the babe with its mother. I did not go far, but came back into the courtyard and made a fire in a corner, out of the way, thinking 'I will stay here till I know how it goes with the child.' As I sat waiting and listening, defendant came out, seized me by foot and throat, and flung me out of the compound. He caught up his machet and would have killed me, but the bystanders ran between and stopped him from harming me further. It was then that the child died, and so soon as he knew that its soul had quite gone from it he thrust the dead body into the arms of my daughter, and bade

[p. 223]

her bear it to my house. This she did, and he refused to bury it, although it is our custom for the father to bury dead babes. It is unseemly and against our rule that a woman should do so, yet when the husband's half-brother came and ordered my daughter to bring the dead body and bury it, she obeyed. She it was, therefore, the mother, who laid it in the grave."

In the course of my husband's study of native burial rites he stumbled upon the discovery that among the Ibos underground chambers, much on the plan of those of ancient Egypt, were formerly prepared for the reception of the dead. In talking over the matter with an Efik chief of high standing the latter stated that in olden days at Calabar graves only slightly different in form used to be dug out for the interment of chiefs. His description was as follows:

"Within the walls of the dead man's compound an oblong chamber often twenty-four feet deep, was dug. Through one of the sides they cut a tunnel, and at the end of this a large underground room was hollowed out. . . . . When all had been arranged the coffin was carefully lowered into the first chamber, borne through the passage, and laid upon the resting-place so reverently prepared.

"Then the best-loved wife of the deceased and two of his most beautiful slaves were led into the chamber and seated upon three chairs at the feet of, and facing, their dead lord. Between living and dead a table was placed, and on this dish es containing fine 'chop' was set.

"The best-loved wife was in the centre, and into her hands a lighted lamp was given. Then all save

[p. 224]

the three women left the burial room. Boards were placed before the entrance and earth piled against these until the passage was filled up. Bolts of cloth and the less costly articles, were then laid in the first compartment, immediately beneath the shaft. Lastly soil was thrown in and beaten down over all." [*1]

Footnotes

^213:1 "The Baganda, their Customs and Beliefs," p. 125. Roscoe.

^214:1 Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia." R. C. Thompson.

^215:1 "The Ballad of Clerk Saunders."

^216:1 Aymonier, quoted in "The Mystic Rose," p. 95. A. E. Crawley.

^224:1 "By Haunted Waters." P. Amaury Talbot.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

 

CHAPTER XVI

 

WIDOWHOOD AND BURIAL CUSTOMS (continued)

FROM the moment when the death of a great Efik chief was announced his widows came under the care of the Ndito Than society, known among Ibibios by the name of "Iban Isong," i.e. Women of the Soil. Should an unfortunate widow offend against custom in any way, such as by washing face or feet, or plaiting her hair, the society at once fined her; for members were continually passing in and out of the house of mourning to watch that the rules were observed. At cock-crow each day the women of the household had to wake and start crying for an hour or two, and should one of them not be thought to perform her part of the ceremony in a sufficiently energetic manner, external aids were applied of sufficient strength to remedy any lack of naturalness. Widows were not allowed to leave the compound on any pretext, but were forced to stay, each in her own house, sitting upon a small mat in a dark corner. No covering was permitted, save the narrow strip usually worn round the waist beneath the robe and called the "woman's cloth."

When women from other families came, the visitors seated themselves just before their hostess. No sooner had they settled down than the widow

[p. 226]

started to weep anew, and the guests joined her in lamentation. After a certain time spent in this way they went on to another wife, and so on till all had been condoled with. Sisters and cousins of the dead man usually received visits in the room beneath the floor of which the corpse was buried.

Only legal wives were thus secluded. Other women of the household, no matter how near or dear they might have been to the dead, were not expected to stay in their little corners, but were free to come and go within the compound. The time of seclusion was called that of the "Mbuk Pisi" house, i.e. house of mourning.

When a very great chief dies his widows make a certain offering to the Ndito Than Society. For this purpose they prepare long wrappings of silk, and, after having presented these, send to inform their families of the bereavement which has befallen them. In olden days a year or more was usually spent in this seclusion. Now it is only a week or two, or at most a month.

As the time of mourning drew to an end, about nine o'clock one night a cry was heard coming from the Egbo house. This was the signal for the beginning of what was called a very "strong night" at Calabar. All the widows stepped, one by one, out of the compound where they had so long been confined, and proceeded to the Egbo shed, each with her family walking round her like a fence The building was full of the great chiefs of the town, while crowds of spectators stood outside. After all the wives had been stationed before the entrance, the name of each was called in turn, from the lowest to the highest, with the words:

[p. 227]

"You must 'cry' your husband before the Egbo, that Egbo may hear."

Then, in the stillness, the poor woman raised her voice bewailing her loss, and the Egbo answered the cry from within, "a very thick and heavy sound amid the silence." After awhile came a pause, then all began again as before. Seven times the wail rose; but the seventh was the last. All this time the family of the first woman stood in readiness to pass her along from one to another. Suddenly bells were heard ringing, and the widow started to run, sheltered always by her kinsfolk. The same happened to all in turn, and, should some unfortunate woman have no strong family to encircle and save her, Egbo caught her and she died there and then.

After having "cried their husband before the Egbo," the widows went back once more to the house of mourning, and early next day Idemm Ikwaw (i.e. lesser Egbo) came out and went round the town. All the principal chiefs followed him, holding in their hands twenty to forty young palm stems, each about four feet long, from which the hard skin had been stripped off, so that only the soft inner part was left.

When these had gathered in the courtyard, the women came out from the Mbuk Pisi house one by one with folded arms and stepping backwards "softly, softly"; for they might not turn their heads. Each was shaking with terror, for none knew what was coming and they feared "too much." All around them bells were ringing with deafening clang and bang. The Egbo image struck at each, as she came forth, and, if the woman was lithe and nimble of mind as

[p. 228]

well as body, at the first stroke she sprang back into the house, but many were too bewildered to know where to turn. For each blow a new stick was used, the others being thrown away immediately. After every widow had been struck in turn, the ceremony was over. "The minds of the women could rest in peace now. There was nothing more to fear."

Later in the day all went down to the river to bathe. There they washed the little cloths which had so long been worn unchanged, and shaved their heads. "Each widow was laved by the women of her family and those who were her dearest friends. No man could see them walking unrobed because of the press of women about each. After bathing they dressed themselves in cloth woven of plaited grasses, the fine kind called Ofon Ndam, black, red, and yellow in colour, which is as soft as linen." Then the "woman's cloth," and every spoon, calabash and other utensil used during the time of mourning was thrown into the river; were this not done it was thought that their continued possession would entail barrenness upon their owner. After these had been cast away the widows returned for the last time to the house of their late husband. They did not enter, however, but only sat on the veranda.

Next some of the principal women of the town and five or six chiefs went thither as witnesses that all had "cleansed themselves," and now wished to go back to the homes of their fathers. The household juju was brought out and set upon the ground, and before it each widow took oath:

"During my husband's lifetime if I was unfaithful

[p. 229]

to him or did any bad thing against his family may the juju punish me! If not, may I go clear!"

After this each woman's kin surrounded her. She raised her clasped hands above her head, resting them with interlocked fingers upon the crown, and cried, "My husband divorces me to-day!" The spectators took up the cry, calling in chorus upon the dead man by his "fine names" such as "Helper of the Town," etc.

After each widow had thus set herself free, the household dependents came forward and "cried" in much the same manner. Then the "free born" amongst them all went back to the homes of their fathers.

For seven days only the native grass cloth "Ofon Ndam" might be worn by the bereaved women, and, when this was laid aside, custom ordained that a kind called "Isodoho" should be substituted.

Sisters, cousins, and women "members" of the deceased's family wore a blue cloth two fathoms long, knotted over the left shoulder and hanging straight down like the usual farm dress. As a further sign of mourning they used to grind charcoal and mix with a little oil to form a black pigment, with which they painted a mark from temple to temple across the forehead, much in the shape of a crescent moon. It is quite probably from this circumstance that the "house of mourning" among the Ibibios is termed "the moon house," though, when the supposition was mentioned, some of my informants disclaimed all knowledge of the point.

Male members of the family or household were

[p. 230]

supposed to wear black or dark blue cloth, sometimes for as much as a year and a half, until a date was fixed upon by the principal men among them, who said, "On such and such a day we will finish mourning." They liked to arrange so that this "throwing off of mourning" took place about Christmas time, before the planting of new farms.

It would seem that the period of mourning is purposely made as disagreeable as possible for the widows, in order to deter these from the temptation to poison their husbands so as to clear the way for another suitor.

As with the Greeks of old, both men and women shaved their heads in sign of mourning. Like the widows, some of the dependents wore Isodoho cloth, and some a kind dyed a lighter shade of blue called "Utan Okpo."

From the day when the widows "took oath before the juju" and returned to their fathers' homes they were free to marry again. [*1]

On the occasion of the funeral rites of the head chief of Ikotobo, the cattle offered to the "Manes" of the dead were laid out to the left of the throne upon which the corpse sat in state; while on the right, as if to balance the slaughtered sheep, which in this case were twenty in number, crouched the deceased's twenty wives with their children, all wailing and wringing their hands. But for the presence of the "white man," [*2] most, if not all, of these unfortunate women would have been sacrificed also and buried with their lord. Even as

[p. 231]

it was their fate was sad enough. They were painted over with black pigment and forced to go into mourning for six months, though in the case of lesser men the period is sometimes shortened to as little as seven days. During this time they were obliged to observe the strictest seclusion. On such occasions none is allowed to wash either body or clothes. They are even forbidden to stand at the door of their prison while rain is falling, lest a single drop should touch them and thus cleanse a fractional part of the body. During this time the wretched women exist under conditions too hideous for description. At the end of their seclusion the Egbo "images" come with attendants and drive them forth from the dead man's house, which is then broken down. Images and attendants bear sharp machets, with which they slash the arms of the terrified women, who run weeping to seek out former friends and beg them to bind up their wounds. After this they remain homeless until parcelled out among the heirs of the dead man.

The wives of even poor Ibibios must remain secluded for a week after their husband's burial. During this time they may wear no garment save a small loin cloth and a piece of goat's skin tied over the right hand. [*1] Before coming forth they are allowed to dress their hair, bathe and resume their customary garments. The first use they make of freedom is usually to go and pluck themselves boughs of ntung leaves, which they wave to and fro "to drive away the scent of the ghost," for Ibibios, like the ancient Babylonians, believe that ghosts have a very evil smell. Thus

[p. 232]

protected, the women approach the grave and lay upon it, folded into a small roll, the cloth and piece of skin which they have worn during the time of their seclusion. After this has been duly done they may return to their ordinary mode of life, mixing with their fellows and going to market as before.

In the neighbourhood of Awa when a chief fell sick his nearest kinsmen used to go to the Idiong priest and ask the cause of the illness. Should the oracle declare, as was usually the case, that this had been brought about in consequence of a wife's unfaithfulness, Idiong was next asked to point out the guilty woman. So soon as her name was pronounced she was called upon to confess and give the name of her lover. Should she refuse and as a result, according to general opinion, the husband died, the oracle was consulted once more, and, on the almost invariable pronouncement that the woman was guilty of the death, a meeting of the townsfolk was called to decide upon her fate. By ancient custom this might be meted out in two ways; either she was buried alive by the dead man's side, in place of a female slave usually sacrificed on such an occasion, or forced to sit above the grave. In the latter case a slender pole of hard wood was brought, sharpened to a fine point before the eyes of the wretched woman, and then driven into the skull, right through the body, and deep down into the earth, in such a manner as to impale her above the place of burial.

Before killing such victims the people used to gather round and order them to pronounce a blessing upon the town. "Make plenty piccans be born to

[p. 233]

us," they would cry; "plenty girls and plenty boys." Should the victim refuse to repeat the words they coaxed her, and said:

"If you will but speak this blessing we will let you go free."

Should she again refuse they beat her very cruelly, crying, "Now speak." If, despite the pain, she still refused, the "fearful Egbo" would come out--hideous beyond description--and threaten nameless tortures till she yielded.

In some rare cases the woman has still been known to hold out, as is also recorded of one or other of the slaves ordained by custom to share the grave of their lord, and from whom a like "blessing" was demanded. Under such circumstances the victims were never sacrificed, since to do so would have been to draw down a period of barrenness and poverty upon the town. Instead of killing such steadfast souls, therefore, they were sold into slavery, while a victim who could be forced or cajoled into pronouncing the necessary formula was offered instead.

It was of the utmost importance to the well-being of the spirits of parents in the Ghost Realm that a son should be left behind who would carry out the burial rites with all due observances. The straits to which good sons were sometimes put in order to make sure that the necessary ritual was performed are illustrated by the story of the sham burial of the mother of the head chief of Ikot Okudum--a town not far from Ubium Creek.

Many years ago when the present head chief, Etuk Udaw Akpan by name, was a young man, he

[p. 234]

was very strong and brave. For a certain reason his fellow-townsmen wanted to kill him. They tried their best, and set many snares, but lie always escaped them.

One day he went to visit the house of a friend in the Ubium country. His host prepared "chop" and set it before him, with palm wine and all things necessary for the refreshment of an honoured guest. During the meal his enemies heard that he was within, so they sent a message to the owner of the compound, saying:

"For a long time we have wanted to kill this man but could never catch him. We beg you, therefore, to give him into our hands, and in return we will pay you a great sum."

The host said, "I agree, provided the amount you offer is large enough!" So they brought much money, whereon he said, "It is good. Do to him what you will."

Then the people surrounded the house and fastened the doors of the encircling fence so that Etuk might not escape them. When all was ready they called:

"Come out. We wish to ask you a word." He, however, answered, "No. If you have anything to say, it can be said while I am within." The people replied, "You must come out." Then when they found that he would not do this, they tried to force in the door and fall upon him.

On that Etuk drew out a sharp machet which was hidden beneath his gown, and springing through the door shut it suddenly behind him, and stood facing his foes. So unexpected was his appearance, and so

[p. 235]

fierce his blows, that momentarily the people all gave way before him. At a glance he saw that the gates were barred, so, as he was an excellent climber, before anyone could stop him, he sprang upon the mud wall of the veranda and thence to the roof. Along this he rushed till he came to a place where the building was very near the fence, cleared this at a bound, and alighted safely on the other side. Then he ran for his life toward the bush, crying out, "If you want me, follow me now!"

It was some time before those within the enclosure could unbar the gate which they themselves had so carefully fastened, and by the time this was done Etuk had disappeared.

All day he hid, but after nightfall managed to reach his home unnoticed. There he said to his mother:

"To-day I went to a house in the Ubium country, whither the townsmen followed to kill me. I was very sorry for myself and also for you, because you are my mother and, unless I am killed, you will probably die before me. In that case it would be my duty to bury you. Now that they want to kill me so soon I fear that you may be left with no grown-up son to perform the rites for you, since my brothers are still very young. I think, therefore, it is best, while there is yet time, to call all the townsfolk together and do that which is proper for a son to do for a dead mother."

To this the woman answered, "Do as you say, for the people want to kill you, and leave me alone in the world with no one to bury me when my time shall come."

[p. 236]

Then Etuk sent one of his small brothers to summon the townsfolk. Goats, cows and much mimbo had been provided, together with everything necessary to do honour to a dead woman.

When all were assembled before the house Etuk said to his mother, "Go now and bathe." Then when the bath was finished he robed her as is done with a corpse. Afterwards he went outside and placed a chair for his mother, who sat thereon in the sight of all the people, as the dead are used to sit in state.

Next all the beasts were slaughtered, and Etuk Udaw took the blood and poured it out before the feet of his mother, as is customary for women who leave behind them a son of fitting age to carry out the burial rites. When this was finished he ordered the people to play the death play for his mother, and at the end bade her go back into the house while he addressed the company.

First he told them to keep silence for a while, and then asked:

"Do you know what I mean by dressing my mother like a dead woman and holding her burial rites while she is still alive?" They answered, "No, we cannot even guess, though we question much among our selves on this very matter." So he continued:

"You want to kill me, and should I die before her she would be left in the world without a son old enough to bury her properly when the time comes. Therefore I have done all this before you slay me, that everything may be performed in due order and she may not suffer in the Ghost Realm."

They answered, "We have drunk all this mimbo

[p. 237]

and eaten these sacrifices to no purpose as it appears! Never have we seen such a thing as this!" So they went away, much amazed. Nevertheless, from that time they left the man in peace, and did not strive to harm him as they had before.

Not long afterwards one of the small brothers fell ill, so Etuk went to the Idiong man and asked the reason. The diviner consulted the oracle, and replied:

"It is because you have carried out the death rites of your mother, and the evil spirits grow impatient, watching for her to die. As she has not yet reached the ghost town, they are trying to take one of your young brothers."

On hearing this, Etuk went home and bought many medicines, he also offered sacrifices to save the boy, but in spite of all that was done the little one died.

The mother herself lived for many, many years. Indeed, it is only about four years since she went to the ghost town, but the son still lives, and has become head chief over all those who formerly wished to kill him, and he now sits as a "member," judging cases in the Eket Native Court.

Footnotes

^230:1 A full description of the obsequies of Iboibo chiefs will be found in my husband's book, "By Haunted Waters." Only so much as directly concerns the women is attempted here.

^230:2 Mr. W. W. Eakin, of the Kwa Ibo Mission.

^231:1 We could learn no reason for this last, seemingly inconsequent, tabu.

Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People, by D. Amaury Talbot, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 238]

 

L'ENVOI

 Degema, Nigeria.
 June, 1911    

SUCH, from cradle to grave, is the life story of an Ibibio woman, so far as those of her people were willing to confide it to one of an alien race. It is naturally a matter of regret that, owing to the fear of being blamed by their kin for having imparted so much information to a stranger, hardly one of my informants would allow her name to be given as authority for any statement here set down. When, however, men and women can be brought to grasp the fact, to which some natives with more than a veneer of education are gradually awakening, that Africans have a great deal more to win than lose by placing on record old customs and beliefs before these are overwhelmed by the oncoming waves of alien religion and culture, the greatest stumbling-block will have been removed from the path of inquirers. It is true that there is much of barbarity and hideous cruelty in these ancient ceremonies, which the civilised negro would fain hide from the knowledge of white races, but it is doubtful whether there is anything more terrible to be disclosed concerning the fetish rites of West Africa than those known to have been practised in the early stages of all the great religions of the world, as witness Egyptian

[p. 239]

and Babylonian bas-reliefs. Yet, side by side with much that will be found revolting to twentieth century ideas, there yet remain traces of traditions and beliefs of a depth and value to which northern races are only just awakening.

Again, at the present day, whether we sympathise with or decry the feminist movement, the fact remains that, for good or ill, a spirit of restlessness has swept over the women of the world. A stirring and quickening has come to them, rousing a consciousness of power long latent which, rightly directed, may suffice to destroy pitfalls and sweep clean those foul places which now surround the path of the poor and weak, but which, wrongly guided, might lead along unlovely roads to sex antagonism and barren hate. The condition of many an African tribe of to-day is in all essentials the same as that through which we ourselves once passed in long-forgotten ages. Surely then, on whichever side we stand in the vexed question of the hour, [*1] it is well for us to look back now and again and watch how primitive woman held her own, or learn what yet remains to be gleaned of the stages by which she rose to dominion over, or sank to serfdom beneath, the men of her day.

While re-reading these pages before sending them to press, news came that two women, splendidly trained and equipped, have set out to do, in another quarter of the globe, what is so inadequately attempted here. Perhaps, later on, others as well fitted as they

[p. 240]

may be induced to turn their attention to the women of Africa.

To my critics I would say that the first steps along a road, which to a certain extent at least has hitherto remained untrodden, are necessarily difficult and uncertain, and that only the intense interest which such a study has for us and the more than kindness of those whose opinion we so greatly value has emboldened me, in default of one more fitted, to attempt even so inadequate an account of these primitive women.

Perhaps a few words on another subject may be permitted here. A recent visitor to the coast wrote on her return reproaching her countrymen because so few English officials take their wives to West Africa, while many French and Germans do so. In discussing the matter with a German acquaintance on one of the boats, she quotes him as saying, apropos of the presence of white women, "It is only the English who fear the rains"--and herself adds in comment, "I deplored, though I could not resent, the slight touch of contempt in his tone."

Had this gifted authoress been aware of the true state of the case, and known how many men fruitlessly apply year after year for permission to bring their wives, she could have removed a misapprehension from the mind of her fellow-traveller, and would herself have had nothing to deplore on this score with regard to her countrymen save their misfortune in being deprived of those whose companionship they eagerly desire. Of one other point she, in common with the general public, also seemed unaware. The German

[p. 241]

and French Governments, recognising the fact that the presence of white women in their colonies does more than anything else to destroy abuses, raise the standard of morals, and make men contented with their lot, defray the cost of the voyage for the wife of every official, while the whole expense, averaging some seventy pounds per tour, must be borne by the Englishman, who, when all things are taken into account, is no more highly paid than his brother officials across the border.

It is, of course, true that many women are unsuited for the hardships of life out here. Some, too, might possibly hinder work, either by seeking to interfere in so-called "government palavers" which by no means concern them, or by holding back their husbands from that constant travelling which alone makes possible efficient supervision in countries such as these. For an official the interests of Government should naturally come before all others, but it would be easy enough for the authorities to judge, from travelling returns and district reports, whether, in any case, the presence of a wife had resulted in a falling off in efficiency, and those women deemed undesirable could be forbidden to return.

On behalf of my sister and myself I would venture to express thanks to Government for having allowed us, during nearly six years, to accompany my husband on all his journeyings. The conditions under which administration is carried on in countries such as this can hardly be grasped at home. In the chief towns it is true that, save for the unhealthiness of the climate, the state of affairs would not seem so much harder

[p. 242]

than in England; but in disturbed districts and at bush stations, where adequate supervision often entails ten to twelve hours work a day for long stretches, with the thermometer at a temperature of 80 degrees to 90 degrees, interspersed with marches varying from twelve to twenty miles per them in a downpour almost constant for nearly half the year, things wear a very different aspect. Under these conditions it is impossible for the overworked officials to give time to seemingly insignificant matters which are, however, so important in a climate such as this, i.e. variety of diet, food values, airing of garments, and, above all, the filtering of water. Were the restrictions now placed on the coming of wives removed, I venture to think it would do more than anything else to decrease the death toll and improve the standard of health in the tropics.

It was lately remarked to me by a woman of high rank in the colony, "Out here one hardly ever hears a man complain as to the worries and hardships of his lot." Difficulties are made light of and anxieties borne in silence, while on every hand one sees examples of devotion to duty not the less heroic because unrecorded, and a gay-hearted courage which is beyond all praise. Few even among the great Elizabethans took more terrible risks than are borne every day by one or other of these quiet men whose names are seldom or never heard in England. Yet, when in carrying out orders they meet a cruel death, as only too often happens, or still more frequently are invalided home, ruined in health by the hardship of life out here, scarcely a word of praise or thanks is accorded them.

At the present time, Nigeria is fortunate in the

[p. 243]

presence of a woman whose goodness, charm and broad sympathies are gratefully acknowledged by all who have the privilege of meeting her. Could but a few more such be attracted to the colony conditions would indeed soon show a vast improvement.

Footnotes

^239:1 A matter of much interest at the time of writing, but now relegated to the half-forgotten things of yesterday by the cataclysm which burst upon the world in August, 1914.

In conclusion, I would venture to add that, to the great anthropologists at home and to those highly placed officials who have given encouragement so unstinted, as also to the one whose selflessness made possible the writing of this little record, I have no words in which to express my grateful thanks. Had the idea been earlier suggested, or had it been possible before beginning to gather information concerning the women dealt with in these pages, to have had the advice of those scientists who on our return so generously devoted time and trouble to pointing out the best lines on which to carry out such a study, this little account would naturally have been of far greater value. We can only hope that--better equipped as we now are for further investigations, through the teaching and advice so more than kindly expended upon us--we may have the opportunity of undertaking fresh inquiries as to the women of other Nigerian tribes.




===== BOOK: wos.txt =====


    
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

SELECT WORKS OF SRI SANKARACHARYA

  

Samskrit Text and English Translation

  

Translated By S. Venkataramanan

  

Madras: G. A. Natesan

  

[1921]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, December 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

  

PREFACE.

THE main object of this publication is to present, in simple English, some of the works of Sri Sankaracharya in which he tried to expound, in a popular style, the philosophy of the non-dualistic Vedanta of which he was the well-known founder. With this view the present translation has been rendered free of technical words and phrases, and, in some instances, literal and technical accuracy has been purposely sacrificed in order to make the translation readable and comprehensible by itself independently of the text. It is however hoped that the juxtaposition of the Samskrit text and the English translation will serve the double object of enabling the student of Samskrit to understand the text better and to correct, by a reference to the text, any defect of expression in the translation as an inevitable result of the attempt to garb it in a popular style. To those that have had no training in metaphysics or dialectics and have neither the leisure nor the capacity to read the original standard works of Sankara,--mostly elaborate commentaries on the Vedanta aphorisms, the Bhagavad-gita and the Upanishads--a publication of this kind should be specially helpful for a proper understanding of the broad outline of Sankara's philosophy of non-dualism. The main feature of that philosophy, as will be apparent from a study of the following pages, may be summed up very briefly as follows.

[p. ii]

[paragraph continues] Samsara or phenomenal existence, whose mar factor is the bondage of births and deaths it succession, is unreal and is the result of illusion.--the ignorance by which the only and absolute reality, the Supreme Self, is mistaken for the unreal world, in the same way as a rope may be mistaken for a serpent in the dusk of the evening. Both bondage and liberation are thus illusory, for, since there is no real bondage at all, how can there be a liberation from it? Yet, liberation or moksha is relatively spoken of and can only result from a thorough knowledge of the reality behind and beyond and underneath and within the unreal. Sankara emphasises the fact that such knowledge is not a mere theoretical one which can be gathered from books or lectures, but is of the nature of direct realisation or actual experience. The sole source of this knowledge is a clear and accurate understanding of the Vedic text "That thou art," but, however much one may analyse its meaning by means of his own reason or with the aid of commentaries, the direct realisation of the self cannot take place unless the Vedic text in question reaches the student through the mouth of a spiritual teacher (the guru). It is then, and only then, that the disciple realises in a flash, as it were, "I am Brahman," the individual soul is seen, at all times and in all conditions, to be identical with the Supreme Self, and the knowledge springs up that all this is indeed the Self and there is naught but the Self. This is the highest goal of spiritual endeavour, the moksha or liberation of the

[p. iii]

[paragraph continues] Vedanta philosophy. Further detail would be out of place in a short preface of this kind, but the translator feels bound to call attention to one very prominent teaching of Sankara which will be evident from a perusal of the present publication,--namely, that devotion to a personal God (Saguna-Brahman) is not inconsistent with the true Vedanta philosophy, but, on the other hand, spiritual perfection or liberation is impossible without the grace of God attainable by devotion and the grace of the Master (guru) who alone can reveal the true nature of the Self to the ardent aspirant for the Absolute that is beyond all word and thought.

THE TRANSLATOR.

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS.

           

       PAGES.

     
      HYMN TO HARI

       <page 1>

     
      THE TEN-VERSED HYMN

       <page 26>

     
      HYMN TO DAKSHINAMURTI

       <page 32>

     
      DIRECT REALISATION

       <page 39>

     
      THE CENTURY OF VERSES

       <page 85>

     
      KNOWLEDGE OF SELF

       <page 160>

     
      COMMENTARY ON THE TEXT

       <page 183>

     
      DEFINITION OF ONE'S OWN SELF

       <page 199>

     
   
     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

SELECT WORKS

  

OF

  

Sri Sankaracharya

  

Hymn to Hari.

I praise, with devotion, the All-pervading (Vishnu), Who, Himself without origin, is the origin of the universe, in Whom this wheel of samsara [**] revolves in this wise, and, on realising Whom, this wheel of samsara is destroyed--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (1)

[p. 2]

Him, from a single aspect of Whom this whole universe has sprung into existence, by Whom again it is held together in this manner, by Whom it is pervaded, and by Whom it is illumined through pleasure and pain,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (2)

Him, Who is all-knowing, Who is indeed all and perfect, Who is bliss itself, Who resides in the qualities [**] and has therefore endless attributes, Who is the Unmanifest that differentiates the undifferentiated, and Who is both the real

[p. 3]

and the unreal,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (3)

There is naught else than Him; yet, this universe is not his real nature. He is not the objective world, for He is of the nature of nonobjective consciousness. And though He is devoid of the distinction of the knower, knowledge and the known, He is nevertheless always the knower,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (4)

Him Who is realised as the Supreme Lord by those who, having learnt from proper preceptors the extremely subtle nature of the

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] Immutable, are engaged in the contemplation of the ultimate Unity with the help of renunciation, constant meditation and firm devotion,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (5)

Him Who is realised as "I am the self-resplendent Self" when, by the control of the life-forces, the mind is confined within the heart amidst the repetition of the sound Om and, all other memory being excluded, is merged therein and is finally dissolved,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (6)

[p. 5]

Him Whom the knowers of Brahman realise by meditation as the Supreme Lord within themselves known as Brahman, as the second-less, infinite, unborn, subtle, inscrutable Resplendence residing in the heart and attainable only by devotees,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (7)

Him Who is understood as the unsurpassable bliss realisable only by the spirit by those who perceive within their own hearts That which is beyond the senses, being realisable only by the expansion of the individual self, and beyond the cognisable, being cognition itself,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (8)

[p. 6]

Him Whom, the Unborn, sages like Sanaka meditate upon by understanding that every object of perception has an underlying reality and is identical with Brahman and by realising "I am That",--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (9)

Him Whom the knowers of the SELF know as the Supreme Lord "in whom I am" by eliminating as not-I whatever is perceptible, and by realising that bliss which is self- resplendent consciousness,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (10)

[p. 7]

Him in Whom the devotees of the Immutable, forsaking their bodies, merge themselves by realising Him as the pure self-resplendent SELF, infinite like space, as That which alone remains when all that is cognisable and differentiated is eliminated step by step,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (11)

Him Who is in all, Whose body is this all, and yet Who is not this all, Who knows all, but Whom none knows at all, and Who, as stated above, holds all this together, being the inner spirit thereof,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (12)

[p. 8]

Him Who is realised as "I am the One that is the All" by those who see, by their reason, all this universe as existing within themselves and their own self as the Unborn residing in the heart of all beings,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (13)

Him Who is described by some as the One in all beings that sees and smells and tastes and touches and hears and knows, and by others as the witness that is the seer in all doers,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (14)

[p. 9]

Him Who is realised as the Supreme Lord, the SELF that is the knower of objects, Who sees and hears and tastes and smells and knows and holds this body together as the individual self therein,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (15)

He Who sees objects of gross matter in the waking state, illusion in dream, and blissful repose in deep sleep and Himself in the fourth state and is happy,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (16)

[p. 10]

Him Who, though pure, imperishable, one and unborn, nevertheless imposes upon Himself [**] different qualities and different shapes and, like a crystal [*+], shines variegated, differentiated and hidden by the fruits of action--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (17)

Him Who is the one Reality, but Who owing to the diversity of intellects, is conventionally spoken of in various ways as Brahman, Vishnu, Rudra, Fire, the Sun, the Moon, Indra, Vayu (the God of Wind), and sacrifice,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (18)

[p. 11]

Him, the Unborn, Whom, at the beginning of the Taittiriya-Upanishad, Varuna explained to Bhrigu [**] as being uncontradictable, conscious,. pure, imperishable, transcendental, unperturbed, unperceivable, without parts, blissful, and without a second,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (19),

Him Whom, as stated at the end of the Taittiriya-Upanishad, Bhrigu, taught by his father, realised as the witness in everything after having determined within. himself "I am

[p. 12]

the Brahman beyond these five sheaths of taste, etc. [**]",--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (20)

Him by Whose inspiration, by Whose power, [*+] and on Whom depending, the knower of the field [*++] directs the active principle in all creatures, and by Whose power [***] is impelled the self that is the doer and enjoyer in this world,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (21)

[p. 13]

Him, the one Supreme SELF, Who created all this indescribable universe and Who fully permeates every part of that creation, being identical therewith, and thus becomes all that is manifest and unmanifest,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (22)

Him Whom, by the help of the Vedantas, the sciences treating of the self, the Puranas, the cults of Vishnu-worship and other sciences, many have realised as the Supreme Lord within their own selves and, knowing thus, have merged themselves into Him,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (23)

[p. 14]

Him, the resplendent Lord, Who is speedily realisable even in this world by those who strive to seek him by means of faith, devotion, meditation, self-control and other expedients, but Who is hard to realise even through hundreds of lives for those who are devoid of those expedients,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (24)

Him, the indescribable glory . of Whose manifestation has been defined by the Vedic seers in the passage "All this indeed is Brahman", that is, all this, being born of Him, being in Him and dissolving in Him, is identical with Him, like the waves of the ocean,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (25)

[p. 15]

Him Who is realised by intense devotion as the unborn and indestructible principle, the pure intelligence residing as Witness in the heart, and by meditating "I am in Him", as taught in the Gita and in the manner laid down therein,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (26)

Him, the Infinite, Who, assuming the condition of the individual self and dwelling in nature, incessantly enjoys the objects of enjoyment through the five gateways of the senses, and Who, though one, appears as different in different bodies like the moon reflected in the

[p. 16]

waters,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (27)

Him Who is named Purusha and Who is realised, even in this world, as "He who is I is that Supreme Lord and I am verily He" by those who intelligently investigate the teachings of Vyasa [**] and understand the distinction between the field and the knower of the field, [*+]--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (28)

[p. 17]

Him, the conscious principle residing in innumerable bodies, Whose oneness realising, men speedily become Himself in this very life, and; in Whom merged, they come no more to birth in this world,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (29)

Him Who is realised as "He that is the Supreme Lord is I and I am verily He" by those who understand the unity in duality taught by the passages of the Madhu-Brahmana [**] and attain a supremacy that exacts veneration even at the hands of Indra,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (30)

[p. 18]

Him Who is realised as the Supreme Lord by those who meditate on the unity of the SELF, as "He that, dwelling in the mind, impels the body to action, He too that, residing in the sun, causes him to -radiate heat, I am verily He,"--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (31)

Him, the ultimate reality, a spark of Whose consciousness reflected in nature [**] cognises the objects of cognition outside the mind, but does not cognise Him that dwells within the mind and inspires the cognition,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (32)

[p. 19]

Him Who is realised as "I am that conscious principle in this body" by those who intelligently enquire "Who is this Shining One in the body?" and determine that this Shining One is indeed the knower, the hearer and the thinker,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (33)

Who indeed can live, if He do not reside in the body? He alone, therefore, is the Supreme Bliss and He is the incoming and outgoing life. By such reasoning does the Scripture [**] declare that He is,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (34)

[p. 20]

"Am I the vital energy [**]? Or speech? Or the senses of hearing etc? Or the mind [*+]? Or the intellect? [*++] Am I a particular entity or the collective whole?" Him Who, by thus meditating, is realised as "I am the conscious principle in this body",--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (35)

Him Who is realised as "I am not the vital energy [**], nor the body, nor the mind [*+], nor the intellect [*++], nor the ego [* section], nor the understanding [***], but am verily He that is the

[p. 21]

conscious principle in this body,"--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (36)

Him Whom, in the Upanishad of the Samaveda [**], the father [*+] explains to his son [*++] as pure existence, pure consciousness, the unborn, the real, the transcendental, the eternal, the infinite, the first cause, and by declaring "That thou art",--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (37)

Him Who is realised as the ultimate reality by those who, through perfect absorption of

[p. 22]

thought [**], attain to the knowledge of the conscious principle within themselves by first excluding all conditioned and unconditioned existence and then eliminating all that is perceptible as "Not this" "Not this,"--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (38)

Him Who is the warp and woof of the web of this universe including the undifferentiated ether, Who is established under the designation of the Indestructible in such passages as "It is not gross, It is not atomic etc.", Who can only be understood as "There is no knower but He", but Who is not the object of cognition,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (39)

[p. 23]

Him, the Knower, without realising Whom within one's self as "I am He", all this appears as real, but, Who being realised, all this becomes unreal,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (40)

Him Who is realised as the consciousness that ultimately remains when the self that is not free from impurity is burnt in the fire of knowledge. kindled by eightfold Yoga [**], like gold alloyed with iron in the furnace,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (41)

[p. 24]

Him Who is the resplendent light of consciousness, the first cause, the praiseworthy, Who shines like lightning within the heart amidst the spheres of the sun, moon and fire, [**] in Whom the sages, worshipping Him with devotion as the ultimate reality within their own selves, merge themselves even in this life,--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (42)

May He, the all-pervading (Vishnu), protect this devotee who is an individual self [*+] existing

[p. 25]

in Himself, considering "This devotee praises Me Who am the essence of all organs with constant devotion and single-mindedness and withdrawing himself within his own self"--that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of samsara, I praise. (43)

He who recites or hears this. hymn of the venerable teacher, valuable to devotees and resembling the sun in dispelling the darkness of the fear of samsara, attains the state of the All-pervading (Vishnu) and; becoming a seer, realises both knowledge and the object of knowledge [**] within himself. (44)

Thus ends the hymn to Hari.

_________

Footnotes

^1:* Phenomenal existence; the succession of births and deaths.

^2:* Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.

^10:* Lit: Sees.

^10:+ Reflecting external colours.

^11:* Son of Varuna.

^12:* The five kosas, namely, annamaya, pranamaya, manomaya, vijnanamaya and anandamaya.

^12:+ Maya-sakti, the power of illusion.

^12:++ Kshetrajna, the individual conscious self.

^12:** Chit-sakti, the power of intelligence.

^16:* The Brahma-Sutras of Vyasa.

^16:+ Kshetra, the field or the body, and Kshetrajna, the knower of the field or the individual self.

^17:* Brih. Up., II. 5.

^18:* I.e., the individual self.

^19:* The Taittiriya-Upanishad.

^20:* Prana.

^20:+ Manas.

^20:++ Buddhi.

^20: section Ahankara.

^20:** Dhi.

^21:* Chhandogya-Upanishad.

^21:+ Uddalaka.

^21:++ Svetaketu.

^22:* Samadhi.

^23:* Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi.

^24:* This is a technicality of the higher Yoga.

^24:+ Purusha.

^25:* The Supreme Being

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

The Ten-versed Hymn.

I am neither earth, nor water, nor fire, nor air, nor ether, nor sensory organ, nor the conglomeration of all these; for, all these are transient. I am He that alone remains in deep sleep, the secondless, uncontradictable [**] attributeless Bliss (Siva). (1)

I am neither castes, nor the rules of caste, society and custom, nor for me are concentration,

[p. 27]

meditation, Yoga and other practices; for, all this illusion of "I" and "mine" is-rooted in the not-self and is therefore dispellable by the knowledge of the self. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable, attributeless Bliss (Siva). (2)

I am neither mother, nor father, nor the gods, nor the worlds, nor the Vedas, nor sacrifices, nor any holy place; for, in deep sleep I am [identical with Brahman which however is] not absolute non-existence. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable attributeless Bliss (Siva). (3)

[p. 28]

Neither the Sankhya doctrine, nor the Saiva, nor the Pancharatra, not the Jaina, nor the Mimamsaka, nor any other, holds good. For, by special realisation it is revealed that my nature is absolutely pure. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable. attributeless Bliss (Siva). (4)

I am neither above, nor below, nor inside, nor outside, nor middle, nor across, nor before, nor behind; for I am indivisible and one by nature and am all-pervading like space. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable, attributeless Bliss (Siva). (5)

[p. 29]

I am neither white, nor black, nor red, nor yellow, nor bent, nor stout, nor short, nor tall, nor even formless; for, I am of the nature of self-resplendent consciousness. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable, attributeless Bliss (Siva). (6)

There is neither teacher, nor science, nor pupil, nor teaching, nor you (the hearer), nor I (the speaker), nor this empirical universe; for, I am the consciousness of the reality, which does not admit of differentiation. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable, attributeless Bliss (Siva). (7)

[p. 30]

For me there is neither waking nor dream nor deep sleep, nor am I the self conditioned by any of these three states (visva, taijasa or prajna); for, all these are of the nature of nescience, but I am the fourth beyond these three. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable, attributeless Bliss (Siva). (8)

All this universe, being other than the SELF, is unreal; for, the SELF alone is all-inclusive, constitutes the ultimate goal and is self-established and self-dependent. I am therefore the secondless, uncontradictable, attributeless Bliss (Siva). (9)

[p. 31]

It cannot even be said that It is One. How then can there be a second, other than That? There is neither absoluteness nor non-absoluteness, neither non-entity nor entity; for It is absolutely non-dual in Its nature. How then can I describe That which is established by all the Vedantas!

Thus ends the ten-versed hymn.

______

Footnotes

^26:* Lit. the ultimate remnant.

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

Hymn to Dakshinamurti.

Who, by virtue of the illusion residing in the self, sees, as in a dream, the universe as existing outside Himself although (more truly) it exists within Himself like the reflection of a city in a mirror, but Who, at the time of the awakening, sees naught but His own secondless self,--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (1)

[p. 33]

Who, like a magician or like a yogi, manifests, by His own will, this universe which at the beginning was undifferentiated like the sprout latent in the seed but which subsequently became differentiated under the various conditions of space and time induced by illusion,--to that Teacher incarnate, [**] the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (2)

Whose light alone that is the reality shines in things that resemble non-entities [**]; Who directly awakens His devotees by means of the Vedic sentence "That thou art"; and Who being realised, there is no more coming hack in this ocean of Samsara,--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (3)

[p. 34]

Whose consciousness flows out through the eye and other senses like the light of a big lamp placed inside a jar with many holes, and (thus) this whole universe shines solely because He shines, namely, by the consciousness "I know,"--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (4)

Deluded persons who talk much, but who are as ignorant as women and children, the blind and the stupid, understand, as the "I," the body, or the breath, or the senses, or the ever-newly-springing knowledge [**], or non-entity.

[p. 35]

[paragraph continues] To Him who dispels this great ignorance induced by the expansive power of illusion [**],--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (5)

Who is the inner self which, under the veil of illusion, like the sun or the moon eclipsed, merely exists [*+] in deep sleep owing to the withdrawal of the senses, but which when He wakes, is recognised by Him as "I have slept",--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (6)

[p. 36]

Who reveals to His devotees, by means of the blessed symbol, [**] His own self which, for ever, shines within as the "I" unchanging through all the changing states of childhood, youth and old age, waking, dream and sleep, etc.,--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (7)

Who is the supreme self that, dreaming or waking, under the sway of illusion, sees the universe under various distinctions such as that of cause and effect, owner and owned, pupil and teacher, father and son,--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (8)

[p. 37]

Whose eightfold form alone, namely, earth, water, fire, air; ether, sun, moon and soul, manifests itself as this sentient and non-sentient universe; than Whom, supreme and infinite, naught else is perceived by the seekers of reality,--to that Teacher incarnate, the Lord facing the south, be this bow. (9)

Since, in this hymn, the identity of the self with the universe has been made clear, by listening to it, by understanding its meaning, by meditating on it, and by teaching it to others, one will acquire the supreme faculty of  with the universe, together with

[p. 38]

the overlordship of nature and the eightfold divine faculty. [**] (10)

 

 

Thus ends the hymn to Dakshinamurti.

____

Footnotes

^33:* Because they have no reality of their own. The self is the only reality and all else is illusory.

^34:* The reference is to a certain school of Buddhists.

^35:* Maya.

^35:+ Since knowledge is latent in sleep.

^36:* The jnana-mudra, in which the thumb and the fore-finger are formed into a ring.

^38:*
 .

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

Direct Realisation.

I bow to that Sri Hari (Vishnu), the infinite bliss, the Teacher, the Supreme Lord, all-pervading, the prime-cause of all the worlds. (1)

Direct realisation is herein expounded as a means to liberation. It should be studied, again and again, with great effort, only by the wise. (2)

By following the duties of one's own caste and order, by asceticism and by the propitiation of Hari, men will gain the four-fold requisite of freedom from desires, etc. (3)

[p. 40]

Spotless freedom from desires means such a dissatisfaction in respect of all objects from Brahman down to the inanimate as is felt in respect of the excrement of a crow. (4)

Discrimination of the real means the determination that the nature of the self is eternal while, all that is perceptible is otherwise (5)

The constant eradication of mental impressions is called control of mind. The restraint of external activities is called control of body. (6)

[p. 41]

Extreme abstention is the turning away from the objects of enjoyment. The endurance of all kinds of pain is called resignation, which is beneficial. (7)

Devoted belief in the sayings of the Veda and of the teacher is called faith. The concentration of the mind on the reality that is the ultimate goal is called balance. (8)

Desire for liberation is the name given to the intense thought "How and when, O Lord, shall liberation from the bonds of samsara come to me?" (9)

Whosoever desires his own welfare should, after acquiring the above-mentioned qualifications,

[p. 42]

commence the enquiry with a view to the attainment of knowledge. (10)

Knowledge cannot spring up by any other means than enquiry, just as the perception of things is impossible without light. (11)

"Who am I? How was this (universe) born? Who is its maker? What is its material cause?" This is the kind of enquiry referred to above. (12)

"I am not the body which is a mere conglomeration of the elements, nor am I the group of the senses, but am something different from all these." This is the kind of enquiry referred to above. (13)

[p. 43]

"All this (universe) has its origin in ignorance and is dissolved by knowledge. Desire, in its various aspects, is the mainspring of all action." This is the kind of enquiry referred to above. (14)

"The prime cause of both these (viz., ignorance and desire) is the one, subtle and immutable Reality [**], even as the clay is the prime cause of the earthen vessel etc." This is the kind of enquiry referred to above. (15)

"I too am the one, subtle, and immutable Reality, the knower, the witness. I am That, without doubt." This is the kind of enquiry referred to above. (16)

[p. 44]

The self is without parts and without a second; but the body is comprised of many parts. And yet they identify the two. Can any ignorance be worse than this? (17)

The self is the ruler and subjective; the body is the ruled and objective. And yet they identify the two. Can any ignorance be worse than this? (18)

The self is of the nature of knowledge and pure; the body consists of flesh and is impure. And yet they identify the two. Can any ignorance be worse than this? (19)

[p. 45]

The self is that which illuminates and is absolutely pure; the body is inert. [**] And yet they identify the two. Can any ignorance be worse than this? (20)

The self is eternal and real by nature; the body is transient and unreal. And yet they identify the two. Can any ignorance be worse than this? (21)

The resplendence of the self consists in its making all things cognisable. Its shining is not like that of fire etc., for, there is darkness at night (in spite of their presence in one place). (22)

[p. 46]

He who thinks "I am the body" remains, alas! in ignorance, as also he who thinks "this body is mine", as if he were always looking at an earthen vessel belonging to him. (23)

"I am indeed Brahman, without difference, without change, and of the nature of reality, knowledge and bliss. I am not, therefore, the body which is unreal." This is what the wise call knowledge. (24)

"I am without change, without form, without blemish and without decay. I am not, therefore, the body which is unreal." This is what the wise call knowledge. (25)

"I am without disease, without appearances, without alternatives, and all-pervading. I am

[p. 47]

not, therefore, the body which is unreal." This is what the wise call knowledge. (26)

"I am without attribute, without action, eternal, eternally free, and imperishable. I am not, therefore, the body which is unreal." This is what the wise call knowledge. (27)

"I am stainless, without motion, without end, pure, and devoid of old age and death. I am not, therefore, the body which is unreal." This is what the wise call knowledge (28)

Why, fool, dost thou imagine to be an absolute void the self which is different from the body but which resides even in your body as the informing spirit [**] auspicious, real, accepted by all? (29)

[p. 48]

Fool, learn from the Veda and by reasoning the nature of thy own self which is the informing spirit beyond the body, absolutely real by nature and utterly incomprehensible by men like you. (30)

That which is denoted by the word "I" for ever remains sole and transcendental. That which is gross, on the other hand, undergoes multiplicity. How then can the body be the self? (31)

The "I" is assuredly the perceiver and the body the perceived, as is evident from the expression "this body is mine". How then can the body be the self?

[p. 49]

It is a matter of direct experience that the "I" is devoid of change, whereas the body is undergoing incessant change. How then can the body be the self? (33)

The wise have ascertained the exact nature of the self from the Vedic passage "Than whom there is naught higher, etc." [**] How then can the body be the self? (34)

It is further declared by the Veda in the Purusha-sukta that all this universe is verily

[p. 50]

the self. How then can the body be the self? (35)

Further, it is declared in the Brihadarnyaka-upanishad that the self is incontaminable. How then can the body, contaminated by numberless impurities, be the self? (36)

In that same upanishad it is declared that the self is indeed self-resplendent. How then can the body, inert and requiring to be illuminated by another, be the self? (37)

Even the ritual portion of the Veda declares that the self, distinct from the body and eternal, enjoys the fruits of ritual after the demise of the body. (38)

[p. 51]

Even the subtle body [**], composed of many parts, Unstable, objective, mutable, finite, and unreal,--how can it be the self? (39)

The self is thus distinct from both the gross and the subtle bodies. It is the informing Spirit, the Supreme Lord, the soul of all, identical with all, beyond all, the "I", the immutable. (40)

(Says the opponent.) By the above distinction between the self and the body, it only follows that the manifested world is real, as declared by the science of logic. [*+] Your aim therefore fails. (41)

[p. 52]

(This is the answer.) By the above distinction between the self and the body, the identification of the body with the self has alone been refuted. The unreality of the body as a separate entity will now be clearly explained. (42)

Since Consciousness is one by nature, no distinction is admissible under any circumstances. Even the condition of the individual soul must be understood to be unreal, like the apprehension of a serpent in a rope. (43)

As the rope, in consequence of one's ignorance of it, appears in an instant as a serpent,

[p. 53]

so does consciousness, which is ever pure, manifest itself as the universe. (44)

There can be no other material cause of the universe than Brahman. All this universe, therefore, is only Brahman and naught else. (45)

The distinction of the pervader and the pervaded is unreal by reason of the declaration "The Self is all." If the highest truth is thus understood, how can there be room for difference? (46)

Indeed, multiplicity is directly contradicted by the Veda. [**] How can there be any manifestation

[p. 54]

different from the one (secondless) cause. (47)

The Veda has also pointed out the evil consequence, namely, that the man who, duped by illusion, perceives  in this world, passes on from death to death. [**] (48)

All creatures are born of Brahman, the Supreme Self. One should therefore understand. that all these are Brahman itself. (49)

The Veda has declared that Brahman alone assumes all names, all forms and all activities. (50)

[p. 55]

Whatever is made of gold retains for ever the nature of gold. So, too, all that is born of Brahman is of the nature of Brahman. (51)

The Veda has declared that the ignorant man who rests content with making the slightest distinction between the individual soul and the Supreme Self is exposed to danger. (52)

Where there is duality by virtue of ignorance one sees all things as distinct from the self. When everything is seen as the self, then there is not even an atom other than the self. (53)

[p. 56]

For him who has realised that all beings are the self, there is neither delusion nor misery, since there is no second. (54)

It has been established in a. passage of the Brihadaranyaka that this self is Brahman itself which is everything. (55)

This world, although it is the object of experience and of phenomenal treatment, is yet unreal like a dream, because it is followed by contradiction. [**] (56)

A dream becomes unreal in the waking state; nor does the waking state exist in dream. Both dream and waking are absent in sleep,

[p. 57]

and sleep too is absent in dream and in waking. (57)

Thus all the three states are unreal, being produced by the three . [**] The Eternal is the witness of these three states, beyond the three , the One that is pure consciousness. (58)

Just as one sees not the separate existence of the pot when he knows that it is clay, or the illusive existence of silver when he knows that it is mother-of-pearl, so too does one see not the condition of the individual soul when he knows Brahman. (59)

Just as a pot is only a name of clay, an ear-ring of gold, or the (illusive) silver of

[p. 58]

mother-of-pearl, so too is the individual foul a name of the supreme. (60)

Like the blueness in the sky, like the mirage in the desert and like the illusive appearance of a person in a post, so is the universe in Brahman. (61)

Like a ghost in vacant space, like a city of the celestials [**] and like two moons in the sky, so is the existence of the world in Brahman. (62)

Just as it is water alone that appears as waves and tides, and copper alone as vessels, so

[p. 59]

does the self alone appear as many universes. (63)

As the clay alone appears under the name of pot, as the threads appear under the name of cloth, so does Brahman appear under the name of the world. It (Brahman) should, therefore, be realised by the elimination of name. (64)

All phenomenal life is possible for men only by virtue of Brahman, just as the pot is possible only by virtue of clay. But men do not understand it thus, owing to ignorance. (65)

[p. 60]

Just as the relation of effect and cause always subsists between the pot and clay, so does the same relation subsist between the world and Brahman. This is known both from the Vedas and by reasoning. (66)

Just as, when the pot is being seen, it is the clay that is seen ipso facto, so too when the world is being seen, it is only the self-resplendent Brahman that is seen. (67)

The self always shines as unconditioned for the wise and always as conditioned for the ignorant, just as the rope appears in two ways. [**] (68)

[p. 61]

Just as the pot consists of clay, so does even the body consist of the self. This distinction between the self and the not-self is therefore unnecessary for the wise. (69)

As a rope is perceived as a serpent, or the mother-of-pearl as silver, so too is the self understood as the body by the utterly ignorant. (70)

As clay is perceived as a pot, as threads are perceived as a cloth, so too is the self understood as the body by the utterly ignorant. (71)

As gold is perceived as an ear-ring or water as a wave, so too is the self understood as the body by the utterly ignorant. (72)

[p. 62]

As a post is perceived as a thief or the mirage as water, so too is the self understood as the body by the utterly ignorant. (73)

As pieces of wood are perceived as a house or as steel is perceived as a sword, so too is the self understood as the body by the utterly ignorant. (74)

Just as trees are seen by one as topsy-turvy by reflection in water, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (75)

[p. 63]

For the person who is going in a boat, everything appears to be in motion, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (76)

Just as some one with a faulty vision sees a white thing as yellow, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (77)

Just as, when the eyes are dizzy, everything appears as wandering, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (78)

Just as a firebrand, by being revolved, appears to be circular like the sun, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (79)

[p. 64]

All things, however big in size, appear very small at a great distance. So does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (80)

All things, however small in size, appear big under a magnifying glass. So does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (81)

A glassy surface appears as water, and a watery surface as glass. So does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (82)

[p. 65]

Just as one mistakes charcoal for a gem or a gem for charcoal, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (83)

When the clouds are moving, the moon appears to move. So does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (84)

Just as the directions seem to be changed for one who is in a swoon, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (85)

Just as the moon appears to some one as moving in the waters, so does one perceive the self as the body by virtue of ignorance. (86)

[p. 66]

Thus is the self mistaken for the body owing to ignorance. But when the self is realised, this mistake disappears in Brahman. (87)

The whole world, sentient and non-sentient, is realised to be only the self. How then can the various things and the various bodies be the self, since they are unreal? (88)

O thou that art most intelligent! Spend all thy time in realising the self. Exhausting all the ripe fruits of thy past deeds, thou needest not feel any anxiety. (89)

We shall now refute the statement in the books that, even when the self has been realised, such fruits of past actions as are ripe for experience [**] cannot be avoided. (90)

[p. 67]

When the knowledge of the reality has sprung up, there can be no fruits of past actions to be experienced, owing to the unreality of the body, etc., in the same way as there can he no dream after waking. (91)

Action done in past lives is called prarabdha. But that has no existence at all at any time, since past life is itself unreal. (92)

Just as the dream-body is a mere illusion, so is this (physical) body also. How can an illusory thing have life, and how, if there is no life, can there be that (past action)? (93)

[p. 68]

As clay is the efficient cause of the pot, so is ignorance declared by the Vedanta to be the efficient cause of the universe. When that ignorance itself is destroyed, where then is this universe? (94)

Just as, by delusion, one ignores the rope and perceives the serpent, so does he of deluded intellect perceive the universe without realising the truth. (95)

When the form of the rope is understood, the appearance of a serpent disappears. So too when the ultimate reality is realised, the universe vanishes. (96)

And as the body too is part of the universe, how can any past action subsist? But the

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] Vedas speak of past action in order to help-the understanding of the ignorant. (97)

In the passage "his actions are destroyed when the supreme is realised", the Veda expressly speaks of actions in the plural, in order to signify the destruction of prarabdha. [**] (98)

There is a twofold fault [*+] in the obstinate insistence on prarabdha by the ignorant. There is also the forsaking of the Vedanta doctrine, since the Veda declares the possibility of knowledge. (99)

[p. 70]

For the gaining of the liberation aforesaid, I shall now explain fifteen steps, by the help of all of which one should at all times practice meditation. (100)

Without constant practice the self that is pure existence and knowledge cannot be realised. Therefore one who desires knowledge and seeks liberation should meditate on Brahman for a long time. (101)

The control of the senses (yama), the control of the intellect (niyama), the avoidance of unreality (tyaga), spiritual silence (manna), place (desa), time (kala), posture (asana), the subdual of the root-cause (mulabandha), the equipoise of the body (deha-samya), the firmness of vision (drik-sthiti), (102)

[p. 71]

The control of life-forces (pranayama), the withdrawal of consciousness (pratyahara), the holding of consciousness, (dharana), self-contemplation (dhyana), and absorption (samadhi),--these, in order, are said to be the steps. (103)

The control of all the senses by means of the knowledge "all is Brahman" is called yama and should be practised again and again. (104)

The incessant flow of thought towards all that relates to the self and the submergence of all that relates to the not-self is called niyama. It imparts supreme bliss and is assiduously practised by the wise. (105)

[p. 72]

Tyaga is the elimination of the phenomenon of the Universe by realising the self that is Brahman. Tyaga is venerated even by the great, because it is of the nature of instant liberation. (106)

The wise man should always see himself as that mauna [**] from which word and thought, not reaching it, turn away, but which is attainable by yogis. (107)

Who can speak of that from which all words turn away? If the universe is to be spoken of, even that is devoid of words. [*+] (108)

[p. 73]

The above may also be termed mauna and is known as sahaja, among the enlightened. The mauna relating to speech [**] has been ordained by the teachers of Brahman for the ignorant. (109)

That in which no individual existence is possible at the beginning or end or in the middle, that by which this universe is at all times pervaded,--that is known as the solitary place (desa). (110)

The secondless (Brahman) that is infinite bliss is known as kala, because by it are manifested, in the twinkling of an eye, all creatures from the creator downwards. (111)

[p. 74]

That [condition] in which Brahman is incessantly contemplated with unmixed bliss is known as asana, and not others [**] which destroy bliss. (112)

The siddha-asana [*+] is the Immutable which is the beginning of all beings and the reality behind the universe, that in which the perfected ever repose. (113)

That which is the root of all existence and which has the control of the mind for its root is the mula-bandha [*+] which should be adopted at all times, being fit for the greatest of yogis. (114)

[p. 75]

Absorption in the all-pervading Brahman is known as the equipoise of the limbs. Without such (absorption) there is no equipoise. Mere stiffness of body is like that of a withered tree. (115)

Converting one's vision into one of knowledge, one should realise the whole world to be Brahman itself. This is the most advantageous vision (drishti) and not that which is directed to the tip of the nose. (116)

Or, the vision should be solely directed to that wherein ceases the distinction of seer, sight and object. It need not be directed to the tip of the nose. (117)

[p. 76]

Pranayama is the control of all life-forces by realising naught but Brahman in all things such as the mind, etc. (118)

The negation of the universe is the outgoing breath. The thought "I am Brahman itself" is called the incoming breath. (119)

The permanence of that; thought thereafter is the restrained breath. This is the pranayama for the wise, while the pressing of the nose is only for the unknowing, (120)

The merging of consciousness in Brahman by realising the self in all objects is known as pratyahara and should be practiced by all seekers after liberation. (121)

[p. 77]

Dharana, in its highest sense, is the holding of consciousness by realising Brahman wheresoever the consciousness reaches. (122)

The condition wherein there is only the uncontradictable thought "I am Brahman itself" and there is no external hold, is denoted by the term dhyana and is productive of the highest bliss. (123)

Samadhi, whose other name is knowledge, is the forgetfulness of all mental activity by first making thought changeless and then identifying the consciousness with Brahman. (124

[p. 78]

One should earnestly practice this unconventional bliss until it will obediently spring up of its own accord in an instant at the will of the individual. (125)

Then does one, independent of all means, become a perfected being and the greatest of yogis. But its real nature cannot be reached by one's word or thought. (126)

While samadhi is being practised, many impediments will perforce assail one: break of continuity, idleness, desire for worldly pleasure, (127)

Sleep, confusion, temptation, infatuation, and a sense of blankness. These and many other obstacles should be got over, step by step, by the seeker after Brahman. (128)

[p. 79]

By the thought of an object, the consciousness becomes objective; by the thought of blankness, the consciousness becomes blank; and by the thought of fullness (Brahman). it becomes full (Brahman). One should therefore practice fullness. (129)

Those that give up this highest and purest Brahmic consciousness live in vain and, though human, are like unto beasts. (130)

They that have realised this consciousness and, having realised it, develop it more and more, are the best of men, fortunate, and venerable in all the three worlds. (131)

[p. 80]

They, in whom this consciousness grows and also fructifies, attain identity with the eternal Brahman, and not those others who merely fight about words. (132)

These, that are clever in their talk of Brahman, but are devoid of this consciousness and are swayed by strong passions, are, indeed, the most ignorant among men, and they again and again pass through births and deaths. (133)

The former (on the other hand) do not remain for even half a second without the Brahmic consciousness, in the same way as Brahman [**] and others, Sanaka and others, Suka and others. (134)

[p. 81]

The nature of the cause passes into the effect, but not the nature of the effect into the cause. One should, therefore, by diligent investigation, attain the nature of the cause by eliminating the effect. (135)

Then will shine the absolutely real (self) that is beyond the scope of words. This should be understood again and again by the illustration of the earthen vessel. [**] (136)

In this manner do the understanding (vritti) of Brahman and, thereafter, the Brahmic consciousness, (vritti jnana) spring up in the pure-minded. (137)

[p. 82]

One should first see the cause as distinct from the effect, and should then, at all times, realise the cause as inherent in the effect itself. (138)

One should see the cause in the effect, and should then eliminate the effect. The cause, as such, will vanish (of its own accord). What then remains, that the sage becomes. (139)

For, one soon becomes that which he contemplates with extreme assiduity and absolute certainty. This should be understood by the illustration of the wasp and the worm. [**] (140)

[p. 83]

The wise man, at all times, should attentively meditate upon his own self which, though unseen, is yet the only reality, and, though manifest as the external universe, is yet of the nature of subjective consciousness. (141)

Having turned the visible into the invisible, one should realise everything to be Brahman itself. The wise man should then dwell in eternal bliss with his mind full of the essence of pure consciousness. (142)

This is known as the raja-yoga, consisting of the steps mentioned above. With this should be combined the hatha-yoga for those whose passions have only been partially eradicated. (143)

[p. 84]

To those however whose minds are fully ripe, the above yoga is by itself productive of perfection. It is easily and speedily attainable by all who have faith in the teacher and in the Lord. (144)

 

 

Thus ends DIRECT REALISATION.

_____

Footnotes

^43:* Brahman.

^45:* That which is illuminated.

^47:* Purusha.

^49:* "Than whom there is naught else that is higher, naught that is smaller or bigger. It stands in space unmoving, like a tree. By That, which is the Self, all this universe is filled."

^51:* Linga-sarira.

^51:+ Tarka-sastra.

^53:* . i.e., there is naught of multiplicity in this world.

^54:* I.e. Is born again and again; does not become free.

^56:* When Brahmad is realised.

^57:* Sattva, rajas and tamas.

^58:* An accidental formation of the clouds resembling a city.

^60:* As a rope to the clear vision or as a serpent to the mistaken vision.

^66:* Prarabdha.

^69:* There are three kinds of actions:--(1) prarabdha, so much of past actions as has given rise to the present birth, (2) sanchita, the balance of past actions that will give rise to future births and (3) kriyamana. acts being done in the present life. If by knowledge (2) and (3) were alone to be destroyed and not (1) also, the dual number would have been used and not the plural.

^69:+ The impossibility of liberation and the futility of knowledge.

^72:* Used here in the sense of Brahman.

^72:+ Since it is neither real nor non-existent. hence anirvachaniya.

^73:* Literal silence.

^74:* Postures and other conditions.]

^74:+ The name or a particular posture in yoga.

^80:* The four-faced Creator.

^81:* The earthen vessel and the clay are illustrations of effect and cause respectively. One can only see the clay in the vessel, by eliminating the name and form of the vessel.

^82:* It is the popular belief that the worm in the wasp's nest develops into a wasp by its constant expectation of the wasp's return.

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

  

The Century of Verses.

There is no known comparison in all the three worlds for the venerable teacher that bestows knowledge. If the philosopher's stone be assumed as such, it only turns iron into gold, but, alas! cannot convert it into philosopher's stone. The venerable teacher, on the other hand, creates equality with himself in the disciple that takes refuge in his feet. He is therefore peerless, nay, even transcendental. (1)

[p. 86]

Just as, by virtue of the fragrance diffused by a sandal tree, other trees around it are also full of fragrance at all times and afford shelter from heat to diverse beings, so do they that have derived wisdom from the teacher, with hearts full of mercy, emancipate, by their teachings, all those who are fortunate enough to stand in their presence, from the three kinds of misery [**] and the three kinds of sin. [*+] (2)

[p. 87]

At the outset is enunciated the perception of the self and of the not-self by means, respectively, of true knowledge and illusion. Thus does scripture speak of the knowledge of Brahman as two-fold, namely, by means of experience relating to oneself (svanubhuti) and by conclusive certainty (upapatti). The former arises in correlation to bodily limitation, while the latter arises out of universality; at first springs up the experience "I am Brahman", and then "All this is Brahman." (3)

The nature of the self is consciousness. knowledge and bliss. It can be known by direct realisation. It. is the inspiring soul in all bodies, (senses), etc. And yet, the utterly ignorant person mistakes the transient body for the soul, although he knows again and

[p. 88]

again that the body, whether his own or another's, is externally composed of bones, tendon, marrow, flesh, blood, nerves, skin and fat, and internally full of ordure, urine and phlegm. (4)

All these beings spend the whole of their valuable life-time on earth as followers of the philosophy of the flesh, imagining: "The body, wife, sons, friends, servants, horses, cattle,--these are the sources of my happiness." They fail to understand that inner, immortal Lord of Life, by whom they live, by whom they are rendered fit for the duties of life and by whom they are endowed with prosperity. (5)

[p. 89]

Just as a sagacious insect (e, g., the silkworm) builds, by its own efforts, a cocoon around itself and, jointly therewith, moves about throughout its life in the discharge of its activities, so does the individual soul, by means of the fruits of various actions, build up a physical body and, remaining therein, move about along with it, day by day, on earth. (6)

Does a person who assumes the mask of a tiger for his livelihood and frightens the young ones, injure any man, beast or other living being, under the impression that he is a tiger? Or, does the actor, playing a woman s part, pant for a husband, imagining himself to be a woman? So is the self conditioned by

[p. 90]

the body, but, being different from the body and from experience, is only the witness. (7)

Just as a mother, in order to pacify her child that has been weeping for a very long time, places before it a grape, a date, a mango, or a good plantain fruit, so well has the upanishad, by various teaching expedients, enlightened the utterly ignorant mind that wanders restlessly in consequence of the faculty of delusion acquired in numerous lives. (8)

That self, by reason of which being dear, all things like the body, wife, children and

[p. 91]

wealth, are dear, must itself be dearer than those things. Those things, on the other hand, are sources of misery. How, then, can they be dearer (than the self)? For the sake of saving one's own life, one gives up even his wife and others, and, for the good of one's own. self, one gives up even one's own body. The wise should therefore cherish the self as the most beloved and not anything else. (9)

As long as one derives pleasure from an object, so long is it beloved; and as long as it gives rise. to pain, so long is it disliked. Neither pleasantness nor unpleasantness resides at all times in the same object. Sometimes what is unpleasant might become pleasant, and what is very pleasant might become unpleasant.

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] The reality known as the self is, therefore; the most beloved at all times. (10)

What is preferable in the world and what is pleasant are each said to be of two kinds, namely, that which is actuated by desire and that which is absolute. That which is actuated by desire is the sole source of sorrow and becomes insipid in an instant; it is sought after by the ignorant. Brahman alone is the absolute, being the repository of unsurpassed bliss; therein do they that know the truth take refuge. This is declared in the six divisions (valli) of the Kathopanishad. (11)

[p. 93]

Feeling, while going about, that he is a wave of the ocean of the self: while sitting, that he is a bead strung on the thread of universal consciousness: while perceiving objects of sense, that he is realising himself by perceiving the self: and, while sleeping, that he is drowned in the ocean of bliss;--he who, inwardly constant, spends his whole life thus, is, among all men, the real seeker of liberation. (12)

All this world, consisting of name and form, is only the particular manifestation (vyaskti) of the universal -Substance (viraj); it moves

[p. 94]

and knows all objects by virtue of the primal life (mukhya-prana) that inspires it. This self, like the sun, is neither the doer nor the enjoyer.--Thus, directly realising, does he that is full of knowledge and realisation live his life, through incessant contemplation of the supreme self. (13)

Non-attachment (vairagya) is declared to be of two kinds, namely, that which springs from disgust (nirveda) and that which is inspired by knowledge. The former arises from the observation that desires, such as for home or friends or sons or wealth, generally end in sorrow; while the latter is the rejection of the above-mentioned things, by virtue of the wisdom imparted, as if they were vomitted matter. Renunciation too is of two kinds for those of

[p. 95]

subdued mind, namely, that of the body and that of the home. (14)

Every one in all the three worlds strives for happiness and not at all fur misery. The two sources of misery are the sense of I-ness in the body and the sense of mine-ness, arising therefrom, in the objects of one's own consciousness; for, even the learned man undergoes suffering from disease or assault by mistaking the transient body for the self, and experiences extreme sorrow at the loss of wife, son or wealth, but not at the loss of an enemy. [**] (15)

[p. 96]

Although dwelling in the house as the head of the family, he who is devoid of the feeling of mine-ness remains therein like a guest longing to reach his destination, [**] and feels not, with fervour, the happiness or the misery residing in the body. What must happen, whether it be the body or anything else, will surely happen, and what must be lost, will surely be lost, like the gathering of clouds. He who knows this truth remains at ease. (16)

He who, by strength of will, escapes from his own home like a snake out of its slough, might occasionally attend to the sustenance of his body like a traveller resorting to the shade

[p. 97]

of a wayside tree, but should only beg of trees so much food, in the shape of fruits fallen of their own accord, as would be enough to appease his hunger. He should also go forth from his body in order to enter the garden of his own self that is full of bliss. (17)

There first arises, in the mind, desire. It then directs the mind to various objects. The mind then grasps those objects through the medium of the senses. When an object is not attained, there springs up anger. When an object is attained, there arises greed in the shape of eagerness to preserve that object. These three are the cause of every one's ruin. The .wise should therefore shun them by constant meditation upon the self. (18)

[p. 98]

That is a gift which is made by men as a dedication to Brahman; patience is the absence of anger; faith is the belief in the existence of the self; and the reality is Brahman (sat). The four opposites of these are known as the barriers (setu), and tend to the bondage of every being. One should therefore overcome these barriers by means of the four gifts, etc., aforesaid, and should thereby attain happiness, immortality, heavenward progress, and the realisation of the light. (19)

[p. 99]

Food that is dedicated to the Lord and to guests tends to immortality; otherwise, the food is useless. So, too, food that is cooked for one's own sake is said to be one's death. He, too, among men, who eats by himself becomes wholly sinful in this world. And he, too, who eats daily without the prescribed consecration of the food to the fire of life, remains a mortal. (20)

He alone, in the world, is the giver who offers food to the famished mendicant that comes to his house. To such an one there is plenty of food for sacrifice, and he becomes one that has no enemy. He, on the other hand, who does not offer food even to the friend that has constantly served him with attachment for the sake of food, is not a

[p. 100]

friend. From such a miser one should be anxious to turn away, as it were, out of disregard. (21)

The manifestation and the dissolution of the universe have, for their respective cause, the ignorance or the knowledge of the self, and are applicable to all beings from the creator (hiranya-garbha) downwards,--so do the Vedas declare. When the self is realised, the universe is sacrificed [**] into Brahman, and, when the self is not realised, this Brahman is again sacrificed [**] into the universe, in the same way as the (illusory) silver disappears into the mother-of-pearl and the real substance (the

[p. 101]

mother-of-pearl) into the (illusory) silver owing Ito the non-recognition of each of them in turn. (22)

Then was not non-entity, that being absolutely non-existent like the sky-flower; nor was then any entity that could divide. But something then was, different from these two. Then was not the universe as it (now) exists in its phenomenal condition; and yet it already existed differently, as the (illusory) silver already exists in the mother-of-pearl. Nor was then the primordial (cosmic) substance (virat) sprung from ether. For, what is there, like unto the water produced by magic, that can veil the unconditioned self? [**] (23)

[p. 102]

If there was no bondage in the shape of origin and dissolution, neither was there liberation; just as there is neither night nor day in the sun, for, it is only a limitation of vision. The One, motionless and unconditioned, then became, by its own power of illusion (maya), that which is known as the maker (kartri) [**]. And there was naught else than that. That alone, veiled by the unborn [*+], became the individual soul. (24)

[p. 103]

In the beginning was darkness, [**] as an entity. Thus veiled by darkness, naught could then be seen, like the water that is contained-in milk. The birth of this universe, consisting of name and form, was by virtue of the will of the Creator desiring to create,--this will being induced by the actions (karma-bhih) of a continuous (anugata) universe constantly inspired by minds that are also continuous in a germinal form. (25)

This (goddess of) illusion (maya) has four crests [*+]. She is always fresh and therefore ever young. She is skilful, because she is an expert in accomplishing even the impossible. She is sweet-mouthed [*++] at the outset. Thus,

[p. 104]

too, she veils the knowledge derivable from the upanishads. In her dwell, like two birds, the supreme self and the individual soul, for, they alone make all things manifest. (26)

Of these two, the former remains unattached, while the latter, on the other hand, falling into the ocean of ignorance and forgetting the real nature of the self, perceived the apparition of these various worlds. But no sooner has he turned his consciousness within himself than the unborn (maya), abandons him and he abandons her. There is, thus, One only. But the wise, somehow, render that One variously by their teachings. [**] (27)

[p. 105]

The inner self neither comes in at the time of birth nor goes away at the time of death; for, it is infinite. But it is the mind with the subtle body that enters thus and goes forth afterwards. The mind does not reproduce in itself the leanness or the stoutness of the gross body. But it departs, taking with it the two sets [**] of tendencies (samskara) and the measures of light (tejo-matrah) [*+], and returns again to this world along with these very appendages. (28)

[p. 106]

There was, of old, a venerable Brahmana, named Subandhu, who was the priest of (king) Sanati; he having died by the deceitful incantations of some Brahmanas, his mind went to (the abode of the god of) death, and his brother brought it back by means of Vedic hymns,--so says the Veda. It follows from this that the mind alone, as related to the self, goes forth and not the inner self in any case. (29)

The one motionless self moves with the wandering mind, remains in it, and is also both before and behind it. But although it is

[p. 107]

thus present throughout, the eye and other senses know it not. Water, for instance, moves about with the rolling waves raised by the wind, is in them and before them and behind them; and when the waves are still, it is as it ever is. (30)

The inner self was, at first, by itself. Then it seeks objects of enjoyment one after another: "Let me have wife and  and wealth to support them." For their sake the man works with very many difficulties even at the risk of his life and does not deem anything-else to be higher or greater than them. Even if any one of them is not gained, he feels himself to be incomplete and is as inactive as if he were dead; so, too, even if any one of them is lost, he feels he has entirely missed his purpose. (31)

[p. 108]

The cloud that hides the huge sun leas not existed (ever) before nor will exist (ever) thereafter, but is visible only during that interval. And it obstructs the vision of the spectator and not the solar orb; for, if it were not so, how can the group of clouds be visible without the sun? In this manner does the universe (visva) [**] veil the understanding and not the supreme (self) that is its [*+] own illuminer and inspirer. (32)

[p. 109]

Having, in dream, ruled a kingdom with all the glories thereof, one does not, on waking thereafter, feel sorry that he has lost his kingdom, knowing, as he does, that it was unreal. Nor does one become liable to punishment by committing adultery or other evil deed in dream. So will it be, if one should forget all the activities of his waking state like dreams. (33)

The pleasure or pain experienced in the dream-state becomes unreal on waking, and the objects towards which the activities of the physical body are directed in the waking state become unreal during sleep. But, although unreality is thus established in both ways, the ignorant person still clings to it [**], although its

[p. 110]

illuminer is the self (satya). Surely, we are not aware why this should be so. (34)

One is filled with sudden grief on seeing the death, in one's dream, of a relation that lives in one's waking state. So, too, does one feel happy by seeing alive, in dream, one that was dead in the waking state. And although one remembers (in dream) the death or the life of the individual (in one's waking condition), he nevertheless converses with him. This being so, reality or unreality depends only on the length or shortness of time. [**] (35)

[p. 111]

Although the pleasure of meeting a woman in dream is extremely unreal, yet the discharge resulting therefrom is visible. In the same way does the universe appear as almost real although it has sprung from unreality. The man in the (above) dream may be real, but the woman and her company are only unreal, and yet the cloth is actually soiled in the morning by the discharge. All this universe, therefore, has imagination (kalpana) [**] for its root-cause. (36)

[p. 112]

All persons witness the sport of this (self) every day in the dream-state, and yet no one sees that (self) itself sporting with illusion (maya) without any of the organs of sense [**]. Nor does any one realise it, in the waking state, as the illuminer of all objects and the inspirer of all creatures, nor, in deep sleep, as that which is full of supreme bliss. This is wonderful! (37)

The revelation of a sacred word (mantra) heard in dream becomes real on waking; and as the result of a benediction in dream, the desired object is actually attained in the morning. Thus the real may spring up even from the unreal. [*+] Further, that (self) alone is self-resplendent by which are manifested all

[p. 113]

animate and inanimate things, the entire variety of perceivable objects, nay, the whole universe itself. (38).

In deep sleep, fire, the sun and others [**] are merged in the medial life (madhya-prana [*+]) which is their source, and speech and others in the life-breath. Therefore is it declared that the cessation is of these senses and not of the breath. The appearance of objects through those senses (in the waking state) is known to be an illusion like that of silver in the mother-of-pearl. The practice of the control of life-forces enunciated in the Vedanta is therefore the only means of realising one's own self and not any other. [*++] (39).

[p. 114]

Fire does not touch wet fuel even exceptionally, but only fuel that has been dried in the sun. So, too, the fire of knowledge does not touch the mind that is wet with attachments although it has acquired merit by the performance of prescribed duties, the preservation of progeny and gifts of wealth, but only the mind that is dried by non-attachment. Therefore is pure non-attachment taught foremost, for, by it is the success of realisation. (40).

[p. 115]

Whatever is of the nature of name and form, whatever moves in this world, springs up as a mere unreality and should be veiled off by the Lord by whom it is manifest and by whom it is multifariously active, in the same way as the (illusory) snake is veiled off by the rope that is definitely known. (Only) by abandoning that (unreality) can unsurpassed bliss be enjoyed. Do not therefore covet any other thing like wealth, etc. (41).

To the aspirant for liberation there first comes liberation while living and then ultimate liberation. These two are the result of constant practice and realisation, which are only attainable by the contact of the teacher's feet and his merciful glance. Practice, too, is of two kinds according to qualification, namely, bodily and mental. Bodily practice consists

[p. 116]

of postures (asana), etc., while the other, previously explained as the path of knowledge, consists of abstention (uparati). (42).

Having rooted out all desires abiding in the heart as if their pegs were forcibly broken, he loses all attachment to the body and gives up his waywardness, his attention being wholly given to the self. Then will he of accumulated merit reach the highest abode [**] which is variegated by dark, white and red veins [*+] and wherein ambrosia flows in plenty, and enjoy the bliss of the self. (43).

[p. 117]

Such a person, while in this body, passes beyond sorrow, ignorance and other impediments and sees the universe as the self. [**] He then attains the shining Brahman [*+] and becomes all-knowing and the repository of all occult powers. Afterwards, losing all sense of the gross, subtle and other bodies and devoid of all volition, he attains the fourth state [*++], and, purged of all merit and demerit, attains liberation even in this life. [* section] (44).

[p. 118]

As a result of such realisation of the self, there springs up the youthful life [**] which, although encased in a body and the senses, is unaffected by boyhood, old age and other bodily attributes, and is extremely blissful and capable of accomplishing the highest goal. It is this life [*+] that is led up [*++], along with the purified consciousness, by those of supreme wisdom and unfailing resolution, who seek to become divine by spiritual practices. (45).

Such a one is almost without desire, for temptations have lost all power over him. He pants only for the realisation of the self for

[p. 119]

the sake of its unsurpassed bliss. When he realises the self, he has attained all his desires, [**] and, remains in the final condition. [*+] When the body dies, the life-breaths do not rise therefrom [*++], but are gradually dissolved in their respective causes. Then, where will the individual soul be, for it will be merged, like salt in water, and is then the Infinite Self itself? (46).

Water taken from the sea, when solidified, goes by the name of salt. When it is thrown back into the sea and is dissolved, it loses its name and form. So does the individual soul merge into the Supreme Self. At the same time, the mind is dissolved into the moon,

[p. 120]

speech into fire, sight into the sun, blood and semen into water and hearing into the directions. (47).

Just as butter is contained in milk as indicated by the sweetness of the latter, but (when extracted) becomes separate therefrom, so too is Brahman in every being as indicated by the activity of the being. This (Brahman) is the cause of rest when one is tired. [**] Attaining it, one discards all other gain as straw. Therein springs up no fear. The concentrated bliss which thus glows within oneself is immortality. All else is transient. (48).

[p. 121]

The many-coloured cloth is woven, crosswise and lengthwise, of threads of many colours. When this is understood, there remains nothing of the cloth but the threads. So is the manifold universe, with its mountains, cities, men, villages, beasts, etc., pervaded through and through, by the primordial substance [**], that again by ether, and the latter by Brahman. (49).

This (Brahman), by virtue of its reflection by various objects [*+], assumes the various corresponding forms, in the same way as the one seer produces a second one (by reflection)

[p. 122]

in water. The Veda too speaks thus of the all-pervading Brahman: "The resplendent one with its powers of illusion, has infinite forms on all sides." The Brahman, therefore, becomes the individual soul by its accidental reflection in the extremely clear consciousness. (50).

The knowers of the self discover, by their wisdom, that the individual soul, [**] besmeared by illusion, is only a ray of the omnipotent Supreme Self reflected in the ocean of consciousness. This Brahman is variously reflected in accordance with the form and measure of the medium reflecting it, in the same way that the face is variously reflected corresponding

[p. 123]

to the mirror in hand; but it is at all times what it ever is. [**] (51).

Just as the one sun, independent of other objects, yet, by virtue of reflection in several waters, becomes [*+] many and has the same stability or motion as the medium reflecting it; so does the Supreme Self seem to be affected by properties [*++] by virtue of its reflection in all beings, high and low, but, when clearly realised, shines unaffected by those properties. (52)

[p. 124]

Just as the rays of the sun reflected by the moon or focussed by a metallic reflector dispel the utter darkness of the night or of the (interior of the) house as the case may be, so do the rays of the Supreme Self reflected by the consciousness and streaming forth through the outlets of the senses, immediately reveal to us the objects of perception around us, such as forms, etc. (53)

The Supreme Self has three aspects, namely, the full, the self and the not-self, the first being the unconditioned Self, the second being that which is conditioned [**] by the consciousness,

[p. 125]

and the third being a mere reflection, in the same way as space has three aspects in respect of water, namely, that which is (everywhere) inside and outside of the water, that Which is conterminous with the water, and that which is reflected therein. When the conditioned self is merged in the unconditioned, then the condition [**] together with its consequences [*+] vanishes altogether. (54)

Just as countless wooden figures of women, acted upon by means of posts and strings, simultaneously exhibit music and all other activities of common occurrence [*++], so does the world, including the regions of bhur, bhuvar, svar and mahar, carry on all its activities by the inspiration of what is known as the

[p. 126]

sutra-atman [**], which pervades everything, whose potency is unique and whose inspiration is in proportion to the end to be achieved. (55).

That is real which is unaffected at all times. [*+] Such are the unembodied things like life, space, ether. Even these ultimately resolve themselves [*++] into Brahman; hence is Brahman the reality of the real. There is naught else which excels it in its transcendentality or its infinitude; therefore is it termed the reality of the real. The lower [* section] that is conditioned by embodied and unembodied things is called satya [***], because it is both sat and tyat. [*] Of this too, Brahman is the reality. (56).

[p. 127]

Whatever unreal thing is, in every-day experience, perceived, like silver (in mother-of-pearl), serpent (in rope) and water (in mirage), depends for its perception on the real. This rule, with its limitation [**], is well-established. So has this whole universe sprung into existence in [*+] Brahman, the reality of the real. That too is called the real by virtue of which the unreal becomes an object of perception. (57).

[p. 128]

The material Brahman [**], known as virat, is such that the expanse of space, time, and the farthest extremities of the directions, are but infinitesimal parts thereof, and yet it appears to be so close at hand and face to face. From that arose the sutra-atman [*+], greater than the great, fuller than the full, in the same way as the commingled water of the (seven) oceans [*++] is fuller than the full ocean, etc. [* section] (58).

Just as the one rain-water inside all herbs is transformed variously according to the numberless tastes, odours, properties and effects of the respective herbs, so is the inner self [***] according

[p. 129]

to the characteristics of the various kinds, of beings. By (virtue of) it does the earth support all creatures, the clouds rain profusely, fire cooks and burns. Hence is that the inner (self) of all. (59)

One should clearly realise the self in all beings and all successive multitudes of created beings in the self. He should, repeatedly and persistently, perceive all things as the self, having, for an example, the relation between water and waves. [**] There is only one Brahman without a second, as is declared by the Vedanta. The many do not in any way exist. But he who sees this universe as manifold passes from death to death. [*+] (60)

[p. 130]

In spite of the knowledge that the atmosphere exists all around the pot, there arises in men the false impression that it has its origin along with the pot, disappears when the pot is broken, moves with the pot when it is removed elsewhere, and assumes the same size and shape as the pot. So is the self in respect of the universe. (61).

As much as is a lump of sugar, so much is nothing but sweetness. As much as a piece of camphor melts, so much is nothing but

[p. 131]

sweet fragrance. So, too, as far as the universe is manifest, with all the beauty of trees, mountains, cities, gardens and temples, so far does the one (pure) consciousness shine forth, for, in the end all that remains of the universe is the self. (62).

Although the hearing of the sound proceeds from the musical instrument, it is nevertheless produced only by striking the instrument. The sounds that proceed from striking the instrument are not heard separately but only in conjunction with the striking. So, too, this universe, whose efficient cause is illusion (maya), is manifest, as it were, in conjunction with Brahman. But when that Brahman is inwardly realised, nothing will remain the object of perception. (63).

[p. 132]

It is thus clearly seen that the Lord of all the worlds is of the nature of pure consciousness, is the one Immovable that is knowledge itself, is all-pervading like ether, and is the inner spirit of all beings. It is also seen that all this universe is different from Brahman, is unreal by nature, and is a mere semblance. One should, therefore, even now and here, give up all desires and remain for ever fixed in the thought "I am Brahman". (64).

When Indra and Indrani have freely enjoyed the bliss of union, the cessation of their pleasure

[p. 133]

is deep sleep. [**] Therein is a state that is fall of concentrated bliss and very difficult to comprehend; that is the ananda-kosa (the bliss-sheath). In that condition one is not conscious of anything, being deeply merged in unsurpassed bliss. If awaked, he becomes unhappy. A wise man should therefore never awake a sleeping person. (65)

All beings [*+] enjoy bliss by attaining Brahman (yasas) which embraces within itself the eye and other sensory organs and which externally helps all perception. All individual souls are alike in nature as in deep sleep. [*++] Among

[p. 134]

these, he who, for the sake of feeding the belly, remains only externally active and is enslaved by the senses of touch, sight, hearing, smell and taste, becomes tainted with sin and suffers misery and confusion. (66).

The individual soul, during the waking state, puts forth innumerable efforts for the attainment of sensual pleasures, and when the entire group of sensory organs is fatigued, it forgets even the pleasure on hand and goes into sleep, in order that it may enjoy rest in its own nature. Ultra-sensual bliss is thus extremely easy of attainment and is far superior to the pleasure derived from the senses which always produces disgust in the end. (67).

[p. 135]

The bird, by the motion of its wings, generates a breeze and, by its aid, reaches a great height, and there, having attained the vast expanse of the atmosphere, cures itself of its fatigue by spreading its wings. So, too, this mind, troubled by many evil desires and doubts in respect of objects of pleasure, and fatigued thereby, stretches forth the hands and feet and sleeps long for the sake of rest. (68).

The moment that the individual soul comes into union with the self (Brahman) [**], it ceases to be conscious of anything, internal or external, like unto a lover fervently embracing his

[p. 136]

beloved one on his return home from a foreign land. In that state all  activity that is the result of merit and demerit, disappears, and nothing is remembered of all these ups and downs,--sorrow, confusion, or fear. (69).

The disappearance of all gross and subtle existence, the cessation of the senses, and the attainment of bliss,--these three are common to liberation-while-alive and deep sleep. There is however this difference that, whereas he who is asleep comes back to life again and again [**] by virtue of the effects of his past actions, he that has attained illumination and liberation, never comes back (to worldly life), because the effects of all his past actions have been destroyed. (70).

[p. 137]

If the bliss of a king endowed with all prosperity and enjoying every kind of happiness be taken as a unit, the bliss of the manes is declared to be a hundredfold. So, too, through the world of the gods higher and higher up to the world of Brahman, each (bliss) is a hundredfold of the next lower one. Singular and containing within itself all these (grades of bliss) is the bliss of (the supreme) Brahman, of which the pleasures of the senses are but an (insignificant) fraction. (71).

[p. 138]

"Therein are included all degrees of bliss,--the bliss of men (ananda), of the manes (moda), of gods (pramoda), etc. Therein all desires are fulfilled. Therein is the state of oneness owing to the cessation of all (phenomena). Make me live immortally for ever, O Soma [**], in that abode of concentrated bliss, and vouchsafe to my soul [*+] that is betwixt the brows an unceasing shower of immortality, [*++]"--so do the Vedas declare. (72).

The self is unperturbed and its nature is bliss; the other (maya) is quite the opposite; their steadiness or perturbation bears fruit in the individual consciousness. The perturbation of the mind, until a desired object is gained,

[p. 139]

gives rise to misery. When that object is-gained, the pleasure (said to be) derived from that object is only so long as the mind remains steady. (73)

Just as there is a momentary bliss when the mind is absorbed in pleasure at the end of a sensual indulgence, so too there is unsurpassed bliss in deep sleep only so long as there is steadiness (of consciousness). In liberation, however, the consciousness is absolutely tranquil and there is eternal bliss. There is thus a constant relation between bliss and steadiness. It is therefore proper to speak of sensual pleasure as a fraction of eternal bliss. (74).

[p. 140]

The mind, tired of external activities, draws them all in together, and carrying with it the tendencies resulting from them, ceases from them and turns inward in search of its own place. In the dream-body, it enjoys dream-objects generated by the combination of those tendencies. Abandoning these, again, it longs for the inner self, reaching which it attains perfect rest. [**] (75).

 [*+] "How is the enjoyment of pleasure, etc. possible in dream, while the instrument therefor

[p. 141]

[paragraph continues] (the gross body) is inert? If (it be said that) a new dream-body fit for such activity springs up, wherefrom does it arise, since the means of its generation [**] is absent? If it be a product of the imagination, then how is it that, after the experience of sexual pleasure in a dream, the effect thereof is (actually) visible in the body that is inert? (76).

"It is with this (the gross body) that he weeps from fear, talks, laughs and exults." It [*+] surely follows from this that the inner self does not abruptly sever its connection with the body during dream, although that body is inert; but, with the help of the subtle body, it creates again, in subtle form, those objects

[p. 142]

which it had previously [**] experienced, such as the body, woman, horse, tiger, locality, etc. (77).

The second state, that of dream, is known by experience to be midway between waking and sleep. In that state the individual, having withdrawn all the senses, has only the light of the self remaining. The gross body having been laid down on a suitable bed, the inner self, experiencing the objects it likes in their subtle form, goes about as it pleases in the same manner. [*+] (78).

[p. 143]

Preserving the body lying in bed by means of the life-forces now reduced to mere breath, lest it assume the form of a corpse and become food for dogs, etc., it creates, in dream, by its own power, horses, chariots, rivers, ponds, playgrounds, companions, women, sons, friends,--all by way of imitation. [**] (79).

It creates elephants, tigers, robbers, enemies, snakes and monkeys. Sometimes it is playing with beloved damsels. Sometimes it laughs and sports. Sometimes it eats delicious food. At other times it is afraid of its kith and kin, because it has become an outcaste. And at other times it runs away for fear of tigers, etc. or is caught by them and wails. (80).

[p. 144]

Whatever object is perceived, it comes into existence then and there by the ignorance of the true nature of the self that is in it. Its manifestation is like the unreal appearance of false silver owing to one's not recognising the mother-of-pearl, or of the mirage owing to one's not recognising the sun's rays, or of the serpent by one's not recognising the rope,--such appearance giving rise to joy or fear, only for an instant. Hence all this universe is really created by perception. [**] (81).

[p. 145]

The Lord of the Universe has declared: "By me, on whom depends the illusion of maya all this (universe) has been spread forth. Therefore, all things are in me, not I in them; for instance, although silver appears (falsely) in the mother-o'-pearl, there is naught of the mother-o'-pearl in silver. Therefore, [**] too, all things do not (in reality) exist in me." It follows from this that the whole objective world is as unreal as the products of jugglery. (82).

Action is the only cause of happiness or misery in this world. The ignorant, not knowing this, speak in vain of friend or enemy. [*+] Yagnavalkya, and Artabhaga of yore, in the palace of king Janaka, spoke only

[p. 146]

of action and praised it. Even the ornament [**] of the race of Yadu declares: "None in this world remains without action." (83).

Although the axe is able to fell a tree, it should nevertheless be wielded by a living being. Food is, no doubt, a source of satisfaction, but the real cause thereof is the effort [*+] of the eater. In the same way, former action is the cause of the good or evil results experienced; yet, being itself evanescent, it cannot do this by itself. It is impelled thereto by the inner self. (84).

[p. 147]

The Vedas declare, with much propriety, that all rites, compulsory, discretionary, and so on, which are laid down by the Smriti for the various castes and conditions of men, are (in reality) dedicated to the Supreme Self [**]; in the same way that, by the satisfaction of the nose, eyes, tongue, hands, feet, head and ears, it is the inner man that is actually satisfied, and, by the watering of the roots of a tree, every part of that tree is nourished. (85).

After death, he who is ignorant of the self, although versed in the Vedas, and has performed the rites prescribed therein, exhausts his

[p. 148]

merit after a brief enjoyment and undergoes very great misery in having to be born again. He who has realised the self and yet longs for reward, enjoys much greater and more lasting happiness accompanied by supernatural powers. Therefore, one should indeed realise the self; for, by realising it, one gains every happiness although he longs for no reward. (86).

It is no wonder that objects are not revealed by the sun, moon, etc., of their own accord nor is the sun directly perceived by its own light, nor the moon, nor fire. On the other hand, the sun, moon, etc., are perceived by means of the sense of sight inspired by (the inner) consciousness. Therefore, only the dweller in the body shines by his own light.

[p. 149]

[paragraph continues] Yet, in the World, [**] the, deities [*+] have their respective power to illuminate. (87).

Through the life-force called prana the individual drinks plenty of water and eats food Then the abdominal fire, with energy derived from, that (prana), digests it sooner or later. Thereafter the life-force known as vyana carries the essence along the blood-vessels of the whole body for the nourishment of life; and the life-force termed apana expels from the body the putrid non-essence. (88).

[p. 150]

This life, with its five-fold energy [**], residing in each body and being master of all the senses, distinctly and incessantly carries on all the activities appropriate to that particular body, by a power which belongs undoubtedly to the self that is pure consciousness. That self am I, the all-seer, the life behind all life, the consciousness behind the consciousness of all beings. (89).

By the light of that One Self that is pure consciousness, the earth, water, air, sun, moon, etc., shine after It, each with its peculiar

[p. 151]

characteristics, and have their being in It. Can the flashes of lightning and flaming conflagrations and the vast expanse of starry galaxies illumine the Supreme Lord, the immutable, infinite light, the seer, without beginning and without end, eternal, because devoid of origin? (90).

If, by the favour of the nectar-like glance, full of unparalleled mercy, of the venerable holy Master, there arises, in any man whatsoever, the realisation "That very Brahman am I," he indeed loses all feelings of doubt and, with his mind free from illusion, attains liberation even while living in the body. (Thereafter), when the beginningless limitation [**] is completely dissolved, he is merged in the Highest, the sole abode of eternal bliss. (91)

[p. 152]

I am neither the dense body nor the senses, nor the evanescent and most erratic mind, nor reason, nor life, nor the ego, nor wife, nor house, nor offspring, nor kith and kin, nor land nor wealth, and so on. For, how can I, the witness aloof, the pure consciousness, the inner self, be all these things which are purely objective? I am the Supreme [**] that is the reality behind all this Universe. (92).

In relation to all these plainly visible forms of dark, yellow and other innumerable colours,

[p. 153]

the eye, which is one, is the seer, for, therein arises the perception. The eye, in its turn, is only objective, because the mind is its seer. And even the workings of the mind, objective forms transformed into thought, are, in their turn, objective. The Lord alone is the absolute seer, the witness, for, He is never, like the above, objective. (93).

Owing to the non-recognition of a rope in the twilight, over it appears a serpent all at once. In the sane way is the extremely unhappy condition of the individual soul imposed on the self by reason of the non-realisation of one's own self. Again, when the illusion of a serpent is dispelled by the admonition of a trustworthy friend, there is only the old familiar rope. So, too, by the admonition of my own Master, I am not

[p. 154]

the individual soul, but the immutable Self that is the seer. I am the Supreme Bliss (Siva.) (94).

Tell me what is thy light. You say: "The sun in the day and the moon, lamp, etc., at night." It may be so, but by what light do you see the sun, the lamp, etc? You say: "the eye." But when that is closed, what brighter light is there? You reply: "the mind." By what light is the mind revealed? "For that, I alone am the light," you say. You are therefore that Supreme Light. "I am, my Master." (95).

[p. 155]

Such a one [**] after remaining on the earth for a time, never more returns to a body and its accompaniments; until the enjoyment of the ripe fruits of his former actions is completed, he lives in a peculiar manner, but blissfully, because his mind is free from all contrasts [*+], ever pure, devoid of my-ness and I-ness, always contented, identical in nature with infinite bliss, steady in thought, imperturbable, cleansed of all illusions. [*++] (96).

Such an absolutely resplendent realisation at once destroys the distinction between the individual soul and Supreme Self. In whomsoever such an unimpeded, unparalleled realisation springs up in consciousness, for him

[p. 156]

the root-illusion (maya) that is the source of births and deaths, is destroyed by that very realisation. Once destroyed, it can no more create illusions by its power of phenomenal manifestation. (97).

Knowing that the universe is unreal and bluing, therefore, completely destroyed all perception of phenomenal forms, he should taste, to his heart's utmost content, the morsel of immortal bliss that is the highest and most perfect concentration of being and consciousness, and, filled with the light of the self and with a tranquil mind, he should realise that all this universe is unessential and should therefore abandon it, in the same way as one, after drinking the juice of a fruit, throws it away although the remnant may be highly fragrant. (98).

[p. 157]

The results of actions are destroyed, the bondage of the heart is broken, and all doubts, which lead one to births, and deaths, are removed, as soon as one realises that Supreme Lord, whose nature is pure consciousness, who is devoid of the stain of qualities, who is realisable by such teachings as "That thou art," the immutable inner self, the Brahman, the Lord, that is beyond all commandments and beyond all thought. (99).

[p. 158]

One should understand the huge tree of phenomenal existence, which bears the fruits of births and deaths before, betwixt and after, whose roots are the results of past actions, whose countless leaves are delusions, vanities, joys and sorrows, whose branches are desire, anger, etc., and on which dwell the birds of sons and cattle, wives and daughters, in large numbers. Such a wise man should fell this tree down with the axe of non-attachment and should at all times meditate upon the Supreme Being (vasudeva). (100).

The whole universe is born in me, has its support in me and dissolves in me. Therefore, that very Brahman indeed am I. Again, humbly and exultingly do I bow to that Immutable Being (achyuta), by whose mere

[p. 159]

remembrance any defective procedure in all auspicious acts like sacrifices is rendered perfectly complete. (101).

 

THUS ENDS THE CENTURY OF VERSES.

_______

 

 

 

Footnotes

^86:* Adhyatmika or bodily ailments, adhibhautika or danger from other beings such as wild animals, and adhidaivika or danger from forces of nature such as earthquakes, floods, etc.

^86:+ Sins of body, speech and mind.

^95:* Because there is no I-ness or mine-ness in the case of an enemy.

^96:* The Brahman.

^100:* These two sacrifices stand respectively for the dissolution of the manifest or apparent into the unmanifest or real, and the opposite process of the unmanifest seemingly becoming the manifest.

^101:* This verse deals with the cause of the universe, i.e., what was before creation.

^102:* Otherwise known as hiranyagarbha.

^102:+ Maya.

^103:* Ajnana, nescience.

^103:+ I.e., eminent qualities.

^103:++ Ghritasya, lit. ghee-mouthed, i.e., tempting at first but finally leading to ruin.

^104:* For purposes of instruction, and not as representing the ultimate truth.

^105:* Good and evil.

^105:+ The five senses of perception and the life-forces in their subtlest form.

^108:* Appearance or phenomenal existence.

^108:+ Of the universe.

^109:* Bodily enjoyment.

^110:* The seeming reality of waking experiences and the unreality of dreams are distinguished only by the difference of their duration. From the ultimate standpoint, however, both are unreal.

^111:* Illusion, nescience: The self is compared to the man, illusion to the woman, and the manifest universe to the discharge.

^112:* Since the experiences of the dream-state are independent of the senses.

^112:+ Therefore, although all phenomenon is illusory, the realisation of Brahman is not an illusion.

^113:* The presiding deities of the senses.

^113:+ Another name for virat, primordial substance.

^113:++ Such as the pandering to the senses or making them more acute or active.

^116:* The thousand-petalled plexus of the yogins.

^116:+ Nadi literally means a tube or vein, but there is no exact English equivalent for the word as used in yoga.

^117:* And not as the external universe.

^117:+ Hiranyagarbha.

^117:++ The state beyond waking, dream and sleep.

^117: section Jivanmukti.

^118:* The mukhya-prana or chief breath as distinguished from the five life-breaths, prana, apana, vyana, udana and samana.

^118:+ Prana.

^118:++ To the thousand-petalled plexus.

^119:* He wants nothing else.

^119:+ The fourth state.

^119:++ The rising is only in case of future birth.

^120:* E.g., during sleep.

^121:* Virat.

^121:+ Technically, upadhis or conditions.

^122:* Called here patanga, because it eventually falls away.

^123:* Just as the face remains the same, whatever the number and variety of its reflections.

^123:+ I.e., seems to become.

^123:++ Of things and individuals.

^124:* Or differentiated.

^125:* Lit: Nescience.

^125:+ The reflection, etc.

^125:++ In a puppet show.

^126:* The thread-self, i.e., the self that pervades all, as a thread running through beads.

^126:+ Past, present and future.

^126:++ Lit: Repose.

^126: section The individual self, viewed singly or generically.

^126:** Real.

^126: I.e., embodied and disembodied.

^127:* That the perception of the unreal is illusory and ceases when the real object is seen.

^127:+ Dependent on Brahman; with Brahman as the substrate.

^128:* Matter viewed universally, primordial matter.

^128:+ The thread-self, otherwise known as hiranyagarbha.

^128:++ At the deluge.

^128: section The fulness of the diluvial waters is greater than that of the ocean, river, lake, etc., at ordinary times.

^128:** The self in all beings.

^129:* The water and the waves are identical with one another.

^129:+ i.e., will not attain liberation.

^133:* Indra represents the 'man' in the right eye and Indrani the light in the left eye that reveals all things to our vision. During waking, the two reside between the brows. When they descend into the heart and enjoy the bliss of union, it is then the dream-state. When that condition ends, the state of deep sleep sets in.

^133:+ Individual souls.

^133:++ Devoid of caste, colour, creed, etc.

^135:* During deep sleep.

^136:* Passes through births and deaths.

^138:* Lit, the moon. Here "hiranyagarbha."

^138:+ 'Indra' in the text.

^138:++ Lit. nectar.

^140:* Tranquillity, bliss.

^140:+ This and part of the next verse are the arguments of an opponent.

^141:* Such as parents.

^141:+ This is the answer to the opponent.

^142:* In the waking state.

^142:+ With the subtle body.

^143:* Of its waking experiences.

^144:* That is, the existence of any object is only so long and so much as we perceive it.

^145:* Because the universe is the creation of maya.

^145:+ One who gives happiness or one who causes misery.

^146:* Krishna.

^146:+ Cooking and eating.

^147:* Whatever lesser deity might be invoked in practice.

^149:* I.e., as far as the senses are concerned.

^149:+ The sun, moon, etc., which preside over the senses. In relation to objects, the senses have, power to reveal them, although their light is but a reflection of the resplendence of the self.

^150:* Prana, apana, udana, samana, vyana.

^151:* Maya, the root-illusion.

^152:* Siva, or parabrahman considered as anandamaya.

^155:* One that has realised "I am Brahman."

^155:+ Happiness and misery, gain and loss, etc.

^155:++ This verse describes a jivan-mukta.

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 160]

  

Knowledge of Self.

This treatise called "Knowledge of Self" is written for the sake of those whose sins have been destroyed by austerities and who, with a tranquil mind and free from attachment, long for liberation. (1).

Compared with all other means, knowledge is the only direct means to liberation. As cooking is impossible without fire, so is liberation impossible without knowledge. (2).

Ritual cannot dispel ignorance, because they are not mutually contradictory. But knowledge

[p. 161]

surely destroys ignorance, as light destroys the densest darkness. (3).

The self appears to be conditioned by virtue of ignorance. But when that (ignorance) is destroyed, the unconditioned self shines by its own light, like the sun when the clouds have disappeared. (4).

Having purified, by repeated instruction, the soul that is turbid with ignorance, knowledge should efface itself, as the paste of the cleaning-nut does with water. [**] (5).

The phenomenal world, abounding in desire, hatred, etc., is verily like a dream. While

[p. 162]

it lasts, it seems to be real, but, when one awakes, it becomes unreal. (6).

Like the (illusion of) silver in mother-o'-pearl, the world appears to be real only until the Supreme Self, the immutable reality behind everything, is realised. (7).

Like bubbles in water, the worlds are born, remain and dissolve in the Supreme Lord that is the material cause and foundation of all things. (8).

On the eternal Vishnu, who is pure existence and consciousness, as the common factor, all these various appearances are superimposed, like wristlets and other forms on gold. (9).

[p. 163]

Like space, the Lord Vishnu, coming in contact with various conditions, appears to be different by reason of their differences, but is seen to be undifferentiated when those (conditions) are destroyed. (10).

Only by virtue of varying conditions are caste, name, periods of religious life, etc., imposed on the self, like taste, colour and other distinctions imposed on water. (11).

The place for experiencing happiness and misery, which is made up of the fivefold compounds of the great elements and is obtained as the result of past actions, is called the (dense) body. (12).

[p. 164]

The instrument of enjoyment, which is made up of the uncompounded elements and which consists of the five life-forces, the mind, the consciousness, and the ten senses [**], is the subtle body. (13).

The beginningless illusion that is indefinable is called the causal body. One should understand the self as other than these three bodies (or conditions). (14).

The pure self, by the relation of the five sheaths, etc., appears to assume their respective natures, like a crystal reflecting a blue cloth, etc. (15).

[p. 165]

One should separate the grain of the pure inner self from the chaff of the body and- other sheaths by the threshing of reason. (16).

Although the self is at all times and in all things, yet it cannot shine in everything, but will shine only in the consciousness, just as a reflection will appear only in polished surfaces. (17).

One should understand the self to be always like a king, different from the body, senses, mind, consciousness, and eyes, the witness of their activities. (18).

[p. 166]

To the indiscriminating, the self appears to be active while (in reality) the senses (alone) are active, in the same way that the moon is seen as if running, when the clouds move. (19).

The body, senses, mind and consciousness, carry on their respective activities by depending on the consciousness of the self, like men depending on the sun's light. (20).

Owing to indiscrimination, men attribute the qualities and activities of the body and the senses to the self that is pure existence and consciousness [**], in the same way as blue colour is attributed to the sky. (21).

[p. 167]

Moreover, the nature of doer, etc., that belongs to the conditioning mind, is attributed to the self, just as the motion, etc., of water is attributed to the refection of the moon therein. (22).

Passions, desires, happiness, misery, etc., exercise their function when the consciousness is present, and do not exist in deep sleep when the consciousness is absent. They belong, therefore, to the consciousness and not to the self. (23).

As light is the very nature of the sun, coldness of water, heat of fire, so are being, consciousness, bliss, eternity and absoluteness the very nature of the self. (24).

[p. 168]

By indiscriminately mixing up the aspect of being and consciousness of the self with the function of the individual consciousness, there springs up the idea "I know." (25).

The self undergoes no modification, nor can knowledge arise in any manner from individual consciousness (alone). And yet, one ignorantly imagines that the individual soul knows, does and sees everything well. (26).

By mistaking the self to be the individual soul, as a rope for a serpent, one is subject to fear. But if he realises, "I am not the individual soul, but the Supreme Self," then he is free from fear. (27).

[p. 169]

The self alone illumines the consciousness; the senses, etc., as a light reveals the pot and other objects; (but) one's own self is not illumined by the illuminable objects. [**] (28).

The very nature of the self being knowledge, it does not depend, for a knowledge of itself, on any other knowledge, in the same way as a light does not need another light to reveal itself. (29).

Eliminating all limitations with the help of the passage "not this, not this," one should realise the identity of the individual soul and the supreme self by means of the principal scriptural passages. (30).

[p. 170]

The body and other objects of perception are the products of ignorance and are as evanescent as bubbles. The self that is unconditioned is other than these and should be understood as "I am Brahman." (31).

Birth, old age, decay, death, etc., are not for me, because I am other than the body. Sound and other objects of sense have no connection with me, for I am other than the senses. (32).

I am not the mind, and, therefore, sorrow, desire, hatred, fear, etc., are not for me. As declared by the scripture, the self is neither the senses nor mind, but is unconditioned. (33).

[p. 171]

I am attributeless, functionless, eternal, doubtless, stainless, changeless, formless, eternally free, and unconditioned. (34).

Like ether, I pervade everything, inside and outside. I am imperishable, ever the established (truth), alike to all, unattached, unconditioned, imperturbable. (35).

I am that very supreme Brahman that is reality, knowledge and infinity, that is ever unconditioned and ever free, the one undivided bliss that is without a second. (36).

Such incessant impression on the mind that "I am only Brahman" removes the turbulences of ignorance, as the elixir of life cures all diseases. (37).

[p. 172]

Sitting in a lonely place, free of all passions, with the senses subjugated, one should contemplate that one infinite self, without thinking of anything else. (38).

A wise man should, by his intelligence, submerge, in the self all that is objective and should ever contemplate the one self that is like unlimited space. (39).

One who has realised the supreme truth gives up everything, such as form, caste, etc., and abides, by nature, in (the self that is) infinite consciousness and bliss. (40).

[p. 173]

The distinction of knower, knowledge and the known does not exist in respect of the supreme self. Being sole consciousness and bliss, it shines by itself alone. (41).

The flame of knowledge that arises by this constant churning of meditation on the wood [**] of the self, will completely burn away the fuel of ignorance. (42).

When knowledge has destroyed ignorance, the self will manifest itself, in the same way as the sun rises as soon as the dawn [*+] of day has dispelled darkness. (43).

[p. 174]

The self, that is ever with us, appears, by ignorance, as if it were unattained and, when that (ignorance) is destroyed, attained, like one's own necklace. [**] (44).

The condition of individual soul has been imposed on Brahman by illusion, as the form of a man on a post, but disappears when the true nature of the individual soul is realised. (45).

The knowledge that arises from the realisation of one's own true nature, directly destroys the illusion of "I" and "mine" which resembles the confusion of the directions. [*+] (46).

[p. 175]

The devotee (yogin) that has gained right realisation sees all things, by the eye of knowledge, as existing in his own self, and the one self as all things. (47).

He sees all things as his own self in the same way as one sees pots, etc., as (mere) clay; (for), all this universe is only the self, and there is naught other than the self. (48).

Liberation-while-living means that the wise person, having abandoned his former limitations and qualities, and acquiring the properties of being, consciousness (and bliss), attains Brahman, in the same way as the worm becomes the wasp. (49).

[p. 176]

Having crossed the ocean of ignorance and having slain the demons of likes and dislikes, etc., the seer, united to tranquillity, is supremely happy in the enjoyment of the bliss of his own self [**]. (50).

Leaving aside all attachments to external and transient pleasures, and happy in the bliss of the self, such a one, for ever, shines within, like a light inside a globe. (51).

The seer, though remaining amidst limitations, should yet be unaffected by their qualities, like space. Knowing all, he should be like one that knows not, and should wander about, unattached, like the wind. (52).

[p. 177]

When the limitations disappear, the seer merges unreservedly in the Supreme (vishnu), like water in water, space in space, or light in light. (53).

Than gaining which there is no greater gain, than whose bliss there is no higher bliss, than knowing which there is no higher knowledge,--that should be understood as Brahman. (54).

Seeing which naught else remains to be seen, becoming which there is no becoming [**] again, knowing which naught else remains to be known,--that should he understood as Brahman. (55).

That which is all-pervading, around, above, below, which is being, consciousness and bliss,

[p. 178]

which is without a second, without end, eternal, sole,--that should be understood as Brahman. (56).

The immutable, the one uninterrupted bliss, which is indicated by the Vedanta by excluding what is not it,--that should be understood as Brahman. (57).

(The four-faced) Brahma and others, that are but parts of that self which is uninterrupted bliss, become happy, each in his own degree, by possessing a particle of that bliss. (58).

Every object (is such because. it) possesses that. All activity has consciousness running through it [**]. The Supreme Self, therefore, pervades

[p. 179]

the whole universe, as butter is in every part of milk. (59).

That which is neither subtle nor dense, neither short nor long, which is unborn, immutable, devoid of form, quality, caste or name,--that should be understood as Brahman. (60).

By whose light the sun, etc., shine, but which is not illumined by these that are illuminable, and by virtue of which all this (universe) shines [**],--that should be understood as Brahman. (61).

Pervading the whole universe, internally and externally, and illumining it, the Brahman shines by itself, like a red-hot iron ball. (62).

[p. 180]

The Brahman is different from the universe. There is naught other than Brahman. If anything other than Brahman is perceived, it is as unreal as the mirage in the desert. (63).

Whatever is seen or heard, other than Brahman, cannot be (real). Even that is Brahman, the secondless being, consciousness and bliss, when the reality is known. (64).

He who has the eye of knowledge sees Brahman that is being, consciousness and bliss, in all things; but he who has not the eye of knowledge cannot see it thus, as a blind man cannot see the shining sun. (65).

[p. 181]

The individual soul, melted in the fire of knowledge kindled by instruction, etc., is freed from all taints, like gold, and shines by itself. (66).

The self is the sun of knowledge that, rising in the firmament of the heart, destroys the darkness of ignorance, and, pervading all and supporting all, shines--and makes everything shine. (67).

He who, unmindful of (the limitations of) direction, space, time, etc., and perfectly tranquil, attains the sanctum of the self, that is the all-pervading, stainless, eternal bliss

[p. 182]

which dispels (all qualities like heat and) cold, etc.,--he becomes all-knowing, all-pervading, and immortal. (68).

 

 

Thus ends KNOWLEDGE OF SELF.

____

Footnotes

^161:* The cleaning-nut, rubbed into a paste and thrown into dirty water, clears the water and itself settles down along with the dirt as a sediment.

^164:* The five senses of perception and the five motor members of the body.

^166:* The self is absolute consciousness as distinguished from buddhi, the individual consciousness.

^169:* The mind, senses, etc.

^173:* Arani wood, used to kindle fire for sacrifices by churning it.

^173:+ Aruna, the charioteer of the sun; the dawn-god.

^174:* One appears to search for his necklace and find it, although it has been on his neck all the time.

^174:+ One who mistakes the directions, north, east, etc., corrects himself as soon as be clearly understands his own position.

^176:* This an allegorical explanation, incidentally, of the story of the Ramayana.

^177:* Birth.

^178:* These are the sat (being) and chit (consciousness) aspects of the self. The ananda (bliss) aspect has been dealt with in the previous verse.

^179:* Is manifest; is perceived.

     
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 183]

  

Commentary on the Text.

I salute the Lord of Lakshmi, the cause of creation, preservation and dissolution, the Lord of the universe possessing inconceivable power, omniscient, infinite in form, free of all bondage, the ocean of unbounded bliss, the concentration of pure knowledge. (1).

I ever prostrate to the lotus-feet of Him by whose grace I always realise the nature of the

[p. 184]

self to the effect that I alone am the Supreme and that all things are merely superimposed on me. (2).

Sorely afflicted by the sun of the three miseries [**], and perplexed in mind, some one, after acquiring the qualifications of mind-control, etc., asks the good Master as follows. (3).

O Lord, out of mere mercy, tell me briefly bow I may, without (much) effort, be liberated from this bondage of births and deaths. (4).

(The Master replies.) The manner of thy speech seems to me to be excellent. I shall explain to thee clearly which is which. Listen with an attentive mind. (5).

[p. 185]

The knowledge relating to the identity of the individual soul and the Supreme Self that arises from texts like "That thou art," is the means to liberation. (6).

What is the individual soul? What is the Supreme Self? How can there be identity between the two? And how can texts like "That thou art" express the same? (7).

We shall explain it (thus). What else, indeed, is the individual soul except thou alone. Thou that questionest me, 'who am I', art Brahman itself, without doubt. (8).

[p. 186]

I have not yet clearly grasped, O Lord, even the meaning of the words, "I am Brahman." How can I understand, tell me, the meaning of the sentence (as a whole)? (9).

What thou sayest is true and free from reproach. For, a knowledge of the word-meaning is indeed essential for the understanding of the sentence-meaning. (10).

Why dost thou not understand thyself,--thou whose very nature is reality and bliss and (pure) consciousness that is the witness of the individual consciousness and all its workings? (11).

Leaving aside all thought relating to the body, etc., thou shouldst ever meditate upon

[p. 187]

that whose nature is reality, bliss, and knowledge and which is the witness of consciousness, as thyself. (12).

Because the body has form, etc., like an earthen vessel or other object, and is, like an earthen vessel, composed of the (five) great elements, ether, etc., it cannot be the self. (13).

If, for the reasons aforesaid, this body is not the self; reveal the self, then, as clearly as a berry in the hand. (14).

As the witness of an earthen pot is different, from the pot and is not the pot in any sense, so is the witness of the body. Understand, therefore, "I am not the body." (15).

[p. 188]

Conclude, in the same way, "I am the witness of the senses and not the senses themselves." So, too, understand, "I am not the mind, the consciousness, or the life-force." (16).

Also "I am not the combination (of these)." Understand, thus, by intelligent reasoning, the witness that is distinct from the object. (17).

Understand "I am He by whose mere proximity, the body, senses and other object become of (all) activities like selection, etc. (18).

[p. 189]

Understand "I am that inner self which impels, the consciousness, etc., but is itself unchanging, like the lodestone. (19).

Understand "I am He by whose proximity, the body, senses, mind, and life-forces, though motionless, vet seem like the self that is not so. (20).

'My mind had gone elsewhere, but has now been steadied.' Understand "I am He who knows the above activity of the mind." (21).

Understand "I am He who is the direct witness, himself changeless, of waking, dream and sleep, and of the presence and absence of objects, and of all phases of consciousness. (22).

[p. 190]

As it is admitted that the light revealing (the presence of) a pot is other than the pot, so am I of the nature of knowledge, the dweller in the body that reveals the body. (23).

Understand "I am the witness that is the dearest of all, for whose sake alone, sons, wealth and other objects are dear." (24).

Understand "I am the witness who, being himself the object of highest love, feels 'let me never cease to be, but let me ever exist.'" (25).

The consciousness that is the witness is said to be the meaning of the word "thou." The

[p. 191]

self is the witness and the knower, because it is devoid of change. (26).

By the word "thou" is denoted that which is different from the body, senses, mind, life-forces, and ego, and is entirely devoid of the six states [**] or other change. (27).

Having thus understood the meaning of "thou," one should then contemplate the meaning of "that," both by eliminating what is not 'that' and by means of direct definitions thereof. (28).

Bereft of all taint of phenomenal existence, characterised by phrases like "not dense, etc.",

[p. 192]

qualified by non-objectivity, etc., free from the stain of nescience, (29),

Bliss unsurpassed, reality, knowledge, and existence by nature, all-filling,--'that' is spoken of as the Supreme Self. (30).

Understand that to be the Brahman in respect of which the Vedas assert omniscience, supreme lordship and omnipotence. (31).

Understand that to be the Brahman of which the Vedas explain, by various illustrations like clay [**], etc., that, by knowing it, all things are known: (32).

[p. 193]

Understand that to be the Brahman, of which the Vedas enunciate infinitude and, to establish it, declare the universe to be the effect of that. [**] (33).

Understand that to he the Brahman which, in the Vedanta, is established, by close reasoning, as the (only) thing to be realised by the aspirants for liberation. (34).

Understand that to he the Brahman which is spoken of in the Vedas as having entered all beings as their souls and controlling them. (35).

Understand that to be the Brahman which alone is spoken of in the Vedas as the bestower of the reward of actions and the originator of the cause [*+] of individual existence. (36).

[p. 194]

The meanings of the words 'that' and 'thou' have been determined. The meaning of the sentence will now be dealt with. This sentence-meaning is the identity between those same two word-meanings. (37)

The accepted meaning of the sentence, in this case, is neither co-existence nor particularisation. The meaning of the sentence, as accepted by the wise, is essential identity without reservation. (38).

What appears as the inner consciousness is that whose characteristic is secondless bliss, whose nature is secondless bliss, and whose sole definition is inner consciousness. (39).

[p. 195]

When the mutual identity of the two is thus understood, then only will the non-Brahmanness of the word-meaning 'thou' be eliminated. (40).

as also the unknownness of the word-meaning of 'that.' If it be so, what then? Listen. The inner consciousness remains absolutely as infinite bliss by nature. (41).

Further, a sentence like 'that thou art,' in order to denote , proceeds on the basis of the secondary [**] meaning of the two words 'that' and 'thou.' (42).

We shall carefully explain how the sentence makes its own meaning clear, by excluding the expressed meanings of the two words, which are mixed up. (43).

[p. 196]

The consciousness, conditioned by the mind, which appears as the connecting link between the idea "I" and the word "I", is expressed by the word "thou". (44).

The first cause of the worlds, conditioned by nescience (maya), characterised by omniscience, etc. [**], of the nature of reality, etc. [*+], and affected by non-cognisability, is expressed by the word "that". (45).

(But) cognisability and non-cognisability, having a second and being .infinite, are inconsistent in respect of the same thing. Hence is the necessity for the derived (or secondary) meaning. (46).

[p. 197]

When the adoption of the primary meaning is inconsistent with other (established) proofs, the adoption of a meaning not unconnected with the principal meaning, is called the derivation of meaning (lakshana). (47).

The derivation of meaning, in the case of passages like "that thou art", is a partial derivation, and no other as in the case of the words in sentences like "This is he". (48).

Until the sentence-meaning of "I am Brahman" is firmly understood, so long should one possess control of mind, etc., and practise (the expedients of hearing, [**] etc.). (49).

When, by the grace of the Vedic teacher, one gets a firm understanding (of the above sentence), then is he entirely free from phenomenal condition and its cause. [*+] (50).

[p. 198]

All ends and means destroyed, unconditioned by the elements and the subtler bodies, and free from the bonds of action, such a one is immediately liberated. (51).

When, by the destruction of the bondage of past actions not yet ripe for enjoyment, one becomes liberated while living, he remains as such for a short time by virtue of such of his past actions as have brought about his present life. (52).

(Thereafter) he attains absolute liberation without any more birth, which is of the nature of unsurpassed bliss and is known as the supreme abode of Vishnu. (53).

 

Here ends the Commentary on the Text.

_____

 

Footnotes

^184:* See footnote on page <page 86>.

^191:* Birth, existence, growth, maturity, decay, and death.

^192:* By knowing clay, all clay things like pot, etc., are known.

^193:* i.e., Brahman is the cause of the universe.

^193:+ Maya or nescience.

^195:* Lakshya, secondary, indirect or derived, as opposed to vachya, primary, direct or expressed.

^196:* Omniscience, omnipotence, omnipresence.

^196:+ Reality, knowledge, infinity.

^197:* Hearing, meditation and concentration.

^197:+ Nescience or maya.

    
Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 199]

  

Definition of One's Own Self.

I salute the two feet of the holy Master, which destroy (this) unendurable duality, and whose dust, like the sacred ashes, quell the demon of illusion. (1).

I salute the merciful and most excellent Master who destroys all doubts and whose two feet reveal the enjoyment of one-ness as the meaning of the word "that". (2).

[p. 200]

Scorched by the forest-fire of phenomenal existence, the pupil, possessed of all necessary qualifications, is thus enlightened by the Master with words capable of revealing the true self. (3).

Whoever doubts the fact that himself exists? If even this is doubted, he who doubts is only thyself. (4).

[p. 201]

When one knows "I am not", it is verily Brahman itself that knows "it is not." When one knows "I am", then (too) it is that Brahman itself that knows thus. (5).

Thyself, therefore, art Brahman. "I am not Brahman" is a mere illusion. From illusion springs separation [**] wherein all sorrows have root. (6).

He who gains a clear knowledge of the five sheaths (of the self) does not experience the five sufferings. [*+] The wise, therefore, always investigate the five sheaths. (7).

[p. 202]

By a clear knowledge of the five sheaths, anna-maya, prana-maya, mano-maya, vijnana-maya and ananda-maya, each within the one before it, the self becomes capable of being revealed. (8).

This (gross) body which is called the anna-maya sheath, is not the self, for it is non-sentient, almost like an earthen vessel, and is non-existent before birth and after death. (9).

[p. 203]

So much of the atmosphere as is contained by the body is the prana-maya sheath. How can this be the self, being afflicted with hunger and thirst? (10).

Nor can the mano-maya sheath be the self, which thinks of the body as 'I' and of home, etc., as 'mine', and which is the slave of likes and dislikes. (11).

Nor can the individual consciousness known by the name of vijnana-maya (sheath), be the self, for it is only a reflection of the pure consciousness, [**] disappearing in deep sleep and permeating the whole body in conscious moments. (12).

[p. 204]

How can I-ness (or egoism), which is called the ananda-maya sheath, be the self, fondly imagining "I am happy" by reason of the small fractions of bliss found in deep sleep?(13).

That which shines as the reality is bliss itself, is the self of all, for it exists before and after, is changeless and uncontradictable. (14).

[p. 205]

If nothing different from the annamaya and other sheaths is perceived, it cannot nevertheless he denied that there is one that Perceives the annamaya, etc., sheaths. (15).

Although the self, being of the very nature of consciousness, cannot therefore be the object of consciousness, nevertheless there can never be a doubt regarding the absolute existence of consciousness itself. (16).

The self experiences all things, but cannot be experienced by anything. The sun, that illumines the whole world, is not, in its turn, illumined. (17).

[p. 206]

What is neither that nor this, so or thus, that much or this much,--that should be understood to be Brahman. Otherwise, it will be a mere object, and not directly knowable. (18).

While everything that is perceived as 'this, this' is contradictable [**], the reality that is 'not this' is not contradictable. It is, moreover, not unrealisable, because it exists. (19).

[p. 207]

Brahman, although not knowable (by the intellect), is yet not unrealisable, because it is self-resplendent. The passage, "Brahman is reality, knowledge, infinity", expresses the definition thereof. (20).

As long as there is limitation by the powers of the sheaths, the conditions of individual soul and Supreme Self affect it. Otherwise, these two conditions disappear, and its real nature without any distinction shines forth. (21).

If it is determined by ordinary reasoning that, when everything visible is known to be unreal, there is naught at all, it is further determined by the Vedas that what is established as naught at all, is Brahman itself. (22).

[p. 208]

Although this is so, to those that are devoid of even a thought of passages like "that thou art", the self, though (ever) resplendent within, becomes, as it were, invisible. (23).

Therefore, by a contemplation of the meaning of such passages through an examination of their word-meanings, and by the glory of the grace of the Master, one directly sees the self in an instant. (24).

[p. 209]

The expressed meaning of the word 'thou' is the (individual) consciousness that prides in being doer, (enjoyer,) etc., superimposing the functions of the body, the senses, etc., on the self as if they were identical. (25).

The derived meaning of the word 'thou' is the consciousness that manifests itself as the. witness of the body, the ego, and the senses, distinct from them. (26).

The expressed meaning of the word "that" is the supreme self which is knowable from Vedantic texts, which is the efficient cause of the whole universe, and which is endowed with omniscience, etc. (27).

[p. 210]

The derived meaning of the word "that" is the supreme self, free of all condition whatsoever, beyond all phenomena, absolute, second-less, eternal, and realisable by (direct) experience. (28).

The relation between the two word-meanings is either sameness of object, or the relation of attribute and subject, or that of indicated and indicator. (29).

[p. 211]

Those versed in interpretation explain "sameness of object" as the application of words, individually denoting different objects, to denote together the same object. (30).

Visibility and invisibility, fullness and the having a second, are mutually contradictory. Therefore, in the case on hand, the derived meaning alone is possible. (31).

Derivation of meaning is the denotation of an object not unconnected with the primary

[p. 212]

meaning, in a case where the primary meaning cannot be adopted owing to its contradiction by other reasons. (32)

Exclusive derivation of meaning [**] is the denotation of a different object connected with the expressed meaning, but completely exclusive of the latter; for instance, the hamlet on the Ganges [*+]. Such derivation of meaning is not applicable to the present case. (33).

[p. 213]

Inclusive derivation of meaning is the denotation of another object without abandoning the expressed meaning; for instance, the red [**] (one) is running. Such derivation, too, should not be adopted in the present case. (34).

The partly exclusive and partly inclusive derivation is that which excludes a portion of the expressed object and denotes another portion thereof; for instance, "this is that Brahmin". This mode of derivation should be adopted in the present case. (35).

[p. 214]

The sentence, "this is that Brahmin", indicates the Brahmin alone by excluding the remoteness and the nearness of place, (time), etc., and thus denotes identity between the meanings of the two words ('this' and 'that'.) (36).

In the same way, the sentence, "that thou art", indicates the Supreme Self that is the reality, by excluding directness and remoteness, etc., and thus clearly denotes identity [**] by the word "art." (37).

In regard to those that realise as "I" the reality thus indicated by the principal text

[p. 215]

declaring identity, the Vedas declare that they shall be free from all sorrow. (38).

It is generally observed, both in secular and Vedic matter, that words of injunction (alone) are capable of inciting one to action. How can the same hold good in the case of passages like "that thou art" which (merely) reveal a thing already established? (39).

It is not injunction alone that can incite one to action, but also an assertion regarding a desired object. A person will begin to act by virtue of the knowledge. "Here is the king" or "a son has been born." (40).

[p. 216]

Although, according to the Vedic passages declaring identity, the self is incessantly revealed, yet it is not possible to realise it for those that are devoid of the grace of the Master. (41).

Do not think, 'what is the need for a Master, since one, by himself, can attain a knowledge of the self by avoiding optional and prohibited rites and by purifying the mind through the performance of prescribed rites?' (42).

[p. 217]

Knowledge (of self) cannot result from rites alone, without the Master that is the ocean of mercy; for it is established by the Vedas that only he who has a Master can know. (43).

The Vedas are the highest authority, either because they are beginningless or because they are the utterances of the Supreme Lord. Knowledge, (therefore) cannot result either by itself or from any other authority. (44).

The Vedic sentence, which does not depend on any other proof, but on which depend all

[p. 218]

proofs, is the only source of the knowledge of Brahman and other things that are beyond the senses. (45).

Those that attempt, by means of proof, to realise a knowledge which reveals the proof itself, are such wonderful beings that they will burn fire itself by means of fuel. (46).

The Veda is beginningless, and the self-resplendent Lord himself manifests it. In view of its manifestation thus, the great ones have declared that it is the (highest) authority. (47).

[p. 219]

As no authority is equal to the eye in the perception of forms, so is there no authority for knowledge, equal to the Veda, in the realisation of that which is beyond perception. (48).

If any treatise elucidates a truth established by the Vedas, it is merely a repetition and is not indicative of any authority whatsoever. (49).

[p. 220]

Of the Vedas consisting of two parts, one part [**] enunciates duality and the other [*+] plainly expounds the one (secondless) reality. (50).

The secondless alone is real. Duality. being only superimposed thereon, is not real, like (the illusion of) silver in the mother-o'-pearl, or the appearance of water in a mirage. (51).

It is not proper to say that the secondless reality may be superimposed on the unreal and dual; for superimposition is (always) that of the unreal on the real. (52).

[p. 221]

Both cannot be superimposed, for there is naught different from them and superimposition cannot be on nothing. Hence, the reality of the secondless (self) must be accepted. (53).

What is expounded by the Vedas is the secondless (Brahman) that cannot be known by direct perception and other proofs, and not duality, for the latter is already established by ordinary reasoning. (54).

[p. 222]

The secondless (Brahman) is of the nature of happiness, while duality is always unendurable misery. The Vedas, therefore, expound only that [**] which is aspired for. (55).

In respect of the secondless reality which is expounded by the Vedas and which is of the nature of bliss, some say that the condition of individual self is its ordinary nature. (56).

If the condition of individual self be the very nature of (Brahman that is) absolute consciousness, then, like the heat and light of fire, it can never disappear. (57).

[p. 223]

Some are of opinion that the individual soul becomes the supreme soul by virtue of spiritual effort in the same way as iron becomes gold by the action of some chemical. (58).

This is not right; for when the power of the chemical disappears by lapse of time, the golden colour that was imparted to the iron, also disappears. (59).

[p. 224]

In the same way, the condition of individual soul, with its characteristics of pleasure and pain, will only seem to disappear (according to the above reasoning), but will not be utterly destroyed. (60).

Therefore, if, by its very nature, it is the individual self, it will for ever remain the individual self. 'In the same way, if (by its very nature) it is the supreme self, it stands to reason that it is always the supreme self. (61).

Even if the individual soul were to attain (only a) similarity with the supreme self by virtue of spiritual efforts, it has been decided

[p. 225]

by all authorities that even that similarity must necessarily perish after some time [**]. (62).

Having therefore destroyed, by the knowledge of the self, the insuperable ignorance regarding one's self and phenomenal limitation (samsara) which is of the nature of (that) ignorance, one becomes oneself the Infinite, and naught else remains. (63).

All the Vedas and all religious treatises (smriti) expound the supreme secondless Self whose nature is reality, knowledge and bliss as the thing to be realised. (64)

[p. 226]

In respect of all the numerous Vedic passages declaring oneness, all other passages are said to be subordinate thereto. (65).

 [**] From passages like "that thou art," how does the knowledge of non-duality spring up, at whose very origin the conditions of doer, etc., disappear, like darkness at the rise of the sun? (66).

[p. 227]

Those versed in ritual argue that knowledge occurs in the ritual portion (of the Veda) and is therefore an auxiliary to ritual. But how can knowledge be an auxiliary to ritual, since it occurs in a quite different context? (67).

The two portions (of the Veda) relating to ritual and knowledge, are entirely different, both in respect of the aspirant's qualifications and the subject dealt with. This being so, how can they be principal and auxiliary in relation to each other? (68).

[p. 228]

Knowledge cannot exist in ritual. So, too, ritual cannot exist in knowledge. How is any correlation possible between the two, which are like sun and darkness? (69),

Therefore, for the removal^ of illusion, knowledge does not need the assistance of anything else, in the same way as the sun for the dispulsion of the densest darkness. (70).

The supreme self that is the witness of al;. is itself that unsullied knowledge. The witness, therefore, is not affected by those limitations (of ignorance) but is (even) reality, knowledge and bliss. (71).

[p. 229]

Its relation to them as (subject and) object is (illusory) like the relation of rope, etc., to serpent, etc. The Vedas, too, establish the same truth by declaring "this (self) is ever unattached". (72)

That which cognises both subject and object is the supreme self itself. Neither of them can know it. That which is neither subject nor object can alone know (itself) clearly. (73).

[p. 230]

Some say that the nature of doer, (enjoyer,) etc. and all else is manifested (in the self) by its power of maya. This is (however) a delusion, because there is naught other than Brahman. (74).

That Brahman being known, all this universe will become known, in the same way as all earthern jars, pots, etc., become known by the clay, which is their cause, being known. (75).

This (Brahman), then, is the one cause, devoid of all distinction, of the nature of purest

[p. 231]

consciousness. From that which is the sole reality, conditioned by maya, sprang forth all this universe. (76).

Some say that the cause is non-entity. (But) the non-existent cannot be a cause. The power to generate a sprout is visible to all, only if the seed exists. (77).

He who declares the cause to be non-entity, can manage affairs with the son of a barren woman and quench intense thirst by drinking the water of a mirage. (78).

[p. 232]

As this doctrine of a non-existent cause is untenable both according to scripture and reason, it follows that real entity is alone the cause of all the worlds. (79)

This reality, higher than the highest, manifests itself as the worlds, also as teacher and pupil, also as (the four-faced) Brahman and other gods. (80).

For those whose minds are not ripe, the impression that the world is real will tend to

[p. 233]

bondage (of births and deaths). Hence, the Vedantas declare all this universe to be unreal. (81)

On the other hand, to those great persons whose minds have become ripe by virtue of their past merits, the Vedas declare that all this universe is Brahman alone. (82).

Those that do not realise the gold understand a golden ornament only as an ornament. So, too, those that are devoid of realisation do not perceive the world to be Brahman. (83).

[p. 234]

How can Brahman be unknown to anyone, which is realisable by means of I-ness? [**] And yet, it is impossible of realisation by the un-enquiring ignorant. (84).

All persons carry on their activities at all times by means of the ideas "I" and "this". Of these, the former relates to the inner self, and the latter to external objects like the body, the senses, etc. (85).

[p. 235]

If the idea of "I" springs up in respect of the body, senses, etc., it is then a huge delusion; for, delusion is defined as the perception of anything in what is not that thing. (86).

It therefore stands to reason that the supreme self that is the witness of all is alone denoted by the idea "I". This I-ness, although devoid of consciousness, becomes conscious, as it were, by its contact with the self. (87).

The direct meaning of the clear and unmixed conception, "I", "I", in all bodies is therefore Brahman alone. (88)

[p. 236]

By the word "cow", the genus 'cow' is primarily meant; but, from the context, a particular cow is also indicated. In the same way, the primary meaning of "I" is the supreme self, but, by virtue of delusion, becomes the ego. (89).

Just as the power to burn, etc., is manifest in iron by reason of its contact with fire, so do the conditions of doer, (enjoyer) etc., manifest themselves in the "I" by reason of its connection with the self. (90).

[p. 237]

Having understood the meaning of "I" to be the pure, transcendental, secondless (self) that is different from the body, senses and other objects, one should not attribute any other meaning thereto. (9l).

Just as, in the same body, the pleasures and pains are numerous in respect of the various limbs, so, too, there are differences of experiences in respect of these individual souls, although there is really no differentiation at all: (92).

[p. 238]

A wise person should never enquire of the universe, 'what is this', 'what is its nature', 'how was it born' 'and 'what is its cause'. He should merely think of it as delusion. (93).

The wood is forgotten in the elephant made of wood, and the elephant in the wood. [**] So is the supreme self forgotten in the universe and the universe in the self. (94)

On the vast canvas of the self, the self itself paints the picture of the various worlds and

[p. 239]

the supreme-self itself derives extreme bliss from seeing that picture. [**] (95).

The wise have the firm conviction that there is nothing else than the supreme self alone, consisting of pure consciousness, attributeless, imperishable, secondless, of the nature of bliss, and attainable only by direct realisation. (96).

The talk in the Vedas about knowledge and ne-science relates to the stage of argumentation. From the true standpoint there is no such distinction, because Brahman is the only reality and there is naught else than this. (97).

[p. 240]

If one asserts that there is anything other than the self, even that is the self in its aspect of existence. Anything which is different from being existent, is non-existent and therefore a mere void. (98).

For the wise, although delusion has been conquered by the steady power of their knowledge of the self, yet it seems to remain until the death of their bodies. But the self shines for them in its real nature. (99)

[p. 241]

This is the peculiarity of the wise, that, although they are looking at all the variety of phenomenal existence, they could see naught other than the self understood from all the Vedas. (100).

For the wise that realise everything to be Brahman, what is there to meditate or not meditate, what to speak or not speak, what to do or not do? (101)

[p. 242]

For the wise that see all objects as the self (drik), there is neither bondage nor liberation, neither the condition of supreme self nor that of individual soul. (102)

This is the sole ultimate teaching of all the Vedas if they are repeatedly enquired into,--the Vedas which uncontradictably reveal the self and which are the highest authority possible. (103).

Thus taught by his master, the disciple saluted his feet with joy and meditated within

[p. 243]

himself on the truth established by his own direct realisation. (104).

I am undecaying, I am imperishable, I am the Lord (prajna), I am the consciousness that is the inner self, I am full of supreme bliss, I am the supreme self (parama-siva), I am the infinite. (105).

I am the greatest of those that have realised the self. I am the enjoyer of the realisation of my own bliss. I am he whose glory is realised as "I" by all beings down to children and the illiterate. (106),

[p. 244]

I am averse to sensual pleasures. I am full of the bliss, knowledge and realisation of the self. I am far aloof from any thought of the objective. I am delighted at heart by that which is not objective. (107).

I am the Lord of lords. I am devoid of even a touch of jealousy and hatred. I am he that fulfils the desired object for those who are bent on realising the goal. (108).

[p. 245]

I alone am the origin of the worlds. I am he that sports in the garden of the upanishads. I am the flame of the sub-marine fire that will dry up the overflowing ocean of sorrow. (109).

I pervade up and down and around with my own extraordinary glories. I am he who appears to be determined by means of argument, counter argument and enquiry. (110).

[p. 246]

I am the seer. I am the host of seers. I am the act of creation and I myself am the created. I am prosperity, I am progress, I am satisfaction, I am the glow of the lamp .of satisfaction. (111).

I am one. I am devoid of all distinctions, such as "this," "like this" or "thus". I am he that should be worshipped by the non-desirous. I am devoid of the inner feeling of merit or demerit. (1I2).

I am the revealer of oneness. I alone am the supreme reality for minds purified by a

[p. 247]

thorough understanding of the (Vedantic) formula. I am the sun that dispels ignorance like the darkness of the night. (113).

I am the efficacy of herbs. I am the warp and woof of the worlds. I am the bee intoxicated with the fragrance of the bliss of self emanating from the lotus of the sacred syllable om. (114).

I am the healing balm for evils. I am devoid of all conditional properties. I am the acne of liberality. I am he that rescues

[p. 248]

all by (granting) the fourfold desires [**] in various ways. (115).

I am the goad of all powerfullest elephants, being greater than them. I am as spotless as space. I am devoid of emotions generated by the god of love. (116).

Amidst doubts and doctrines regarding the self, I am he that is realised by unerring instruction. I am averse to transient pleasures. I am fittest for the plenitude of eternal bliss and knowledge. (117).

[p. 249]

I am filled with the nectar of mercy. I am he that devours all the worlds including that of the lotus-seated. [**] I am devoid of the sinful "I". I am free from the contagion of sin and virtue. (118).

I am beyond the scope of the senses. I transcend the ether (akasa). I pervade phenomenal existence which is (unreal) like a sky-flower. I am unattainable by the wicked. I am bent on dispelling imperfect knowledge. (119).

[p. 250]

The very mention of duality will slip away from me. I am he whose dwelling is the innermost heart of all. I am attainable by the contented. I am the perfect consciousness that knows no going or coming. (120).

I am a host of suns for destroying the accumulated darkness of densest delusion. I am the various divisions of time, hour, day, night, year, yuga and kalpa. (121).

[p. 251]

The sentient and the non-sentient are my forms. My actions are extolled by the wisest. I am inaccessible to the unsteady. My abode is the other shore of the boisterous ocean of phenomenal existence. (122).

I am elated with the joy of conscious bliss that is hidden down the ocean of the Vedas. I am concealed to those whose minds are fond of deceptive verbiage. I am attainable by the way of peace. (123).

[p. 252]

I am the root of all objects from the lotus-seated (Brahman) downwards and of the five great elements. I impart bliss to the worlds. I am free from birth, age, disease and death. (124).

I am the several varieties of noise like the buzz, the grunt, the tinkling and the roar. I am he that illuminates the mansion of the heart by the lamp of self-realisation promptly lit. (125).

I am knowledge. I am the known. I am the knower. I am all the aids to knowledge.

[p. 253]

[paragraph continues] I am that pure sole existence bereft of knower, knowledge and known. (126).

My nature is beyond all principles. I am devoid of the thought that I am among them. I am difficult of attainment for the ignorant. My secret is realisable by a knowledge of the words "that" and "thou." (127).

I am the foremost of all deities, demons, fiends, men, animals and mountains. I am without body and senses. I am the various directions like south, east, etc. (128).

[p. 254]

I am of the nature of right and wrong. I am free from the bondage of right and wrong etc. I am easily attainable by those that follow the right. I am the happiest. I am the origin of the Creator himself. (129).

I am devoid of names (and forms) etc. I am free from hell, heaven and liberation. I am he that is realised by the ultimate inner sound. I am the essence of all the Vedas and of the whole universe. (130).

[p. 255]

I am he whose mind is purified by the knowledge of the reality which dispels the distinction between the supreme self and the individual soul. I am the original. I am the change. I am the fruition of all fortunes. (131).

In the shape of the serpent, the mountain and the elephant, I bear the whole weight of the world. I (am Siva who) destroyed the five-arrowed (Cupid) by the fire emanating from the eye in the forehead. (132).

[p. 256]

I never become bound. So, too, I am never liberated from bondage. I am never such as to be taught. I am not the teaching. I am not the teacher. (133).

I am devotion. I am worship. I am liberation. I alone am the means to liberation. I am the ruler of all beings. I am the root-cause of all that is past, present and future. (134).

I am respected by the great. I am disrespected by the ignorant. I am difficult to attain, owing to the evil tendencies of the mind deluded by pride, desire and vanity. (135).

[p. 257]

I am the sacrificial rite, the sacrificer, the priest and the sacrifice. I am free from control of mind etc. [**] I am Yama, Varuna, Kubera, Indra, Nirriti, Vayu, Isvara and Agni. [*+] (136).

I are the glory of that playful glance that affords protection and witnesses the control (of the universe.) I am established by the authority of that realisation which springs up amidst conditions wherein there is neither night nor day. (137).

[p. 258]

I am the definition and the defined. I am the implied meaning. I am devoid of dissolution etc. I am the gain and the loss. I am the unattained amidst the attainable. (138).

I have no castes or rules of life. I am the sacred syllables. I am the respected among the most respectable. I am beyond the scope of speech. I am within the words and the meaning of every sentence. (139).

[p. 259]

I am unattainable even by hundreds of philosophies for minds that are devoid of peace and self-control. I am the sole refuge of the wise. I break to pieces countless doubts of various sorts. (140).

I am free from the six states [**] and the six tastes. [*+] I. have no enemy. I am free from the six bodily sheaths. [*++] I am beyond the thirty-six principles. [* section] (141).

[p. 260]

I am the bliss of realisation. I am the celestial tree that grants the desire for absorbed contemplation. I am free from phenomenal condition. I am the direct realisation of the Vedanta (atma vidya). (142)

I am the oblation to the gods and the oblation to the manes. I am devoid of all ideas of rejection and acceptance. I am Vishnu, I am Siva, I am Brahman (the creator), and I alone am their cause. (143)

[p. 261]

All my sins have been washed away. The sorrows of phenomenal existence have been dispelled from my heart. I am the root of all the various activities expressed by the letters ending with ksha and beginning with a. [**] (144)

Why say so much! All this universe, sentient and non-sentient, is myself. Spray and foam and wave are not, in reality, substances-different from the ocean. (145)

[p. 262]

My refuge is neither my mother, nor father, nor sons, nor brothers, nor others. My supreme refuge shall be the foot placed by my master on my head. (146)

There is the foot of the master. There is unbounded mercy in his look. There is whatever he has taught. Is there any higher fulfilment of life? (147)

The looks of the venerable master are as full as the flood of rays of the (full) moon, they

[p. 263]

are a variety of the celestial tree in granting whatever boon is desired, and they soothen and quell the sorrow of the mind. (148)

In the cave of the heart there lies for ever by herself, the serpent-maid of pure consciousness, made happy by swallowing the huge frog of a fickle mind. (149)

In the vast ocean of bliss and realisation, which is myself, characterised by maya, a thousand universe bubbles spring up and disappear again and again. (150)

[p. 264]

Solely by the good ship of the master's grace, wafted by the wind of good luck acquired in former lives, I have crossed the vast ocean of phenomenal existence, whose waves of sorrow are unendurable. (151)

While there was the darkness of ignorance, I saw the whole universe as a reality before my eyes. But when the sun of knowledge has risen, I see nothing at all. This is wonderful! (152)

[p. 265]

I prostrate not to the gods. One who is beyond all gods does not salute a god. After that stage, one does no prescribed act. I prostrate again and again to my own self, which is the root of all endeavour. (153)

Thus, rejoicing again and again at the thought of his having gained the knowledge of the self, he reaches the supreme state of absoluteness (kaivalya), when the fruits of actions ripe for present enjoyment are . (154)

[p. 266]

The Lord facing the south [**], himself, has composed this work entitled "The definition of one's own self", which will dispel the darkness of ignorance and will carry one across the shoreless ocean of phenomenal existence. (155)

The sky of my mind is illumined by the sun of the master who is the Lord Vishnu that destroys the darkness of ignorance and causes the lotus of realisation to blossom. (156)

Here Ends

THE DEFINITION OF ONE'S OWN SELF.

_________

 

 

 

Footnotes

^201:* Difference, duality, manifoldness, variety.

^201:+ Avidya, ignorance; asmita, egoism; raga, desire; dvesha, hate; and abhinivesa, fear of death.

^203:* The Supreme Self.

^206:* i.e., Unreal.

^212:* Derivation of meaning is of three kinds: exclusive, inclusive, and partly exclusive and partly inclusive.

^212:+ Which really means "the banks of the Ganges"

^213:* The quality of redness cannot run. The red horse or other animal is meant.

^214:* Between the two indicated by "that" and "thou"

^220:* The karma-kanda.

^220:+ The jnana-kanda.

^222:* Brahman, that is, eternal bliss.

^225:* Because whatever has au artificial origin must have an end.

^226:* This and the first half of the next verse are the view of the mid mimamsaka or ritual school.

^234:* i.e. realisable by the experiences common to all, "I am ", "I know", "I feel" etc,

^238:* Children treat it as an elephant, and the elderly as wood. So the wise see only the supreme self and the ignorant the non-self only.

^239:* As a painter may draw a picture on the back of his hand and enjoy its sight himself.

^248:* Dharma, merit, artha, riches, kama, pleasure and moksha, liberation.

^249:* The four-faced Brahman.

^257:* The eight limbed (or Raja--) Yoga.

^257:+ The eight deities presiding over the eight cardinal points.

^259:* Birth, existence, growth, ripeness, decay, death.

^259:+ Sweet, sour, salt, bitter, pungent and astringent.

^259:++ Skin muscles, blood, nerves, bones and marrow.

^259: section The five elements, the five pranas (vital breaths), the five sensory and the five motor organs, the four aspects of the mind, mahat, kala, (time), pradhana, maya, avidya, purusha, bindu, nada, sakti, siva, santa and atita.

^261:* ###2309### (a) and  (ksha) are the first and last letters of the Samskrit alphabet.

^266:* Dakshinamurti, the Lord Siva in the shape of a spiritual teacher.

 

    


===== BOOK: wosf.txt =====


    The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Writings

  

of

  

St. Francis of Assisi.

  

NEWLY TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES

  

BY

  

FATHER PASCHAL ROBINSON

  

of the Order of Friars Minor

  

PHILADELPHIA

  

The Dolphin Press

  

[1905]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, August 2007. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to January 1st, 1923. These files may be used for any purpose.

Click to enlarge
First Title Page

Click to enlarge

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

Paterson die 26 Novembris, 1905

FR. EDUARDUS BLECKE, O.F.M.

Provinciae SS. Nominis Jesu Minister Provincialis

_________

###10016### PATRITIUS JOANNES

Archiep. Philadelphien.

Die 8 Decembris, 1905

 

TO THE
 MOST REVEREND

Father Denis Schuler

THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH SUCCESSOR OF
 SAINT FRANCIS AS MINISTER GENERAL
 OF THE FRIARS MINOR

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

CONTENTS.

          INTRODUCTION

       <page ix>

     
      CHARACTERISTICS   OF ST. FRANCIS' WRITINGS

       <page x>

     
      EARLY MS.   COLLECTIONS

       <page xviii>

     
      EDITIONS AND   TRANSLATIONS

       <page xxii>

     
      
   PART I.

        

     
      WORDS OF   ADMONITION

       <page 3>

     
      SALUTATION OF   THE VIRTUES

       <page 20>

     
      INSTRUCTION ON   THE LORD'S BODY

       <page 22>

     
      RULES OF THE   FRIARS MINOR

       <page 25>

     
           FIRST   RULE OF THE FRIARS MINOR

       <page 31>

     
           SECOND   RULE OF THE FRIARS MINOR

       <page 64>

     
      FRAGMENTS FROM   THE RULE OF THE CLARES

       <page 75>

     
      THE TESTAMENT

       <page 79>

     
      REGULATION FOR   HERMITAGES

       <page 87>

     
      
   PART II.

        

     
      SIX LETTERS OF   ST. FRANCIS

       <page 93>

     
           1.   TO ALL THE FAITHFUL

       <page 96>

     
           2.   TO ALL THE FRIARS

       <page 109>

     
           3.   TO A CERTAIN MINISTER

       <page 119>

     
           4.   TO THE RULERS OF THE PEOPLE

       <page 125>

     
           5.   TO ALL THE CUSTODES

       <page 127>

     
           6.   TO BROTHER LEO

       <page 130>

     
      
   PART III.

        

     
      PRAISES AND   PARAPHRASE OF THE LORD'S PRAYER

       <page 137>

     
      SALUTATION OF   THE BLESSED VIRGIN

       <page 143>

     
      PRAYER TO   OBTAIN DIVINE LOVE

       <page 145>

     
      [p. viii]

        

     
      THE PRAISES OF   GOD

       <page 146>

     
      THE BLESSING OF   BROTHER LEO

       <page 149>

     
      THE CANTICLE OF   THE SUN

       <page 150>

     
      THE OFFICE OF   THE PASSION

       <page 154>

     
      
   APPENDIX:

        

     
      SOME LOST,   DOUBTFUL AND SPURIOUS WRITINGS

       <page 179>

     
      
   BIBLIOGRAPHY

       <page 189>

     
      
   INDEX

       <page 197>

     
   
     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

INTRODUCTION.

  

I.

THE writings of St. Francis may, as is obvious, be considered from more than one point of view. Premising this, we are afforded a clue to the difficulty which has led students of Franciscan sources to divide themselves into two camps as to the objective value of these writings. Indeed, one writer [*1] goes so far as to compare the attitude of modern scholars toward them to that of the "Spiritual" and Conventual Friars respectively in the first century of Franciscan history. For while one party, led by M. Paul Sabatier, [*2] attaches what some regard as almost undue weight to the writings of St. Francis as a source of our knowledge of him, the other party, following Mgr. Faloci Pulignani, [*3] displays, we are told, a tendency to belittle their importance. The truth is, as Professor Muller long ago pointed out, [*4] that these writings afford

[p. x]

us little if any information as to the life of their author, a fact which may perhaps account for their comparative neglect by so many of the Saint's biographers, but it is not less true that they bear the stamp of his personality and reflect his spirit even more faithfully than the Legends written down on the very morrow of his death by those who had known him the best of all. [*1] For this reason they are well worth all the serious study that scholars outside the Franciscan Order are now beginning to give to them.

To say that the writings of St. Francis reflect his personality and his spirit is but another way of saying that they are at once formidably mystic and exquisitely human; that they combine great elevation of thought with much picturesqueness of expression. This twofold element, which found its development later on in the prose of mystics like St. Bonaventure and in the verse of poets like Jacopone da Todi, and which has ever been a marked characteristic of Franciscan ascetic literature, leads back to the writings of the Founder as to the humble upper waters of a mighty stream. St. Francis had the soul of an ascetic and the heart of a poet. His unbounded faith had an almost lyric sweetness about it; his deep sense of the spiritual is often clothed with the character of romance. This intimate union of the supernatural and the natural is nowhere more strikingly manifested than in the writings of St. Francis, which, after

[p. xi]

the vicissitudes of well nigh seven hundred winters, are still fragrant with the fragrance of the Seraphic springtide.

Important as the doctrinal aspect of St. Francis' writings must of necessity be to all who would understand his life--since "the springs of action are to be found in belief, and conduct ultimately rests upon conviction "--it is foreign to the object of the present volume. I am here concerned with the literary and historical aspect of these writings. Suffice it to say that St. Francis' doctrine, [*1] which received, so to speak, the Divine Imprimatur upon the heights of La Verna two years before his death, [*2] is nothing more or less than a paraphrase of the Sermon on the Mount. Nowhere can there be found a simpler literalness in the following of the "poverty, humility, and holy Gospel of the Lord Jesus " than in the writings of St. Francis, and any attempt to read into them the peculiar doctrines of the Abbot Joachim of Flora, the Humiliati, the Poor Men

[p. xii]

of Lyons, or any of their nameless followers, is as unjust as it is unjustifiable. Needless to add that St. Francis' writings contain no new message. Indeed, the frequency with which certain very old and familiar aspects of the eternal truths are insisted upon by St. Francis in season and out of season, is not unlikely to weary the average reader who does not pause to look between the lines. This tendency to repeat himself, which is habitual with St. Francis, does not necessarily bespeak any dearth of ideas. On the contrary. His simple, childlike nature fastened upon three or four leading thoughts "taken from the words of the Lord," which seemed to him all-sufficing, and these he works into his writings over and over, tempering them to the needs of the different classes he addresses as he understood them. If then we recall the circumstances under which St. Francis wrote and the condition of those for whom his writings were intended in the first instance, far from being bored, we may gain something from each new repetition.

Because St. Francis loved Jesus and His Eucharistic Passion, ardently, enthusiastically, almost desperately--to borrow Bossuet's adjectives--his sympathy extended to every creature that suffered or rejoiced. His writings are eloquent witnesses to this far-reaching, all-embracing solicitude. They may be said to run over the whole gamut. Witness the soft note touched in the letter to Brother Leo and the

[p. xiii]

deep masculine tone in which the Testament is pitched. On the whole, however, his writings fall naturally under three heads: [*1] those, like the Rules, which represent St. Francis as legislator; those, like the Letter to a Minister, which show us St. Francis as a spiritual father; and those, like the Praises and Salutations, in which we see St. Francis as his earliest biographer saw him--"not so much a man praying as prayer itself." [*2]

It was Matthew Arnold, I believe, who first held St. Francis up to English readers as a literary type [*3]--a type withal as distinct and formal as the author of the Divine Comedy. But however true a poet--and without St. Francis no Dante--it is certain that the Poverello was in no sense a man of letters. He was too little acquainted with the laws of composition to advance very far in that direction. His early years had been a bad preparation for study, and he ever remained a comparative stranger to the ecclesiastical and classical learning of his time, though probably his culture was larger than we might be led to conclude from his repeated professions of ignorance and the disparaging remarks of some of his early biographers. Through his mother he seems to have got some acquaintance

[p. xiv]

with French; [*1] he received elementary instruction in reading and writing from the priests at San Giorgio, who also taught him enough Latin to enable him to write it in later years after a fashion, [*2] and to understand the ritual of the Church and its hymns, which he was wont to sing by the wayside. But in considering St. Francis' literary formation, we must reckon largely with the education he picked up in the school of the Troubadours, who at the close of the twelfth century were making for refinement in Italy. [*3] The imagery of the chansons de gestes seems to have exercised an abiding influence upon St. Francis' life and writings, as is evident from his own tale of the Lady Poverty, which later inspired the pen of Dante and the brush of Giotto. Witness, too, his frequent allusions to the Knights of the Round Table; his desire that his Friars should become "the Lord's Jongleurs," and his habit of courtesy extended even to Sister Death. [*4] On the other hand St. Francis was nothing if not original. His writings abound not only in allegory and personification, but also in quaint concepts and

[p. xv]

naive deductions. His final argument is often a text of Holy Scripture, which he uses with a familiarity and freedom altogether remarkable. Indeed there are parts of his writings in which the interweaving of Scriptural phrases is so intricate as almost to defy any attempt to indicate them by references, the more so since the Biblical language adopted by St. Francis is not always taken from the Bible, but often from the Liturgy, Missal, and Breviary. [*1] For the rest, as Celano puts it, "he left empty ornaments and roundabout methods of speech and everything belonging to pomp and to display to those who are ready to perish; for his part he cared not for the bark, but for the pith; not for the shell, but for the nut; not for the multiple, but for the one only sovereign good." [*2]

If we may judge from the two solitary autographic fragments of his that have come down to us, [*3] St. Francis was not by any means a skilful penman. Be this as it may, St. Bonaventure clearly implies that he had a secretary, [*4] to whom

[p. xvi]

he dictated notes, and affirms with Celano that the Saint signed such documents as called for his signature with the "sign thau," or capital T. [*1] Whether or not St. Francis' practice of signing his name thus has any connection with Brother Pacifico's vision of the large T, [*2] is a matter of conjecture and of small import. What is certain is that St. Francis wrote little. The most characteristic of his extant writings are very short, extremely simple in style, and without any trace of pedantry. If some of the longer pieces seem to show the touch of a more skilful hand than that of St. Francis, idiota et simplex, we need not on this account feel any misgivings as to their authenticity. Whatever assistance he may have received in pruning and embellishing certain of his later compositions from Caesar of Spires or another, no one who examines these writings carefully can doubt but that they are the work of the great Saint himself.

From a literary standpoint perhaps the most carefully composed bit of St. Francis' writing that has come down to us is the realistic picture of the miser's death in the letter "To all the Faithful." More interesting, however, to the student is the "Canticle of the Sun," not only as an example of the simple, spontaneous Umbrian dialect rhyme which St. Francis taught his poet followers to substitute for the artificial versification

[p. xvii]

of courtly Latin and Provencal poets, but also because of the light it throws on St. Francis' literary method,--if method it may be called. His piecemeal fashion of composing as the spirit moved him, is also manifest in a very different work, the First Rule, as is evident from the modification and additions this strange piece of legislation suffered during the fourteen years it was in force. [*1] St. Francis' practice of returning to his old writings, retouching and remoulding them, working them over and inserting parts of them in his new ones, goes far toward explaining difficulties which would otherwise arise from the resemblance between his different compositions.

For the rest, even though St. Francis' literary culture was incomplete, his constant contemplation of the "things that are above" and the perfect purity of his life whetted alike his understanding of supernatural truth and of the human heart, and so it comes to pass that his simple words, written down in the far-off thirteenth century and with a fashion of speech different from ours, yet work wonders to this day, while the tomes of many a learned doctor "leave all things as they were before."

It remains to say a few words concerning the history of St. Francis' writings before coming to the writings themselves.

[p. xviii]

  

II.

The history of the writings of St. Francis, from the time of their composition in the far-off thirteenth century down to our own day, opens up a most interesting field for speculation. Who, it may be asked, first gathered these writings together? In answer to this question nothing definite can be said, for the early Legends and Chronicles of the Order are silent on the subject, and we must rest content to begin our inquiry with the oldest MS. collections containing the writings of St. Francis. Many such collections exist in mediaeval codices, but any attempt to classify these MSS. is, in the present state of our documentation, beset by peculiar difficulties. Not the least of these difficulties arises from the fact that even as in the Legends or Lives of St. Francis we can distinguish a double current; [*1] so, too, in the early MS. collections two distinct families or categories are found representing or rather illustrating the twofold tradition and observance which date from the very beginnings of Franciscan history. [*2]

The first place among these collections belongs to the MS. numbered 338, formerly in

Click to enlarge

PAGE OF THE ASSISI MS. 338 CONTAINING CONCLUSION OF THE "SALUTATION OF THE VIRTUES" AND COMMENCEMENT OF THE "CANTICLE OF THE SUN." (See page <page xviii>.

[p. xix]

the Sacro Convento, but now in the municipal library at Assisi. Critics who have studied this early codex are not in accord as to its age. [*1] But it dates at least from the beginning of the fourteenth century. It includes eleven of the nineteen works here translated. They are contained in three parchment books in the following order: fol. 12-16, The Second Rule of the Friars Minor; [*2] fol. 16-18, The Testament; [*3] fol. 18-23, Admonitions; [*4] fol. 23-28, The Letter to All the Faithful; [*5] fol. 28-31, The Letter to the General Chapter; [*6] fol. 31-32, Instruction to Clerics on the Holy Eucharist; [*7] fol. 32, Salutation of the Virtues; [*8] fol. 33, The Canticle of the Sun; [*9] fol. 34, Paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer; [*10] fol. 34-43, The Office of the Passion; [*11] and fol. 43, The Regulation for Hermitages. [*12]

The same collection either wholly or in part is given in the well-known fourteenth century compilation of materia seraphica known as Fac secundum exemplar from the opening words of its prologue, and which may be found in the

[p. xx]

[paragraph continues] Vatican MS. 4354, the Berlin MS. 196, the Lemberg MS. 131, [*1] and the Liegnitz MS. 12. [*2] The Mazarin MSS. 989 and 1743, [*3] as well as the Dusseldorf MS. 132, [*4] may also be said to belong to this family of codices which present the writings of St. Francis in practically the same number and order as Mariano of Florence adopts in his Chronicle, composed about 1500. [*5]

We now come to the second collection of St. Francis' writings, which is often found along with the traditional Legenda Trium Sociorum, and the Speculum Perfectionis. It is represented by the celebrated Florentine codex at Ognissanti, [*6] the codex 1/25 at St. Isidore's, Rome, [*7] the Vatican MS. 7650, [*8] and the codex of the Capuchin

[p. xxi]

convent at Foligno, [*1] all of which contain St. Francis' works in almost the same order as that given by Bartholomew of Pisa, in his Liber Conformitatum. [*2]

This second collection of the writings of St. Francis differs from the first one in several details. In the first place it omits the Instruction to Clerics on the Holy Eucharist and adds the letter To a Certain Minister. [*3] Again, the Assisi and Liegnitz MSS., which are typical examples of the first collection, place the prayer, "O Almighty Eternal God," etc.,  [*4] at the end of the letter to the General Chapter, whereas in the Ognissanti MS. and others of the same family this prayer is found elsewhere. So, too, in the Assisi and Liegnitz MSS. the Salutation of the Virtues is inscribed "Salutation of the Virtues which adorned the Soul of the Blessed Virgin Mary and which ought to adorn the holy soul," while in the Ognissanti and kindred MSS. the title of this piece reads: "Salutation of the Virtues and of their efficacy in confounding Vices." These examples suffice to indicate that this twofold family of MSS. includes also a two-fold

[p. xxii]

reading, as becomes more evident from the variants noted elsewhere in the course of this work. Meanwhile, let us pass on from the MS. collections of St. Francis' writings to the

  

PRINTED EDITIONS.

Two diverse compilations, each containing part of the Opuscula, were published at the beginning of the sixteenth century. The first of these, known as the Speculum Vitae B. Francisci et Sociorum ejus, [*1] and quarried largely from the Actus Beati Francisci, contains (fol. 126-127) among various legends and other narrations some of St. Francis' prayers, and (fol. 189) also the First Rule. The second compilation, which is of a much more polemic character, [*2] and which contains a larger number of the Opuscula, appeared successively with some variations in form at Rouen in 1509 as the Speculum Minorum, [*3] at Salamanca in 1511 as the Monumenta Ordinis Minorum, [*4] and at Paris in 1512 as the

[p. xxiii]

[paragraph continues] Firmamenta trium Ordinum B. Francisci. [*1] The seventeenth century saw the appearance of

  

WADDING'S EDITION.

The honor of making the first serious attempt to collect all the writings of St. Francis belongs to the renowned Annalist of the Order, Father Luke Wadding. [*2] His celebrated edition of the Opuscula [*3] is distributed in three parts: Part I contains the Letters, Prayers, and the Testament; Part II, the Rules; and Part III, the Monastic Conferences, the Office of the Passion and Canticles, followed by Apophthegms, Colloquies, Prophecies, Parables, Examples, Benedictions, etc.

Wadding's edition of the Opuscula differs mainly from all preceding collections in this, that whereas the latter contained only those pieces which as regards both matter and form were the handiwork of St. Francis, Wadding felt justified in including among St. Francis' writings many dicta of the Saint found in the early Legends. For example, St. Bonaventure [*4] relates of St. Francis "Non enim securum esse putabat earum formarum introrsus haurire imagines."

[p. xxiv]

[paragraph continues] Wadding, in his sixth Conference, by changing putabat into puto, gives this passage as the ipsissima verba of St. Francis. Again, in the seventeenth Conference, he entirely changes the form of what St. Bonaventure elsewhere [*1] relates of St. Francis when he substitutes "Officium praedicationis Patri misericordiarum omni sacrificio est acceptius" for "Istius Miserationis officium Patri misericordiarum omni sacrificio firmabat acceptius."

Thus it comes to pass that in Wadding's edition, side by side with the undisputed writings of St. Francis, we find doubtful, even. spurious, extracts from different sources attributed to the Seraphic Father. It must ever remain a matter of regret that Wadding, instead of following the oldest MSS. that he had at hand, was content to transcribe the incomplete and often interpolated parts of them he found in second-hand compilations, like that of Mark of Lisbon. His work from our standpoint is vitiated by imperfect research and unreliable criticism. But if Wadding was more profuse than prudent in his attribution of Franciscan fragments to the Founder, it must be remembered that he wrote at a time when even the highest minds troubled themselves little enough about literary exactness. For what we now glorify as "scientific criticism" had not yet become the fashion. The faults therefore of Wadding's edition of the Opuscula are largely the faults of

[p. xxv]

his time; and considering the difficulties to be overcome, the result of his labors was very creditable. And if he had never undertaken the task of collecting St. Francis' writings, any attempt of ours to that end would be surely more arduous, and perhaps not so fruitful.

Several editions of St. Francis' writings have appeared since Wadding's day, notably those published by de la Haye, [*1] Von der Burg, [*2] and Horoy. [*3] But these editions are very imperfect. Their authors, in spite of the advance made in historical criticism since Wadding's day, have merely reproduced and rejuvenated the edition of the great annalist. The same is true of the various translations of the Opuscula,--they are simply Wadding in Italian, [*4] English, [*5] French, [*6] German, [*7] or Spanish, [*8] as the case may be.

On the other hand, M. Sabatier's strictures on the "numerous ecclesiastics" who have edited

[p. xxvi]

the writings of St. Francis, for not reprinting Wadding's comments on them, are a trifle wide of the mark, seeing that their editions were prepared mainly for a class of readers whose point of view is practical and devotional, rather than theoretical and speculative, who read the writings of the saints not merely as historical or literary documents, but as words of spirit and of life. For such a clientele critical notes would be caviare indeed.

The remarkable upgrowth of interest in the sources of early Franciscan history that has characterized the literature of the past decade accentuated the need of a more perfect edition of St. Francis' writings. The matter was soon taken in hand by the Friars Minor at Quaracchi--already famous in the literary history of the Order--and in 1904 they issued the

  

FIRST CRITICAL EDITION

of the Opuscula. [*1] Without overlooking the internal character of each document, the Quaracchi editors based their edition upon the early MS. tradition, weighing by this standard all the various writings contained in the stereotyped editions of St. Francis' works, with the result that many a familiar page that had come down to us on the good faith of Wadding was

[p. xxvii]

found wanting. Thus the seventeen letters commonly ascribed to St. Francis have been reduced to six, the Rules of the Second and Third Orders have been eliminated, only one of the twenty-eight monastic conferences, and one of the seven blessings, are left; most of the prayers have gone, and all the colloquies, prophecies, parables, etc., have likewise disappeared. Most likely the doubtful and suppositious works thus excluded often embody the doctrine and ideas of St. Francis; to a greater or lesser extent some of them may even be his in substance, but as there is no good reason to believe they are his own composition they are not entitled to a place among his writings.

The authentic works of St. Francis left to us then, according to the Quaracchi edition, are the Admonitions, Salutation of the Virtues, Instruction on the Blessed Sacrament, the First and Second Rules of the Friars Minor, the Testament and Regulation for Hermitages, some fragments from the Rule of the Clares, Six Letters, the Praises of God, the Salutation of the Blessed Virgin, the Chartula containing the Laudes and Benediction for Brother Leo, the prayer Absorbeat, and the Office of the Passion.

The Quaracchi edition does not therefore embody any new matter, but it contains for the first time in any edition of St. Francis' works the letter "To a Minister" in its entirety. For the rest, while purging the text of St. Francis' writings of the many doubtful and apocryphal

[p. xxviii]

pieces with which they had come to be burdened in the course of time, the Quaracchi editors have perfected the text of the authentic writings by their emendations and collations, notes and comments, thus conferring the freedom of no small city upon the students of Franciscan sources.

The year 1904 also saw the publication, almost simultaneously, of two other works dealing with the Opuscula of St. Francis, written by well known professors at Bonn [*1] and Munich, [*2] and both of real value. [*3] It would be foreign to our present purpose to examine either of these works in detail. Suffice it to say that they accord in substance almost completely with the conclusions of the Quaracchi editors. If anything, they lean more on the side of kindliness toward certain doubtful writings. Thanks to this trilogy of works, and to certain learned criticisms which they have called forth from Fr. Van

[p. xxix]

[paragraph continues] Ortroy, [*1] M. Sabatier, [*2] and Mr. Carmichael [*3] among others, we are now in a position to form a fairly accurate estimate of what St. Francis really wrote.

It is obvious, however, that in dealing with writings like those of St. Francis we are left largely to the probabilities of criticism; and criticism has by no means said the last word as to the authenticity of certain pieces. It may yet take away from St. Francis some writings now commonly ascribed to him; it may even give back to him others at present with seemingly greater likelihood made over to one or another of his immediate followers. But in the long run, to whatever criticism St. Francis' writings may be subjected, the main lines will always remain the same. It may well be true as a recent writer [*4] has remarked, that it is not yet the time to essay a complete English edition of St. Francis' writings, yet withal the lack of any translation of these writings in English which aims at fulfilling the requirements of modern criticism has led me to think that English students of Franciscan literature might be glad to have some such translation of them, however imperfect. To this end I have ventured

[p. xxx]

to prepare this humble volume, which may perhaps be suffered tentatively, at least, to stand in the gap which it is not worthy permanently to fill.

My first object, then, is to give a literal and, I hope, accurate translation of the Latin text of the authentic writings of St. Francis as it stands in the critical Quaracchi edition. The present volume, however, represents something more than a mere translation of the Quaracchi text. In the first place it is not restricted to the Latin works of St. Francis, and as a consequence the "Canticle of the Sun," which does not figure in the Quaracchi edition, finds a place here. I have often deviated from the order of the Quaracchi edition and have distributed the critical notes throughout the book instead of relegating them to the end. I have added an Introduction, Appendix, Bibliography and Index, besides much original matter collected at Quaracchi and elsewhere in Italy, when I was afforded an opportunity of consulting the original MS. authorities. I should state that I have not translated all the variants in the Latin text, but only such as change the sense. A table I had made for the purpose of indicating the probable date of each piece, I have omitted, since it remains a matter of pure conjecture when many were written.

I am glad of this opportunity to record my sincere thanks to all those who have assisted me in any way in the preparation of this volume. Not only have I profited by the labors of the

[p. xxxi]

[paragraph continues] Fathers at Quaracchi, but I have enjoyed the rare advantage of Fr. Leonard Lemmens' personal interest in the work. To him, therefore, my grateful recognition is first due. I wish further to acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr. Montgomery Carmichael, who, amid his own literary labors, made time to assist me with many helpful suggestions. Moreover, by placing at my disposal all the references to Holy Scripture which occur in the Office of the Passion, which he had looked up and translated, he has afforded me very substantial aid. My thanks are also due to Father Stephen Donovan, O.F.M., for his kind cooperation in collating the text of the "Canticle of the Sun," in the Assisi MS., with other versions, and for contributing the translation of it. For the generous loan of books of reference I am under obligation to Mgr. O'Hare, Father John J. Wynne, S.J., Fathers Ludger Beck, and Bede Oldegeering, O.F.M., and Mr. John A. Tennant; for the gift of their own writings to Father Cuthbert, O.S.F.C., Luigi Suttina, and Prof. A. G. Little; and for the photographs here reproduced to Mgr. Faloci Pulignani, M. Paul Sabatier and Signor Lunghi. I may perhaps be permitted to take this occasion to thank the Guardians at the Portiuncula, La Verna, St. Damian's, and the Carceri, as well as the Friars at St. Antony's and St. Isidore's at Rome, at Ognissanti, Florence, and the Mother Abbess at Santa Chiara, for their courtesy and hospitality.

[p. xxxii]

For the rest, it is with a clear sense of its many shortcomings and not without some diffidence that I offer this volume to the public. I shall be more than repaid for any labor its preparation may have entailed if its publication conduces ever so little toward making St. Francis better known and better loved. To this end I ask the reader to forget all that may be mine within these pages, and to remember only the words of him who, "saintlier than any among the saints, among sinners was as one of themselves." [*1]

FR. PASCHAL ROBINSON, O.F.M.,

Franciscan Convent, Paterson, N. J.
 Feast of St. Agnes of , 1905.

Footnotes

^ix:1 Prof. A. G. Little. See English Historical Review, Oct., 1902, p. 652.

^ix:2 M. Sabatier's views on this point are summarized in his Vie de S. Francois, Paris, 1904. See Etudes des Sources, p. xxxvi.

^ix:3 Mgr. Faloci's opinion may be found in his Miscellanea Francescana, Foligno, t. VII, p. 115 seq.

^ix:4 Die Anfange des Minoritenordens, Freiburg, 1885, p. 3.

^x:1 See Opuscula. Ed. Quaracchi, p. vi.

^xi:1 See on this subject the long study of Cardinal Gabriel de Treio, given by Wadding in the Opuscula. The full title is: "Gabriel, divina miseratione S. R. E. Tituli S. Pancratii presbyter cardinalis de Treio, in epistola missa ad R. admodum P. Lucam Wadingum." It is given in substance by Fr. Apollinaris, O. F. M., in his Doctrine Spirituelle de S. Francois (Paris, 1878). See also the Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum (Cologne, 1618), which ranks St. Francis among the Fathers.

^xi:2

" . . . nel crudo sasso, intra Tevere ed Arno,
 Da Cristo prese l'ultimo sigillo,
 Che le sue membra due anni portarno."
                                          Paradiso, XI-114.

^xiii:1 See Boehmer, Analekten, p. xlv.

^xiii:2 "Non tam orans quam oratio factus." 2 Cel. 3, 51.

^xiii:3 See his chapter on " Pagan and Mediaeval Religious Sentiment " in the Essays on Criticism. Third edition, Macmillan, 1875, pp. 243-248.

^xiv:1 See Leg. III Soc., 10.

^xiv:2 Eccleston speaks of his "false Latin." See below, <page 132>.

^xiv:3 Some of the greatest troubadours of Provence were then sojourning in Italy. On their journeys and influence there see Fauriel, Histoire de la poesie Provencale, t. II, and three articles by the same author in the "Bibliotheque de l'Ecole des Chartes," t. III and IV. Fragments of their poems are given by Monaci: Testi antichi provenzali (Rome, 1889).

^xiv:4 See Gorres: Der hl. Franciscus von Assisi, ein Troubadour (Ratisbon, 1879).

^xv:1 I have rendered all Scripture phrases by the corresponding Douay Version; not, indeed, that I wish to raise any vexatious question as to the relative merits of the Douay and the English Authorized Version from a literary point of view, but because, as every student of Franciscan literature must be aware, the Biblical passages in the early documents are quoted from the Vulgate, and the English Authorized Version is not and does not profess to be a translation of the Vulgate. See Franciscan Annals, January, 1905, p. 8.

^xv:2 1 Cel. 1.

^xv:3 See below, <page 130>.

^xv:4 M. Sabatier (Vie de S. Francois, p. 5) suggests that Brother Leo may have acted in this capacity, and invokes the authority of Bernard of Besse to prove it.

^xvi:1 For the testimony of St. Bonaventure and Celano see below, <page 147>.

^xvi:2 See Tract. de Miraculis., Anal. Bol., t. xviii, p. 115.

^xvii:1 See below, <page 27>.

^xviii:1 See Lemmens: De duobus generibus vitarum S. P. Francisci in Doct. Ant. Franc., P. II, p. 9; and de Kerval: Les Sources de l'histoire de S. Francois in Bullettino Critico, fasc. I, p. 3.

^xviii:2 See Sabatier: Opuscules, fasc. x, p. 133; also Boehmer: Analekten, p. vi.

^xix:1 See Ehrle, S.J.: Die historischen Handschriften des Klosters San Francesco in Assisi in Archiv fur Litteratur, etc., t. I, p.484; Mgr. Faloci Pulignani in the Miscell. Francescana, t. VI, p. 46; M. Sabatier: Vie de S. Francois, I, p. 370; and Professor Alessandri: Inventario dei manoscritti della biblioteca del conv. de S. Francesco di Assisi, p. 57.

^xix:2 See page <page 64>.

^xix:3 See page <page 81>.

^xix:4 See page <page 5>.

^xix:5 See page <page 98>.

^xix:6 See page <page 111>.

^xix:7 See page <page 23>.

^xix:8 See page <page 20>.

^xix:9 See page <page 152>.

^xix:10 See page <page 139>.

^xix:11 See page <page 155>.

^xix:12 See page <page 89>.

^xx:1 See Speculum Perfectionis (ed. Sabatier), p. clxxvi, for description of these three MSS.

^xx:2 See Sabatier: Le Manuscrit de Liegnitz, in Opuscules, t. I, p. 33. This codex adds the Salutation of the Blessed Virgin and the letter to Brother Leo.

^xx:3 On these MSS. see Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), p. clxiv.

^xx:4 This MS. adds the example: Fuit quidam miles, etc. See Actus B. Francisci (ed. Sabatier), cap. 66.

^xx:5 The Chronicle of Mariano, so often quoted by Wadding, is now lost. It comprised five large volumes in folio. In the first of these he gives the catalogue of St. Francis' writings above referred to, and which is reproduced in the Quaracchi edition after Wadding. I have not deemed it necessary to translate it here. On Mariano and his works, see Sabatier: Bartholi, p. 137.

^xx:6 On this MS. see Minocchi: "La Legenda trium Sociorum," p. 13; also his "Nuovi Studii" in the Archiv. Storico Ital., t. XXIV, p. 266; see also Sabatier: Bartholi, p. cxxxv.

^xx:7 On this MS. see Lemmens: Doct. Ant. Franc., P. III, P. 52.

^xx:8 On this MS. see Sabatier: Bartholi, p. cxlvi.

^xxi:1 On this MS. see Faloci: Misc. Frances., t. VII, p. 45; and Sabatier: Opuscules, t. I, p. 359. It may be noted that the Foligno MS. conforms more to that of St. Isidore's and the Vatican MS. rather to that of Ognissanti.

^xxi:2 My references to the Conformities are to the Milan edition of 1510. The edition published in 1590, especially in the historical part, is mutilated and corrupted at almost every page, as I can personally attest after a comparison of it with several old MS. versions.

^xxi:3 See below, <page 121>.

^xxi:4 See below, <page 118>.

^xxii:1 It was printed at Venice "expensis domini Jordani de Dinslaken per Simonem de Lucre" in 1504, and at Metz "per Jasparem Hochffeder" in 1509. Both these editions are identical. It was republished by Spoelberch at Antwerp in 1620.

^xxii:2 It is largely a collection of declarations and expositions of the Rule, and of statutes, decrees, and privileges concerning the Order.

^xxii:3 The Speculum Morin, as it is called from the printer, Martin Morin, is now very rare. In a copy at the National Library, at Paris, it is ascribed to Fr. John Argomanez, a Spanish provincial. See Etudes Franc., t. XIII, p. 317.

^xxii:4 Also at Barcelona, in 1523. See Sbaralea: Supplementum, p. 51.

^xxiii:1 On the edition published at Venice, in 1513, see Sbaralea: Supplem., p. 196.

^xxiii:2 See The Life of Father Luke Wadding, by Fr. Joseph O'Shea, O.F.M.

^xxiii:3 See Wadding: B. P. Francisci Assisiatis Opuscula, Antwerp, 1623. See also his Scriptores Ordinis Minorum, p. 112; and Sbaralea: Supplem., p. 244.

^xxiii:4 Leg. Maj., V, 5.

^xxiv:1 Leg. Maj., VIII, 1.

^xxv:1 Opera Omnia S. Francisci, Paris, 1641.

^xxv:2 Opera B. P. Francisci, Cologne, 1849.

^xxv:3 Sti Francisci Assisiensis Opera Omnia, Paris. 1880 (vol. VI of Bibliotheca Patristica.)

^xxv:4 Oposculi di S. Francesco, by Fr. Bernardo da Fivizzano, O.M.Cap., Florence, 1880. The Latin text is also given in this edition.

^xxv:5 Works of St. Francis. Translated by a Religious of the Order. London, 1890.

^xxv:6 Oeuvres de S. Francois. Trans. of Berthaumier. Paris, 1864.

^xxv:7 Leben, Regel, and Werke des h. Franziskus von Assisi. By Hereneus Haid. Ratisbon, 1856.

^xxv:8 Obras Completas del B. P. S. Francisco de Asis segun la coleccion del P. Wadingo. Ternel, 1902.

^xxvi:1 "Opuscula Sancti Patris Francisci Assisiensis sec. Codices MSS. emendata et denuo edita a PP. Collegii S. Bonaventurae. Ad Claras Aquas (Quaracchi), 1904."

^xxviii:1 H. Boehmer: Analekten zur Geschichte des Franciscus von Assisi. S. Francisci Opuscula. Tubingen and Leipzig, 1904.

^xxviii:2 W. Goetz: Die Quellen zur Geschichte des lit. Franciscus von Assisi. Gotha, 1904. The part of this work dealing with the Opuscula already appeared in the Zeitschrift fur Kirchengeschichte. As there is some difference between the reprint and the original, I have quoted sometimes from one and sometimes from the other.

^xxviii:3 There is also an excellent new French translation by Fr. Ubald d'Alencon, O.M.Cap.,--Les Opuscules de Saint Francois d'Assise (Paris, Poussielgue, 1905). I have quoted from it elsewhere. A critical Italian edition is in preparation by Fr. Nicolo Dal-Gal, O.F.M., already well known for his contributions to Franciscan history.

^xxix:1 See Analecta Bollandiana, fasc. III, p. 411.

^xxix:2 Examen de quelques travaux recents sur les Opuscules de Saint Francois, in Opuscules, fasc. X.

^xxix:3 "The Writings of St. Francis," by Montgomery Carmichael, in the Month, January, 1904.

^xxix:4 See The Words of St. Francis, by Anne Macdonell, p. 7, London, 1904.

^xxxii:1 1. Cel. 29.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

PART I.

[p. 2]

  

ADMONITIONS, RULES, ETC.

[p. 3]

  

I.

  

WORDS OF ADMONITION OF OUR HOLY FATHER ST. FRANCIS.

UNDER this title a precious series of spiritual counsels on the religious life has come down to us from the pen of St. Francis. The early Legends afford no indication of the time or circumstances of the composition of these Admonitions; nor is it possible to determine by whom they were collected. But they accord so completely with the Saint's genuine works and are so redolent of his spirit that their authenticity is admitted by all. [*1] Moreover, the various codices in which these Admonitions may be found are unanimous in attributing them to St. Francis, while the number of the Admonitions [*2] and the order in which they are given in the different codices are almost the same as in the Laurentian codex at Florence, dating from the thirteenth century.

Codices containing the Admonitions of St. Francis are to be found at the following places: 1. Assisi (Munic. lib. cod. 338, fol. 18);--2. Berlin (Royal lib. cod. lat. 196, fol. 101);--3. Florence (Laurentian lib.

[p. 4]

cod. X. Plut. XIX. dextr., fol. 448);--4. Florence (cod. of the Convent of Ognissanti, fol. 5);--5. St. Floriano (monast. lib. cod. XI. 148, fol. 38);--6. Foligno (cod. of Capuchin Conv., fol. 21);--7. Lemberg (Univ. lib. cod. 131, fol. 331);--8. Liegnitz [*1] (lib. of SS. Peter and Paul. cod. 12, fol. 131);--9. Luttich (Munic. lib. cod. 343, fol. 154);--10. Munich (Royal lib. cod. lat. 11354, fol. 25, number 1 only);--11. Naples (Nation. lib. cod. XII. F. 32, folio antepaen. numbers 6-27);--12. Oxford [*2] (Bodl. lib. cod. Canon miscell. 525, fol. 93);--13. Paris (Nat. lib. cod. 38327, fol. 354);--14, 15. Paris (Mazarin lib. cod. 1743, fol. 134, and cod. 989, fol. 191);--16. Paris (codex at lib. of the Prot. theol. faculty, fol. 86);--17. Prague (Metrop. lib. cod. B. XC., fol. 244);--18. Rome (codex at St. Antony's Coll. [*3] fol. 77);--19, 20. Rome (archiv. of St. Isidore's College, cod. 1/25, fol. 14, and cod. 1/73, fol. 11);--21, 22. Rome (Vatic. lib. cod. 4354, fol. 39, and cod. 7650, fol. 10);--23. Toledo (capit. lib. cod. Cai. 25, no. 11, fol. 65) and--24. Volterra (Guarnacci lib. cod. 225, fol. 141).

Of the foregoing codices that in the Laurentian Library at Florence dates from the thirteenth century; those at Ognissanti, Florence, at Assisi, Berlin, St. Floriano, Oxford, Rome (St. Antony's, St. Isidore's, and the Vatican codex 4354), Toledo, and Volterra date from the fourteenth, and the others from the fifteenth century.

For the Quaracchi edition of the Admonitions, upon which the present translation is based, the two oldest of all these codices, to wit, those of the Laurentian

[p. 5]

[paragraph continues] Library at Florence and of the Municipal Library at Assisi, [*1] have been used. Those at St. Isidore's, Rome, and Ognissanti, Florence, have also been consulted, besides the editions of the Admonitions found in the Monumenta Ordinis Minorum (Salamanca, 1511, tract. 11, fol. 276 r), the Firmamenta Trium Ordinum [*2] (Paris, 1512, P. I, fol. 19 r), and the Liber Conformitatum of Bartholomew of Pisa (Milan, 1510, fruct. XII, P. 11). But for the titles and paragraphing, which differ more or less in different codices, the Laurentian codex has been followed. [*3]

So much by way of preface to the

  

ADMONITIONS.

  

1. Of the Lord's Body

The Lord Jesus said to His disciples: "I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life. No man cometh to the Father, but by Me. If you had known Me you would, without doubt, have known My Father also: and from henceforth you shall

[p. 6]

know Him, and you have seen Him. Philip saith to Him: Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us. Jesus saith to him: Have I been so long a time with you and have you not known Me? Philip, he that seeth Me seeth [My] Father also. How sayest thou, Shew us the Father?" [*1] The Father "inhabiteth light inaccessible," [*2] and "God is a spirit," [*3] and "no man hath seen God at any time." [*4] Because God is a spirit, therefore it is only by the spirit He can be seen, for "it is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing." [*5] For neither is the Son, inasmuch as He is equal to the Father, seen by any one other than by the Father, other than by the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, all those who saw the Lord Jesus Christ according to humanity and did not see and believe according to the Spirit and the Divinity, that He was the Son of God, were condemned. In like manner, all those who behold the Sacrament of the Body of Christ which is sanctified by the word of the Lord upon the altar by the hands of the priest in the form of bread and wine, and who do not see and believe according to the Spirit and Divinity that It is really the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, are condemned, He the Most High having declared it when He said, "This is My Body, and the Blood of the New Testament," [*6] and "he that eateth My

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] Flesh and drinketh My Blood hath everlasting life." [*1]

Wherefore [he who has] [*2] the Spirit of the Lord which dwells in His faithful, he it is who receives the most holy Body and Blood of the Lord: all others who do not have this same Spirit and who presume to receive Him, eat and drink judgment to themselves. [*3] Wherefore, "O ye sons of men, how long will you be dull of heart?" [*4] Why will you not know the truth and "believe in the Son of God?" [*5] Behold daily He humbles Himself as when from His "royal throne" [*6] He came into the womb of the Virgin; daily He Himself comes to us with like humility; daily He descends from the bosom of His Father upon the altar in the hands of the priest. And as He appeared in true flesh to the Holy Apostles, so now He shows Himself to us in the sacred Bread; and as they by means of their fleshly eyes saw only His flesh, yet contemplating Him with their spiritual eyes, believed Him to be God, so we, seeing bread and wine with bodily eyes, see and firmly believe it to be His most holy Body and true and living Blood. And in this way our Lord is ever with His faithful, as He Himself says: "Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world." [*7]

[p. 8]

  

2. The Evil of Self-will.

The Lord God said to Adam: "Of every tree of paradise thou shalt eat. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat." [*1] Adam therefore might eat of every tree of paradise and so long as he did not offend against obedience he did not sin. For one eats of the tree of knowledge of good who appropriates to himself his own will [*2] and prides himself upon the goods which the Lord publishes and works in him and thus, through the suggestion of the devil and transgression of the commandment, he finds the apple of the knowledge of evil; wherefore, it behooves that he suffer punishment.

  

3. Of Perfect and Imperfect Obedience.

The Lord says in the Gospel: he "that doth not renounce all that he possesseth cannot be" a "disciple " [*3] and "he that will save his life, shall lose it." [*4] That man leaves all he possesses and loses his body and his soul who abandons himself wholly to obedience in the hands of his superior, and whatever he does and says--provided he himself knows that what he does is good and not contrary to his [the superior's] will--is true obedience. And if at times a subject sees things which would be better or more useful to his soul than those which the

[p. 9]

superior commands him, let him sacrifice his will to God, let him strive to fulfil the work enjoined by the superior. This is true and charitable obedience which is pleasing to God and to one's neighbor.

If, however, a superior command anything to a subject that is against his soul it is permissible for him to disobey, but he must not leave him [the superior], and if in consequence he suffer persecution from some, he should love them the more for God's sake. For he who would rather suffer persecution than wish to be separated from his brethren, truly abides in perfect obedience because he lays down his life for his brothers. [*1] For there are many religious who, under pretext of seeing better things than those which their superiors command, look back [*2] and return to the vomit of their own will [*3]. These are homicides and by their bad example cause the loss of many souls.

  

4. That no one should take Superiorship upon himself.

I did "not come to be ministered unto, but to minister," says the Lord. [*4] Let those who are set above others glory in this superiority only as much as if they had been deputed to wash the feet of the brothers; and if they are more perturbed by the loss of their superiorship than they would be by losing the office of washing feet, so much

[p. 10]

the more do they lay up treasures to the peril of their own soul.

  

5. That no one should glory save in the Cross of the Lord.

Consider, O man, how great the excellence in which the Lord has placed you because He has created and formed you to the image of His beloved Son according to the body and to His own likeness according to the spirit. [*1] And all the creatures that are under heaven serve and know and obey their Creator in their own way better than you. And even the demons did not crucify Him, but you together with them crucified Him and still crucify Him by taking delight in vices and sins. Wherefore then can you glory For if you were so clever and wise that you possessed all science, and if you knew how to interpret every form of language and to investigate heavenly things minutely, you could not glory in all this, because one demon has known more of heavenly things and still knows more of earthly things than all men, although there may be some man who has received from the Lord a special knowledge of sovereign wisdom. In like manner, if you were handsomer and richer than all others, and even if you could work wonders and put the demons to flight, all these things are hurtful to you and in nowise belong to you, and in them you cannot glory; that, however, in which we may glory is in our infirmities, [*2] and in

[p. 11]

bearing daily the holy cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

  

6. Of the Imitation of the Lord.

Let us all, brothers, consider the Good Shepherd who to save His sheep bore the suffering of the Cross. The sheep of the Lord followed Him in tribulation and persecution and shame, in hunger and thirst, in infirmity and temptations and in all other ways; [*1] and for these things they have received everlasting life from the Lord. Wherefore it is a great shame for us, the servants of God, that, whereas the Saints have practised works, we should expect to receive honor and glory for reading and preaching the same.

  

7. That Good Works should accompany Knowledge.

The Apostle says, "the letter killeth, but the spirit quickeneth." [*2] They are killed by the letter who seek only to know the words that they may be esteemed more learned among others and that they may acquire great riches to leave to their relations and friends. And those religious are killed by the letter who will not follow the spirit of the Holy Scriptures, but who seek rather to know the words only and to interpret them to others. And they are quickened by the spirit of the Holy Scriptures who do not interpret

[p. 12]

materially every text they know or wish to know, but who by word and example give them back to God from whom is all good.

  

8. Of avoiding the Sin of Envy.

The Apostle affirms that "no man can say the Lord Jesus but by the Holy Ghost," [*1] and "there is none that doth good, no not one." [*2] Whosoever, therefore, envies his brother on account of the good which the Lord says or does in him, commits a sin akin to blasphemy, because he envies the Most High Himself who says and does all that is good.

  

9. Of Love.

The Lord says in the Gospel, "Love your enemies," etc. [*3] He truly loves his enemy who does not grieve because of the wrong done to himself, but who is afflicted for love of God because of the sin on his [brother's] soul and who shows his love by his works.

  

10. Of Bodily Mortification.

There are many who if they commit sin or suffer wrong often blame their enemy or their neighbor. But this is not right, for each one has his enemy in his power,--to wit, the body by which he sins. Wherefore blessed is that servant who always holds captive the enemy

[p. 13]

thus given into his power and wisely guards himself from it, for so long as he acts thus no other enemy visible or invisible can do him harm.

  

11. That one must not be seduced by Bad Example. [*1]

To the servant of God nothing should be displeasing save sin. And no matter in what way any one may sin, if the servant of God is troubled or angered--except this be through charity--he treasures up guilt to himself. [*2] The servant of God who does not trouble himself or get angry about anything lives uprightly and without sin. And blessed is he who keeps nothing for himself, rendering "to Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's." [*3]

  

12. Of Knowing the Spirit of God.

Thus may the servant of God know if he has the Spirit of God: if when the Lord works some good through him, his body--since it is ever at variance with all that is good--is not therefore puffed up; but if he rather becomes viler in his own sight and if he esteems himself less than other men. [*4]

[p. 14]

  

13. Of Patience.

How much interior patience and humility a servant of God may have cannot be known so long as he is contented. [*1] But when the time comes that those who ought to please him go against him, as much patience and humility as he then shows, so much has he and no more.

  

14. Of Poverty of Spirit.

"Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." [*2] Many apply themselves to prayers and offices, and practise much abstinence and bodily mortification, but because of a single word which seems to be hurtful to their bodies or because of something being taken from them, they are forthwith scandalized and troubled. These are not poor in spirit: for he who is truly poor in spirit, hates himself and loves those who strike him on the cheek. [*3]

  

15. Of Peacemakers.

"Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God." [*4] They are truly peacemakers who amidst all they suffer in this world maintain peace in soul and body for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

[p. 15]

  

16. Of Cleanness of Heart.

"Blessed are the clean of heart: for they shall see God." [*1] They are clean of heart who despise earthly things and always seek those of heaven, and who never cease to adore and contemplate the Lord God Living and True, with a pure heart and mind.

  

17. Of the Humble Servant of God.

Blessed is that servant who is not more puffed up because of the good the Lord says and works through him than because of that which He says and works through others. A man sins who wishes to receive more from his neighbor than he is himself willing to give to the Lord God.

  

18. Of Compassion toward one's Neighbor.

Blessed is the man who bears with his neighbor according to the frailty of his nature as much as he would wish to be borne with by him if he should be in a like case.

  

19. Of the Happy and Unhappy Servant.

Blessed is the servant who gives up all his goods to the Lord God, for he who retains anything for himself hides "his Lord's money," [*2] and that "which he thinketh he hath shall be taken away from him." [*3]

[p. 16]

  

20. Of the Good and Humble Religious.

Blessed is the servant who does not regard himself as better when he is esteemed and extolled by men than when he is reputed as mean, simple, and despicable: for what a man is in the sight of God, so much he is, and no more. [*1] Woe to that religious who is elevated in dignity by others, and who of his own will is not ready to descend. And blessed is that servant who is raised in dignity not by his own will and who always desires to be beneath the feet of others.

  

21. Of the Happy and Vain Religious.

Blessed is that religious who feels no pleasure or joy save in most holy conversation and the works of the Lord, and who by these means leads men [*2] to the love of God in joy and gladness. And woe to that religious who takes delight in idle and vain words and by this means provokes men to laughter.

  

22. Of the Frivolous and Talkative Religious. [*3]

Blessed is that servant who does not speak through hope of reward and who does not manifest everything and is not "hasty to speak," [*4] but who

[p. 17]

wisely foresees what he ought to say and answer. Woe to that religious who not concealing in his heart the good things which the Lord has disclosed to him and who not manifesting them to others by his work, seeks rather through hope of reward to make them known to men by words: for now he receives his recompense and his hearers bear away little fruit.

  

23. Of True Correction.

Blessed is the servant who bears discipline, accusation, and blame from others as patiently as if they came from himself. Blessed is the servant who, when reproved, mildly submits, modestly obeys, humbly confesses, and willingly satisfies. Blessed is the servant who is not prompt to excuse himself and who humbly bears shame and reproof for sin when he is without fault.

  

24. Of True Humility. [*1]

Blessed is he [*2] who shall be found as humble among his subjects as if he were among his masters. Blessed is the servant who always continues under the rod of correction. He is "a faithful and wise servant" [*3] who does not delay to punish himself for all his offences, interiorly by contrition and exteriorly by confession and by works of satisfaction.

[p. 18]

  

25. Of True Love.

Blessed is that brother who would love his brother as much when he is ill and not able to assist him as he loves him when he is well and able to assist him. Blessed is the brother who would love and fear his brother as much when he is far from him as he would when with him, and who would not say anything about him Behind his back that he could not with charity say in his presence.

  

26. That the Servants of God should honor Clerics.

Blessed is the servant of God who exhibits confidence in clerics who live uprightly according to the form of the holy Roman Church. And woe to those who despise them: for even though they [the clerics] may be sinners, nevertheless no one ought to judge them, because the Lord Himself reserves to Himself alone the right of judging them. For as the administration with which they are charged, to wit, of the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which they receive and which they alone administer to others--is greater than all others, even so the sin of those who offend against them is greater than any against all the other men in this world.

[p. 19]

  

27. Of the Virtues putting Vices to flight.

Where there is charity and wisdom there is neither fear nor ignorance. Where there is patience and humility there is neither anger nor worry. [*1] Where there is poverty and joy there is neither cupidity nor avarice. Where there is quiet and meditation there is neither solicitude nor dissipation. Where there is the fear of the Lord to guard the house the enemy cannot find a way to enter. Where there is mercy and discretion there is neither superfluity nor hard-heartedness.

  

28. Of hiding Good lest it be lost.

Blessed is the servant who treasures up in heaven [*2] the good things which the Lord shows him and who does not wish to manifest them to men through the hope of reward, for the Most High will Himself manifest his works to whomsoever He may please. Blessed is the servant who keeps the secrets of the Lord in his heart. [*3]

Footnotes

^3:1 See Goetz: Quellen zur Geschichte des hl. Franz von Assisi, in Zeitschrift fur Kirchengeschichte, t. xxii, p. 551, and Van Ortroy, S.J., in Anal. Bolland., t. xxiv, fasc. iii (1905), p. 411.

^3:2 The codex of St. Antony's College, Rome, omits the Admonitions numbered 11 and 22. It may be noted, however, that both these numbers are found at the end of the Speculum Perfectionis, ed. Lemmens. See Documenta Antiqua Franciscans, P. II, p. 84.

^4:1 On this MS. see Sabatier, Opuscules, fasc. ii.

^4:2 On this MS. see Little, Opuscules, fasc. v.

^4:3 As to this codex see Lemmens: Documenta Antiqua Franciscana, P. III, p. 72.

^5:1 Mgr. Faloci has edited the first of the Admonitions from this codex in his Miscellanea Francescana, t. vi, p. 96.

^5:2 In this edition, which Wadding has followed (fol. 21 v.), nos. 20, 21, and 23 are repeated.

^5:3 In places where variants are noted at the foot of the page the following abbreviations will be used:

        L.

       Laurentian   Codex.

     
      As.

       Assisian Codex.

     
      O.

       Ognissanti   Codex.

     
      An.

       Codex at St.   Antony's College.

     
      Is.

       Codex at St.   Isidore's College.

     
      Mon.

       Version of the Monumenta.

     
      Firm.

       Version of the Firmamenta.

     
      Pis.

       Version given   by Bartholomew of Pisa in his Conformities.

     
 

^6:1 John 14: 6-9.

^6:2 I Tim. 6: 16.

^6:3 John 4: 24.

^6:4 John 1: 18.

^6:5 John 6: 64.

^6:6 Mark 14: 22-24.

^7:1 John 6: 55.

^7:2 These words are added in the text given by Pis. and Wadd.

^7:3 See I Cor. 11: 29.

^7:4 Ps. 4: 3.

^7:5 John 9: 35.

^7:6 Wis. 18: 15.

^7:7 Matt. 28: 20.

^8:1 Gen. 2: 16-17.

^8:2 To which, namely, he has no right after religious profession, having relinquished his will by the vow of obedience.

^8:3 Luke 14: 33.

^8:4 Matt. 16: 25.

^9:1 See John 15: 13.

^9:2 See Luke 9: 62.

^9:3 See Prov. 26: 11.

^9:4 Matt. 20: 28.

^10:1 See Gen. 1: 26.

^10:2 See II Cor. 12: 5.

^11:1 See John 10: 11; Heb. 12: 2; John 10: 4; Rom. 8: 35.

^11:2 II Cor. 3: 6.

^12:1 I Cor. 12: 3.

^12:2 Ps. 52: 4.

^12:3 Matt. 5: 44.

^13:1 This Admonition is wanting in codex An., but is found in the Speculum Perfectionis, ed. Lemmens. See Documenta Antiqua Franciscana, P. II, p. 84.

^13:2 See Rom. 2: 5.

^13:3 Matt. 22: 21.

^13:4 Cod. O. and Is. read: "If therefore his body is puffed up, he has not the Spirit of God. If, however, he becomes rather viler in his own sight, then he truly has the Spirit of God."

^14:1 Cod. O. reads: "so long as he enjoys everything according to his wish and necessity."

^14:2 Matt. 5: 3.

^14:3 See Matt. 5: 39.

^14:4 Matt. 5: 9.

^15:1 Matt. 5: 8.

^15:2 See Matt. 25: 18.

^15:3 Luke 8: 18.

^16:1 See Bonav. Leg. Maj., VI, 1: "And he had these words continually in his mouth: 'what a man is in the eyes of God, so much he is, and no more.'" See also Imitation of Christ, Bk. III, Chap. L, where the same saying of St. Francis is quoted.

^16:2 See Speculum Perfectionis, ed. Sabatier, p. 189.

^16:3 This Admonition (like No. 11) is wanting in Cod. An., but is found in the Speculum Perfectionis, ed. Lemmens. See Doc. Act. Franc., P. II, p. 84.

^16:4 Prov. 29: 20.

^17:1 In Cod. O. numbers 23 and 24 are not divided.

^17:2 Cod. An. reads: "Blessed is that superior . . . "

^17:3 Matt. 24: 45.

^19:1 Cod. O. omits this sentence.

^19:2 See Matt. 6: 20.

^19:3 St. Francis would often say to his brethren: "When a servant of God receives any divine inspiration in prayer, he ought to say, 'This consolation, O Lord, Thou hast sent from heaven to me, a most unworthy sinner, and I commit it to Thy care, for I know that I should be but a thief of Thy treasure.' And when he returns to prayer, he ought to bear himself as a little one and a sinner, as if he had received no new grace from God."--St. Bonaventure, Leg. Maj., X, 4.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

II.

  

SALUTATION OF THE VIRTUES.

Thomas of Celano, St. Francis' earliest biographer, bears witness to the authenticity of this exquisite Salutation in his Second Life, written about 1247. [*1] It is found in the codices of Assisi, Berlin, Florence (Ognissanti MS.), Foligno, Liegnitz, Naples, Paris (Mazarin MSS. and MS. of Prot. theol. fac.), and Rome (Vatican MSS.), above mentioned, [*2] as well as at Dusseldorf (Royal arch. cod. B. 132), and is given by Bartholomew of Pisa in his Liber Conformitatum [*3] (fruct. XII, P. 11, Cap. 38). This Salutation was also published in the Speculum Vitae B. Francisci et Sociorum Ejus (fol. 126 v) [*4] and by Wadding, [*5] who followed the Assisian codex. This codex, which is the oldest one containing the Salutation, has been used for the Quaracchi edition, which I have here followed, as well as the Ognissanti MS. and the version given in the Conformities.

Now follows the

  

SALUTATION OF THE VIRTUES. [*6]

Hail, [*7] queen wisdom! May the Lord save thee with thy sister holy pure simplicity! O

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] Lady, holy poverty, may the Lord save thee with thy sister holy humility! O Lady, holy charity, may the Lord save thee with thy sister holy obedience! O all ye most holy virtues, may the Lord, from whom you proceed and come, save you! There is absolutely no man in the whole world who can possess one among you unless he first die. He who possesses one and does not offend the others, possesses all; and he who offends one, possesses none and offends all; and every one [of them] confounds vices and sins. Holy wisdom confounds Satan and all his wickednesses. Pure holy simplicity confounds all the wisdom of this world and the wisdom of the flesh. Holy poverty confounds cupidity and avarice and the cares of this world. Holy humility confounds pride and all the men of this world and all things that are in the world. Holy charity confounds all diabolical and fleshly temptations and all fleshly fears. Holy obedience confounds all bodily and fleshly desires and keeps the body mortified to the obedience of the spirit and to the obedience of one's brother and makes a man subject to all the men of this world and not to men alone, but also to all beasts and wild animals, so that they may do with him whatsoever they will, in so far as it may be granted to them from above by the Lord.

Footnotes

^20:1 "Wherefore," he writes of St. Francis, "in the praises of the virtues which he composed he says 'Hail! queen wisdom, God save Thee with Thy sister pure, holy simplicity.'" See 2 Cel. 3, 119, for this Incipit.

^20:2 See page <page 3>.

^20:3 In the text of the Conformities (which for the most part agrees with that of the Ognissanti MS.) the Salutation is preceded by No. 27 of the Admonitions and begins with the words "There is absolutely no man," etc.

^20:4 Ed. of Venice, 1504, and of Metz, 1509.

^20:5 Opuscula, Antwerp, 1623.

^20:6 In the Assisi codex (as in that of Liegnitz) the title reads: (Notes 6 and 7 carried forward to next page.) [p. 21] "Of the virtues with which the Blessed Virgin Mary was adorned and with which a holy soul ought also to be adorned," whereas in the Ognissanti codex and others of the same class, the title is: "Salutation of the Virtues and of their efficacy in confounding Vice." (See Introduction.)

^20:7 Cod. As. omits "Hail."

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

III.

  

ON REVERENCE FOR THE LORD'S BODY AND ON THE CLEANLINESS OF THE ALTAR.

The arguments already adduced to establish the authenticity of the Admonitions may also be used in behalf of this instruction addressed "to all clerics." It is found in eight of the codices above mentioned--to wit, those of Assisi, Liegnitz, Paris (both Mazarin MSS. and at lib. of Prot. theol. fac.), Rome (St. Antony's and St. Isidore's MS. 1/73), and Dusseldorf. In Wadding's edition of the Opuscula this instruction on the Blessed Sacrament is placed among the letters of St. Francis [*1] (No. XIII), but the early codices do not give it in an epistolary form, [*2] but rather as it is printed here without address or salutation. For the present edition the Assisian codex [*3] has

[p. 23]

been used as well as the codices of St. Antony's and St. Isidore's at Rome. The text is as follows:

  

ON REVERENCE FOR THE LORD'S BODY AND ON THE CLEANLINESS OF THE ALTAR.

Let us all consider, O clerics, the great sin and ignorance of which some are guilty regarding the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ and His most holy Name and the written words of consecration. For we know that the Body cannot exist until after these words of consecration. For we have nothing and we see nothing of the Most High Himself in this world except [His] Body and Blood, names and words by which we have been created and redeemed from death to life.

But let all those who administer such most holy mysteries, especially those who do so indifferently, consider among themselves how poor the chalices, corporals, and linens may be where the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is sacrificed. And by many It is left in wretched places and carried by the way disrespectfully, received unworthily and administered to others indiscriminately. Again His Names and written words are sometimes trampled under foot, for the sensual man perceiveth not these things that are of God. [*1] Shall we not by all these things be moved with a sense of duty when the good Lord Himself places Himself in our hands and we handle Him and receive Him daily?

[p. 24]

[paragraph continues] Are we unmindful that we must needs fall into His hands?

Let us then at once and resolutely correct these faults and others; and wheresoever the most holy Body of our Lord Jesus Christ may be improperly reserved and abandoned, let It be removed thence and let It be put and enclosed in a precious place. In like manner wheresoever the Names and written words of the Lord may be found in unclean places they ought to be collected and put away in a decent place. And we know that we are bound above all to observe all these things by the commandments of the Lord and the constitutions of holy Mother Church. And let him who does not act thus know that he shall have to render an account therefor before our Lord Jesus Christ on the day of judgment. And let him who may cause copies of this writing to be made, to the end that it may be the better observed, know that he is blessed by the Lord.

Footnotes

^22:1 Wadding, following Mariano of Florence, prefaces the letter with the following Salutation: "To my reverend masters in Christ; to all the clerics who are in the world and live conformably to the rules of the Catholic faith: brother Francis, their least one and unworthy servant, sends greeting with the greatest respect and kissing their feet. Since I am become the servant of all, but cannot, on account of my infirmities, address you personally and viva voce, I beg you to receive, with all love and charity, this remembrance of me and exhortation which I write briefly." Wadding also (p. 45) adds at the end of this instruction the following words: "May our Lord Jesus Christ fill all my masters with His holy grace and comfort them."

^22:2 Father Ubald d'Alencon (Opuscules de Saint Francois, p. 21) is inclined, with M. Sabatier, to regard this instruction as a kind of postscript to St. Francis' letter to the General Chapter and to all the Friars. (See Speculum Perfectionis, ed. Sabatier, p. clxvi.)

^22:3 Mgr. Faloci has edited the Instruction after this codex; see Misc. Francescana, t. VI, p. 95.

^23:1 See I Cor. 2: 14.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

IV.

  

RULES OF THE FRIARS MINOR.

The early history of the Seraphic legislation, to wit, the Rules of the Friars Minor, the Poor Ladies and the Brothers and Sisters of Penance, is intricate beyond measure, as those at all conversant with the subject are but too well aware. Withal, as regards the Rule of the Friars Minor, with which we are now more particularly concerned, St. Francis seems, on the whole, to have written it twice. We have the formal testimony of St. Bonaventure and other trustworthy authorities to this effect. Suffice it to say that in the third year after he underwent the great spiritual crisis we call conversion, "the servant of Christ, seeing that the number of his Friars was gradually increasing, wrote for himself and for them a form of life in simple words, laying as its irremovable foundation the observance of the holy Gospel and adding a few other things which seemed necessary for uniformity of life." [*1] It was this "form of life," which has be come known as the first Rule, that Innocent III approved viva voce, April 23, 1209. [*2] Some fourteen years later on, when the Order had greatly increased,

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] Francis "desiring to bring into a shorter form the Rule handed down in which the words of the Gospel were scattered somewhat diffusely . . . caused a Rule to be written. . . . And this Rule . . . he committed to the keeping of his Vicar, who, after a few days had elapsed, declared that he had carelessly lost it. Once more the holy man . . . rewrote the Rule as at the first . . . and by Pope Honorius obtained its confirmation" [*1] on November 29, 1223. Such in briefest outline is the genesis of the first and second Rules written by St. Francis for the Friars Minor.

To these two Rules Prof. Karl Muller [*2] and M. Paul Sabatier [*3] would fain add a third, written, as they aver, in 1221. Their opinion, however, seems to rest upon a misconception, for the Rule which they describe as dating from 1221, is not a new one, but the same that Innocent III approved, not indeed in its original form, which has not come down to us, [*4] but rather in the form it had assumed in the course of twelve years, as a consequence of many changes and additions. [*5]

[p. 27]

Early expositors of the Rule, such as Hugo de Digne [*1] and Angelo Clareno, [*2] in their works always represent the Rule of which we are now speaking as the first and original one. Moreover, none of the thirteenth century writers make mention of any third rule; they speak only of the changes and accretions which the first Rule suffered between 1209 and 1223. [*3]

For example Jordan a Giano tells us that St. Francis chose Brother Caesar of Spires, a profound student of Scripture and a devoted friend, to assist

[p. 28]

him in putting this Rule into shape, [*1] and Jacques de Vitry, writing about 1217, relates that the Friars "meet once a year . . . and then with the help of good men adopt and promulgate holy institutions approved by the Pope." [*2] One of these institutions has been recorded for us by Thomas of Celano in his Second Life. It appears that "on account of a general commotion in a certain chapter, St. Francis caused these words to be written: 'Let the friars take care not to appear gloomy and sad like hypocrites, but let them be jovial and merry, showing that they rejoice in the Lord, and becomingly courteous,'" [*3] words which may be found in the seventh chapter of the first Rule. [*4] Honorius III, on September 22, 1220, issued a decree forbidding the Friars to leave the Order after having made profession, or to roam about "beyond the bounds of obedience," and this ordinance was added to the second chapter of the Rule. [*5]

All permanent and powerful rules grow, as a recent writer [*6] has justly remarked, and it was thuswise that

[p. 29]

the first Rule of the Friars Minor received constant additions in the form of constitutions enacted at the Chapters held at Portiuncula after 1212 or otherwise--it is necessary to insist on this point [*1]--during the fourteen years it was in force. It is not hard therefore to understand why the texts we have of this Rule do not always agree, since these changes and additions did not come to the knowledge of all through the same channel. For example, in the tenth chapter, which deals with "the sick brothers," we have two different readings: the one followed in the present translation is that found in the majority of the codices; [*2] the other, which has been incorporated by Celano in his Second Life, [*3] has been used by Hugo de Digne in his exposition of the Rule. [*4] So too in the twelfth chapter, which prescribes that the friars should avoid the company of women, we find the following addition in the exposition of Angelo Clareno [*5] and the Speculum Vitae B. Francisci: [*6] "Let no one walk abroad with them alone or eat out of the same plate with them at table,"--words not to be found in the more common form of the Rule.

It remains to say a word about the relation of this first Rule to the second and definitive one approved in 1223. In treating of the difference between these two Rules, M. Sabatier errs still more strangely. They had little in common, he avers, except the name, the second being the very antithesis of the first, which alone was truly Franciscan. [*7] To say the truth

[p. 30]

this assertion is less conformable to reality than it is to the theories and prejudices of the French writer. In so far as the first and second Rules written by St. Francis for the Friars Minor may be said to differ, the difference lies in this that the second Rule is shorter, more precise, and more orderly; [*1] but essentially and in substance it is clearly and truly the same as the first Rule. Indeed, the very wording of the second Rule already exists in great part in the first one, as any one must observe who makes an unbiassed comparison of the two. So true is this agreement between the two Rules that they are often regarded as one and the same. Thus Pope Honorius III himself in his bull of 1223 confirming the second Rule makes no distinction between the two. "We confirm," he says, "the Rule of your Order approved by Pope Innocent, our predecessor, of happy memory." [*2] And Brother Elias, in a letter addressed to the friars "living near Valenciennes," exhorts them to observe purely, inviolably, unweariedly the "holy Rule approved by Pope Innocent and confirmed by Pope Honorius." [*3] Rightly then does Hugo de Digne ("spirituals homo ultra modum") describe the difference between the two Rules in his Exposition, [*4]

[p. 31]

when he says: "Some things were afterwards omitted for the sake of brevity from the Rule approved by Pope Innocent before it was confirmed by the bull of Pope Honorius." [*1]

For the rest, M. Sabatier's assertion that the "Spiritual" friars at the beginning of the fourteenth century did not dream of using the first Rule [*2] can hardly be admitted. To refute it, it suffices to cite Angelo Clareno, the leader of the "Spiritual" friars, who so very often mentions the first Rule in his exposition and whose citations prove that in the first quarter of the fourteenth century there was no memory of any other Rule, even in the camp of the rigorists. In a word, "the opposition which the distinguished French critic would fain set up between the two Rules, does not exist, and Chapter XV of his Life of St. Francis is not at all consonant with history." Such is the assertion of the Quaracchi editors. Its truth will be best demonstrated by an examination of the text of both Rules, which now follow:

  

FIRST RULE OF THE FRIARS MINOR

Which St. Francis made and which Pope Innocent III confirmed without a Bull. [*3]

In the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. This is the

[p. 32]

life that Brother Francis begged might be conceded to him and confirmed by the Lord Pope Innocent. And he [the Pope] has conceded and confirmed it to him and to his brothers present and future.

Brother Francis, and whoever may be at the head of this religion, promises obedience and reverence to our Lord Pope Innocent and to his successors. And the other brothers shall be bound to obey Brother Francis and his successors. [*1]

1.--That the Brothers ought to live in Obedience, without Property and in Chastity.

The Rule and life of these brothers is this: namely, to live in obedience and chastity, and without property, and to follow the doctrine and footsteps of our Lord Jesus Christ, who says: "If thou wilt be perfect, go sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, follow Me." [*2] And: "If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me;" [*3]

[p. 33]

in like manner: "If any man come to Me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be My disciple." [*1] "And everyone that hath left father or mother, brothers or sisters, or wife, or children or lands, for My sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall possess life everlasting." [*2]

2.--Of the Reception and Clothing of the Brothers.

If any one, wishing by divine inspiration to embrace this manner of life, comes to our brothers, let him be kindly received by them. And if he be firmly resolved to undertake our life, let the brothers take great care not to meddle with his temporal affairs, but let them present him as soon as possible to their minister. Let the minister receive him kindly, and encourage him, and diligently explain to him the tenor of our life. This being done, if he be willing and able, with safety of conscience and without impediment, let him sell all his goods and endeavor to distribute them to the poor. But let the brothers and the ministers of the brothers be careful not to interfere in any way in his affairs, and let them not receive any money, either themselves or through any person acting as intermediary; if however they should be in want, the brothers may accept other necessaries for the body, money excepted, by reason of their necessity, like other poor. And when he [the

[p. 34]

candidate] shall have returned, let the minister grant him the habit of probation for a year; that is to say, two tunics without a hood and cord and breeches and a chaperon [*1] reaching to the girdle. The year of probation being finished, let him be received to obedience. Afterwards it shall not be lawful for him to pass to another Order, nor to "wander about beyond obedience," according to the commandment of the Lord Pope. [*2] For according to the Gospel "no man putting his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God." [*3] If, however, anyone should present himself who cannot without difficulty give away his goods, but has the spiritual will to relinquish them, it shall suffice. No one shall be received contrary to the form and institution of the holy Church.

But the other brothers who have promised obedience may have one tunic with a hood, and another without a hood, if necessity require it, and a cord and breeches. And let all the brothers be clothed with mean garments, and they may mend them with sackcloth and other pieces, with the blessing of God, for the Lord says in the Gospel: they that are in costly apparel and live delicately and they that are clothed in soft garments are in the houses of kings. [*4] And although they should be called hypocrites, let

[p. 35]

them not cease to do good; let them not desire rich clothes in this world, that they may possess a garment in the kingdom of heaven.

3.--Of the Divine Office and of the Fast.

The Lord says: "This kind [of devil] can go out by nothing but by fasting and prayer"; [*1] and again: "When you fast be not as the hypocrites, sad." [*2] For this reason let all the brothers, whether clerics or laics, say the Divine Office, the praises and prayers which they ought to say. The clerics shall say the Office, and say it for the living and the dead, according to the custom of clerics; but to satisfy for the defect and negligence of the brothers, let them say every day Miserere mei, with the Pater noster; for the deceased brothers let there say De profundis, with Pater noster. And they may have only the books necessary to perform their Office; and the lay-brothers who know how to read the Psalter may also have one; but the others who do not know how to read may not have a book. The lay-brothers however shall say: Credo in Deum, and twenty-four Paternosters with Gloria Patri for Matins, but for Lauds, five; for Prime, Tierce, Sext, and Nones, for each, seven Paternosters with Gloria Patri; for Vespers, twelve; for Compline, Credo in Deum and seven Paternosters with Gloria Patri; for the dead, seven Paternosters with Requiem aeternam; and for

[p. 36]

the defect and negligence of the brothers, three Paternosters every day.

And all the brothers shall likewise fast from the feast of All Saints until the Nativity of our Lord, and from Epiphany, when our Lord Jesus Christ began to fast, until Easter; but at other times let them not be bound to fast according to this life except on Fridays. And they may eat of all foods which are placed before them, according to the Gospel. [*1]

4.--Of the Ministers and the other Brothers: how they shall be ranged.

In the Name of the Lord let all the brothers who are appointed ministers and servants of the other brothers place their brothers in the provinces or places where they may be, and let them often visit and spiritually admonish and console them. And let all my other blessed brothers diligently obey them in those things which look to the salvation of the soul and are not contrary to our life. Let them observe among themselves what the Lord says: "Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do you also to them," [*2] and "what you do not wish done to you, do it not to others." [*3] And let the ministers and servants remember that the Lord says: I have not "come to be ministered unto, but to minister," [*4] and that to them is committed the care of the souls of their brothers, of whom, if any should be lost

[p. 37]

through their fault and bad example, they will have to give an account before the Lord Jesus Christ in the day of judgment.

5.--Of the Correction of the Brothers who offend.

Therefore take care of your souls and of those of your brothers, for "it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." [*1] If however one of the ministers should command some one of the brothers anything contrary to our life or against his soul, the brother is not bound to obey him, because that is not obedience in which a fault or sin is committed. Nevertheless, let all the brothers who are subject to the ministers and servants consider reasonably and carefully the deeds of the ministers and servants. And if they should see any one of them walking according to the flesh and not according to the spirit, according to the right way of our life, after the third admonition, if he will not amend, let him be reported to the minister and servant of the whole fraternity in the Whitsun Chapter, in spite of any obstacle that may stand in the way. If however among the brothers, wherever they may be, there should be some brother who desires to live according to the flesh, and not according to the spirit, let the brothers with whom he is admonish, instruct, and correct him humbly and diligently. And if after the third admonition he will not amend, let them as soon as possible send him, or make the matter known, to his

[p. 38]

minister and servant, and let the minister and servant do with him what may seem to him most expedient before God.

And let all the brothers, the ministers and servants as well as the others, take care not to be troubled or angered because of the fault or bad example of another, for the devil desires to corrupt many through the sin of one; but let them spiritually help him who has sinned, as best they can; for he that is whole needs not a physician, but he that is sick. [*1]

In like manner let not all the brothers have power and authority, especially among themselves, for as the Lord says in the Gospel: "The princes of the Gentiles lord it over them: and they that are the greater exercise power upon them." [*2] It shall not be thus among the brothers, but whosoever will be the greater among them, let him be their minister and servant, [*3] and he that is the greater among them let him be as the younger, [*4] and he who is the first, let him be as the last. Let not any brother do evil or speak evil to another; let them rather in the spirit of charity willingly serve and obey each other: and this is the true and holy obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ. And let all the brothers as often soever as they may have declined from the commandments of God, and wandered from obedience, know that, as the prophet says, [*5]

[p. 39]

they are cursed out of obedience as long as they continue consciously in such a sin. And when they persevere in the commandments of the Lord, which they have promised by the holy Gospel and their life, let them know that they abide in true obedience, and are blessed by God.

6.--Of the Recourse of the Brothers to their Ministers and that no Brother may be called Prior.

Let the brothers, in whatsoever places they may be, if they cannot observe our life, have recourse as soon as possible to their minister, making this known to him. But let the minister endeavor to provide for them in such a way as he would wish to be dealt with himself if he were in the like case. And let no one be called Prior, but let all in general be called Friars Minor. And let one wash the feet of the other.

7.--Of the Manner of serving and working.

Let the brothers in whatever places they may be among others to serve or to work, not be chamberlains, nor cellarers, nor overseers in the houses of those whom they serve, and let them not accept any employment which might cause scandal, or be injurious to their soul, [*1] but let them be inferior and subject to all who are in the same house.

And let the brothers who know how to work, labor and exercise themselves in that art they may understand, if it be not contrary to the

[p. 40]

salvation of their soul, and they can exercise it becomingly. For the prophet says: "For thou shalt eat the labors of thy hands; blessed art thou, and it shall be well with thee"; [*1] and the Apostle: "If any man will not work, neither let him eat." [*2] And let every man abide in the art or employment wherein he was called. [*3] And for their labor they may receive all necessary things, except money. And if they be in want, let them seek for alms like other brothers. And they may have the tools and implements necessary for their work. Let all the brothers apply themselves with diligence to good works, for it is written: "Be always busy in some good work, that the devil may find thee occupied;" [*4] and again: "Idleness is an enemy to the soul." [*5] Therefore the servants of God ought always to continue in prayer or in some other good work.

Let the brothers take care that wherever they may be, whether in hermitages or in other places, they never appropriate any place to themselves, or maintain it against another. And whoever may come to them, either a friend or a foe, a thief or a robber, let them receive him kindly. And wherever the brothers are and in whatsoever place they may find themselves, let them spiritually and diligently show reverence

[p. 41]

and honor toward one another without murmuring. [*1] And let them take care not to appear exteriorly sad and gloomy like hypocrites, but let them show themselves to be joyful and contented in the Lord, merry and becomingly courteous. [*2]

8.--That the Brothers must not receive Money.

The Lord commands in the Gospel: "Take heed, beware of all malice and avarice and guard yourselves from the solicitudes of this world, and the cares of this life." [*3] Therefore let none of the brothers, wherever he may be or whithersoever he may go, carry or receive money or coin in any manner, or cause it to be received, either for clothing, or for books, or as the price of any labor, or indeed for any reason, except on account of the manifest necessity of the sick brothers. For we ought not to have more use and esteem of money and coin than of stones. And the devil seeks to blind those who desire or value it more than stones. Let us therefore take care lest after having left all things we lose the kingdom of heaven for such a trifle. And if we should chance to find money in any place, let us no more regard it than the dust we tread under our feet, [*4] for it is "vanity of vanities, and all is vanity." [*5] And if perchance, which God

[p. 42]

forbid, it should happen that any brother should collect or have money or coin, except only because of the aforesaid necessity of the sick, let all the brothers hold him for a false brother, a thief, a robber, and one having a purse, unless he should become truly penitent. And let the brothers in nowise receive money for alms [*1] or cause it to be received, seek it or cause it to be sought, or money for other houses or places; nor let them go with any person seeking money or coin for such places. But the brothers may perform all other services which are not contrary to our life, with the blessing of God. The brothers may however for the manifest necessity of the lepers ask alms for them. But let them be very wary of money. But let all the brothers likewise take great heed not to search the world for any filthy lucre.

9.--Of asking for Alms.

Let all the brothers strive to follow the humility and poverty of our Lord Jesus Christ, and let them remember that we ought to have nothing else in the whole world, except as the Apostle says: "Having food and wherewith to be covered, with these we are content. [*2]" And they ought to rejoice when they converse with mean and despised persons, with the poor and

[p. 43]

the weak, with the infirm and lepers, and with those who beg in the streets. And when it may be necessary, let them go for alms. And let them not be ashamed thereof, but rather remember that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living and Omnipotent God, set His face "as a hard rock," [*1] and was not ashamed, and was poor, and a stranger, and lived on alms, He Himself and the Blessed Virgin and His disciples. And when men may treat them with contempt, and refuse to give them an alms, let them give thanks for this to God, because for these shames they shall receive great honor before the tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ. And let them know that the injuries shall not be imputed to those who suffer them, but to those who offer them. And alms is an inheritance and a right which is due to the poor, which our Lord Jesus Christ purchased for us. And the brothers who labor in seeking it will have a great recompense, and they will procure and acquire a reward for those who give; for all that men leave in this world shall perish, but for the charity and alms deeds they have done they will receive a reward from God.

And let one make known clearly his wants to another, in order that he may find and receive what are necessary for him. And let everyone love and nourish his brother as a mother loves and nourishes her son, in so far as God gives them grace. And "let not him that eateth despise

[p. 44]

him that eateth not; and he that eateth not, let him not judge him that eateth." [*1] And whensoever a necessity shall arise, it is lawful for all the brothers, wherever they may be, to eat of all food that men can eat, as our Lord said of David, who "did eat the loaves of proposition, which was not lawful to eat but for the priests." [*2] And let them remember what the Lord says: "and take heed to yourselves, lest perhaps your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life: and that they come upon you suddenly. For as a snare shall it come upon all that sit upon the face of the whole earth." [*3] And in like manner in time of manifest necessity let all the brothers act in their needs, as our Lord shall give them grace, for necessity has no law.

10.--Of the sick Brothers.

If any of the brothers fall into sickness, wherever he may be, let the others not leave him, unless one of the brothers, or more if it be necessary, be appointed to serve him as they would wish to be served themselves; but in urgent necessity they may commit him to some person who will take care of him in his infirmity. And I ask the sick brother that he give thanks to the Creator for all things, and that he desire to be as God wills him to be, whether sick or well; for all whom the Lord has predestined to eternal

[p. 45]

life [*1] are disciplined by the rod of afflictions and infirmities, and the spirit of compunction; as the Lord says: "Such as I love I rebuke and chastise." [*2] If, however, he be disquieted and angry, either against God or against the brothers, or perhaps ask eagerly for remedies, desiring too much to deliver his body which is soon to die, which is an enemy to the soul, this comes to him from evil and he is fleshly, and seems not to be of the brothers, because he loves his body more than his soul. [*3]

11.--That the Brothers ought not to speak or detract, but ought to love one another.

And let all the brothers take care not to calumniate anyone, nor to contend in words; [*4] let them indeed study to maintain silence as far as God gives them grace. Let them also not dispute among themselves or with others, but let them be ready to answer with humility, saying: "we are unprofitable servants." [*5] And let them not be angry, for "whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of the judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council. And whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire." [*6] And let them love one another, as the

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] Lord says: "This is My commandment, that you love one another, as I have loved you. [*1]" And let them show their love by the works [*2] they do for each other, according as the Apostle says: "let us not love in word or in tongue, but in deed and in truth." [*3] Let them "speak evil of no man," [*4] nor murmur, nor detract others, for it is written: "Whisperers and detractors are hateful to God." [*5] And let them be "gentle, showing all mildness toward all men." [*6] Let them not judge and not condemn, and, as the Lord says, let them not pay attention to the least sins of others, but rather let them recount their own in the bitterness of their soul. [*7] And let them "strive to enter by the narrow gate," [*8] for the Lord says: "How narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leadeth to life, and few there are that find it!" [*9]

12.--Of avoiding unbecoming Looks and the Company of Women.

Let all the brothers, wherever they are or may go, carefully avoid unbecoming looks, and company of women, and let no one converse with them alone. [*10] Let the priests speak to them honestly, giving them penance or some spiritual counsel. And let no woman whatsoever be received

[p. 47]

to obedience by any brother, [*1] but spiritual counsel being given to her let her do penance where she wills. Let us all carefully watch over ourselves, and hold all our members in subjection, for the Lord says: "Whosoever shall look on a woman to lust after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart." [*2]

13.--Of the Punishment of Fornicators.

If any brother by the instigation of the devil should commit fornication, let him be deprived of the habit of the Order which he has lost by his base iniquity and let him put it aside wholly, and let him be altogether expelled from our religion. And let him afterwards do penance for his sins.

14.--How the Brothers should go through the World.

When the brothers travel through the world, let them carry nothing by the way, neither bag, nor purse, nor bread, nor money, nor a staff. And whatsoever house they shall enter, let them first say, "Peace be to this house," and remaining in the same house, let them eat and drink what things they have. [*3] Let them not resist evil, [*4] but if anyone should strike them on the cheek, let them turn to him the other; and if anyone take away their garment, let them not

[p. 48]

forbid him the tunic also. Let them give to everyone that asketh them, and if anyone take away their goods, let them not ask them again. [*1]

15.--That the Brothers may not keep Beasts nor ride.

I enjoin all the brothers, both clerics and laics, that when they travel through the world, or reside in places, they in no wise, either with them or with others or in any other way, have any kind of beast of burden. Nor is it lawful for them to ride on horseback unless they are compelled by infirmity or great necessity.

16.--Of those who go among the Saracens and other Infidels.

The Lord says: "Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye therefore wise as serpents and simple as doves." [*2] Wherefore, whoever of the brothers may wish, by divine inspiration, to go among the Saracens and other infidels, let them go with the permission of their minister and servant. But let the minister give them leave and not refuse them, if he sees they are fit to be sent; he will be held to render an account to the Lord if in this or in other things he acts indiscreetly. The brothers, however, who go may conduct themselves in two ways spiritually among them. One way is not to make disputes or contentions; but let them be "subject

[p. 49]

to every human creature for God's sake," [*1] yet confessing themselves to be Christians. The other way is that when they see it is pleasing to God, they announce the Word of God, that they may believe in Almighty God,--Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, the  of all, our Lord the Redeemer and Saviour the Son, and that they should be baptized and be made Christians, because, "unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." [*2]

These and other things which please God they may say to them, for the Lord says in the Gospel: "Everyone that shall confess Me before men, I will also confess him before My Father who is in heaven;" [*3] and "he that shall be ashamed of Me and My words, of him the Son of Man shall be ashamed, when He shall come in His majesty and that of His Father, and of the holy angels." [*4]

And let all the brothers, wherever they may be, remember that they have given themselves, and have relinquished their bodies to our Lord Jesus Christ; and for love of Him they ought to expose themselves to enemies both visible and invisible, for the Lord says: "Whosoever shall lose his life for My sake, shall save it" [*5] in eternal life. "Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of

[p. 50]

heaven." [*1] "If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you." [*2] If however they should persecute you in one city, flee to another. [*3] "Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all that is evil against you, untruly, for My sake." [*4] "Be glad in that day and rejoice, for your reward is great in heaven." [*5] "I say to you, my friends, be not afraid of them who kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do." [*6] " See that ye are not troubled." [*7] "In your patience you shall possess your souls." [*8] "But he that shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved." [*9]

17.--Of Preachers.

Let none of the brothers preach contrary to the form and institution of the holy Roman Church, and unless this has been conceded to him by his minister. But let the minister take care that he does not grant this leave indiscreetly to anyone. Nevertheless, let all the brothers preach by their works. And let no minister or preacher appropriate to himself the ministry of brothers or the office of preaching, but let him give up his office without any contradiction at whatever hour it may be enjoined him. Wherefore I beseech in the charity which God is [*10] all

[p. 51]

my brothers, preachers, prayers, or laborers, both clerics and laics, that they study to humble themselves in all things and that they glory not, nor rejoice, nor inwardly exalt themselves on account of good words and works, nor indeed for any good which God may sometimes say or do and operate in them or by them, according to what the Lord says: "But yet rejoice not, in this that spirits are subject unto you." [*1] And let us know for certain that nothing belongs to us but vices and sins. And we ought rather to rejoice when we "fall into divers temptations," [*2] and when we bear some afflictions or sorrows of soul or body in this world for the sake of eternal life. Let us then all, brothers, avoid all pride and vainglory. Let us keep ourselves from the wisdom of this world, and the prudence of the flesh; for the spirit of the world wishes and cares much for words, but little for work; and it seeks not religion and interior sanctity of spirit, but wishes and desires a religion and sanctity appearing from without to men. And these are they of whom the Lord says: "Amen, I say unto you, they have received their reward." [*3] But the spirit of the Lord wishes the flesh to be mortified and despised, and to be considered vile, abject, and contemptible; and it studies humility and patience, pure simplicity, and true peace of mind, and always desires above all things divine fear and divine wisdom, and the divine love of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

[p. 52]

And let us refer all good to the Lord God most High and Supreme; let us acknowledge that all good belongs to Him, and let us give thanks for all to Him from whom all good proceeds. And may He, the most High and Supreme, only True God, have, and may there be rendered to Him and may He receive, all honors and reverences, all praises and benedictions, all thanks and all glory, to whom all good belongs, who alone is good. [*1] And when we see or hear evil said or God blasphemed, let us bless and thank and praise the Lord who is blessed for ever. Amen.

18.--How the Ministers should meet together.

Each minister may assemble with his brothers every year wherever he may please on the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, to treat of those things which belong to God. And let all the ministers who are in parts beyond the sea and beyond the mountains come once in three years, and the other ministers once every year to the chapter on Whit Sunday, at the Church of St. Mary of the Portiuncula, unless it be otherwise ordered by the minister and servant of the whole brotherhood.

19.--That all the Brothers must live in a Catholic way.

Let all the brothers be Catholics, and live and speak in a Catholic manner. But if anyone

[p. 53]

should err from the Catholic faith and life in word or in deed, and will not amend, let him be altogether expelled from our fraternity. And let us hold all clerics and religious as our masters in those things which regard the salvation of souls, if they do not deviate from our religion, and let us reverence their office and order and administration in the Lord.

20.--Of the Confession of the Brothers and of the Reception of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Let my blessed brothers, both clerics and laics, confess their sins to priests of our religion. And if they cannot do this, let them confess to other discreet and Catholic priests, knowing firmly and hoping that from whatever Catholic priests they may receive penance and absolution, they will undoubtedly be absolved from these sins if they take care to observe humbly and faithfully the penance enjoined them. If however they cannot then have a priest, let them confess to their brother, as the Apostle James says: "Confess your sins to one another;" [*1] but let them not on this account fail to have recourse to priests, for to priests alone the power of binding and loosing has been given. And thus contrite and having confessed, let them receive the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ with great humility and veneration, calling to mind

[p. 54]

what the Lord Himself says: "He that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood hath everlasting life;" [*1] and "Do this for a commemoration of Me." [*2]

21.--Of the Praise and Exhortation which all the Brothers may make.

And this or the like exhortation and praise all my brothers may announce with the blessing of God, whenever it may please them among whatever men they may be: Fear and honor, praise and bless God, give thanks [*3] and adore the Lord God Almighty in Trinity and Unity, Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, the Creator of all. "Do penance," [*4] bring forth fruits worthy of penance, [*5] for know that we must soon die. "Give and it shall be given to you;" [*6] "Forgive, and you shall be forgiven." [*7] And if you do not forgive men their sins, the Lord will not forgive you your sins. [*8] Confess all your sins. [*9] Blessed are they who shall die in penitence, for they shall be in the kingdom of heaven. Woe to those who do not die in penitence, for they shall be the children of the devil, whose works they do, [*10] and they shall go into eternal fire. Beware and abstain from all evil, and persevere in good until the end.

[p. 55]

22.--Of the Admonition of the Brothers.

Let us all, brothers, give heed to what the Lord says: "Love your enemies, and do good to them that hate you." [*1] For our Lord Jesus, whose footsteps we ought to follow, [*2] called His betrayer friend, [*3] and offered Himself willingly to His crucifiers. Therefore all those who unjustly inflict upon us tribulations and anguishes, shames and injuries, sorrows and torments, martyrdom and death, are our friends whom we ought to love much, because we gain eternal life by that which they make us suffer. And let us hate our body with its vices and sins, because by living carnally it wishes to deprive us of the love of our Lord Jesus Christ and eternal life, and to lose itself with all else in hell; for we by our own fault are corrupt, miserable, and averse to good, but prompt and willing to evil; because, as the Lord says in the Gospel: from the heart of men proceed and come evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, false testimonies, blasphemy, foolishness. [*4] All these evils come from within, from the heart of man, and these are what defile a man.

But now, after having renounced the world, we have nothing else to do but to be solicitous, to follow the will of God, and to please Him.

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Let us take much care that we be not the wayside, or the stony or thorny ground, according to what the Lord says in the Gospel: The seed is the word of God. And that which fell by the wayside and was trampled under foot are they that hear the word and do not understand; then the devil cometh, and snatcheth that which has been sown in their hearts and taketh the word out of their hearts, lest believing they should be saved. But that which fell upon the rock are they who, when they hear the word, at once receive it with joy; but when tribulation and persecution arise on account of the word, they are immediately scandalized, and these have no roots in themselves, but are for a while, for they believe for a while, and in time of temptation fall away. But that which fell among thorns are they who hear the word of God, and the solicitude and cares of this world, the fallacies of riches, and the desire of other things entering in choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. But that sown on good ground are they who, in a good and best heart, hearing the word understand and keep it, and bring forth fruit in patience. [*1]

And for this reason, brothers, let us, as the Lord says, "let the dead bury their dead." [*2] And let us be much on our guard against the malice and cunning of Satan, who desires that man should not give his heart and mind to the

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues] Lord God, and who going about seeks to seduce the heart of man under pretext of some reward or benefit, to smother the words and precepts of the Lord from memory, and who wishes to blind the heart of man by  business and cares, and to dwell there, as the Lord says: "When an unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places seeking rest and findeth none; then he saith: 'I will return into my house whence I came out.' And coming he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. Then he goeth and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there; and the last state of that man is made worse than the first." [*1] Wherefore let us all, brothers, watch much, lest under pretext of some reward or labor or aid we lose or separate our mind and heart from the Lord. But I beseech all the brothers, both the ministers and others, in the charity which God is, [*2] that, overcoming all obstacles and putting aside all care and solicitude, they strive in the best manner they are able, to serve, love, and honor the Lord God with a clean heart and a pure mind, which He seeks above all. And let us always make in us a tabernacle and dwelling-place for Him, who is the Lord God Omnipotent, Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, who says: "Watch, therefore, praying at all times, that you may be accounted worthy to escape" all the evils "that are to come,

[p. 58]

and to stand before the Son of Man." [*1] And when you stand to pray, [*2] say, "Our Father, who art in heaven." And let us adore Him with a pure heart, for "we ought always to pray, and not to faint," [*3] for the Father seeks such adorers. "God is a Spirit, and they that adore Him, must adore Him in spirit and in truth." [*4] And let us have recourse to Him as the "Shepherd and Bishop of our souls," [*5] who says; "I am the Good Shepherd," who feed My sheep, "and I lay down My life for My flock." [*6] But all you are brothers. "And call none your father upon earth; for one is your Father who is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters, for one is your master, who is in heaven, Christ." [*7] "If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, you shall ask whatever you will, and it shall be done unto you." [*8] "Where there are two or three gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of them." [*9] "Behold, I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world." [*10] "The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life." [*11] "I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life." [*12]

Let us therefore hold fast the words, the life and doctrine and holy Gospel of Him who deigned for us to ask His Father to manifest to

[p. 59]

us His Name, saying: Father, I have manifested Thy Name to the men whom Thou hast given Me because the words which Thou gayest Me I have given to them, and they have received them, and have known in very deed that I came forth out of Thee, and they have believed that Thou didst send Me. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them whom Thou hast given Me, because they are Thine and all My things are Thine. Holy Father, keep them in Thy Name whom Thou hast given Me, that they may be one, as We also are. These things I speak in the world that they may have joy filled in themselves., I have given them Thy word, and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, as I also am not of the world. I pray not that Thou shouldst take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldst keep them from evil. Sanctify them in truth. Thy word is truth. As Thou hast sent Me into the world, I have sent them into the world. And for them I do sanctify Myself, that they may be sanctified in truth. Not for them only do I pray, but for them also who through their word shall believe in Me, that they may be consummated in one, and that the world may know that Thou hast sent Me, and hast loved them, as Thou hast also loved Me. And I have made known Thy Name to them, that the love wherewith Thou hast loved Me may be in them, and I in them. Father, I will that where I am, they also whom Thou hast

[p. 60]

given Me may be with Me, that they may see Thy glory in Thy kingdom. [*1]

23.--Prayer, Praise, and Thanksgiving. [*2]

Almighty, most Holy, most High and Supreme God, Holy and Just Father, Lord King of heaven and earth, for Thyself we give thanks to Thee because by Thy holy will, and by Thine only Son, Thou hast created all things spiritual and corporal in the Holy Ghost and didst place us made to Thine image and likeness [*3] in paradise, whence we fell by our own fault. And we give Thee thanks because, as by Thy Son Thou didst create us, so by the true and holy love with which Thou hast loved us, [*4] Thou didst cause Him, true God and true Man, to be born of the glorious and ever-Virgin, most Blessed holy Mary, and didst will that He should redeem us captives by His Cross and Blood and Death. And we give thanks to Thee because Thy Son Himself is to come again in the glory of His Majesty to put the wicked who have not done penance for their sins, and have not known Thee, in eternal fire, and to say to all who have known Thee and adored Thee, and served Thee in penance: "Come, ye blessed of My Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world." [*5]

[p. 61]

And since all we wretches and sinners are not worthy to name Thee, we humbly beseech Thee, that our Lord Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, in whom Thou art well pleased, [*1] together with the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, may give thanks to Thee as it is pleasing to Thee and Them, for all; He suffices Thee always for all through whom Thou hast done so much for us. Alleluia. And we earnestly beg the glorious Mother, the most Blessed Mary ever-Virgin, Blessed Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and all the choirs of the blessed spirits, seraphim, cherubim, and thrones, dominations, principalities and powers, virtues, angels and archangels, blessed John the Baptist, John the Evangelist, Peter, Paul, the blessed patriarchs and prophets, innocents, apostles, evangelists, disciples, martyrs, confessors, virgins, blessed Elias and Enoch, and all the Saints who have been and are, and shall be, for Thy love, that they may, as it is pleasing to Thee, give thanks for these things to the most high, true God, eternal and living, with Thy most dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, for ever and ever. Amen. Alleluia.

And all we, brothers minor, useless servants, humbly entreat and beseech all those within the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church wishing to serve God, and all ecclesiastical Orders, priests, deacons, subdeacons, acolytes, exorcists, lectors, door-keepers, and all clerics; all religious men

[p. 62]

and women, all boys and children, poor and needy, kings and princes, laborers, husbandmen, servants and masters, all virgins, continent, and married people, laics, men and women, all infants, youths, young men and old, healthy and sick, all small and great, and all peoples, clans, tribes, and tongues, all nations and all men in all the earth, who are and shall be, that we may persevere in the true faith and in doing penance, for otherwise no one can be saved. Let us all love with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, with all our strength and fortitude, with all our understanding and with all our powers, [*1] with our whole might and whole affection, with our innermost parts, our whole desires, and wills, the Lord God, who has given, and gives to us all, the whole body, the whole soul, and our life; who has created and redeemed us, and by His mercy alone will save us; who has done and does all good to us, miserable and wretched, vile, unclean, ungrateful, and evil.

Let us therefore desire nothing else, wish for nothing else, and let nothing please and delight us except our Creator and Redeemer, and Saviour, the only true God, who is full of good, all good, entire good, the true and supreme good, who alone is good, [*2] merciful and kind, gentle and sweet, who alone is holy, just, true, and upright, who alone is benign, pure, and clean, from whom, and through whom, and in whom is all mercy,

[p. 63]

all grace, all glory of all penitents and of the just, and of all the blessed rejoicing in heaven. Let nothing therefore hinder us, let nothing separate us, let nothing come between us. Let us all, everywhere, in every place, at every hour, and at all times, daily and continually believe, truly and humbly, and let us hold in our hearts, and love, honor, adore, serve, praise and bless, glorify and exalt, magnify and give thanks to the most High and Supreme, Eternal God, in Trinity and Unity, to the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, to the Creator of all, to the Saviour of all who believe and hope in Him, and love Him, who, without beginning or end, is , invisible, unerring, ineffable, incomprehensible, unfathomable, blessed, praiseworthy, glorious, exalted, sublime, most high, sweet, amiable, lovable, and always wholly desirable above all forever and ever.

In the Name of the Lord, I beseech all the brothers that they learn the tenor and sense of those things that are written in this life for the salvation of our souls, and frequently recall them to mind. And I pray God that He who is Almighty, Three in One, may bless all who teach, learn, hold, remember, and fulfil those things as often as they repeat and do what is there written for our salvation. And I entreat all, kissing their feet, to love greatly, keep and treasure up these things. And on the part of Almighty God and of the Lord Pope, and by obedience, I, Brother Francis, strictly command and enjoin

[p. 64]

that no one subtract from those things that are written in this life, or add anything written to it over and above, and that the brothers have no other Rule.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

Footnotes

^25:1 See Bonav. Leg. Maj., III, 8. See also 1 Cel. 1, 5, and the Vita S. Francisci, by Julian of Spires, cap. iv.

^25:2 Although M. Sabatier (Vie de S. Francois, p. 100), following Wadding (Annales ad an. 1210, n. 220 seq.), fixes this event in the summer of 1210, it is far more probable that the approbation of the Rule took place on April 23, 1209, the date given by the Bollandists and the Seraphic Breviary. This latter date is not only more conformable to the ancient tradition of the Order (see Anal. Franciscana, t. III, p. 713) but involves no historic difficulties (see Appunti critici sulla cronologia della Vita di S. Francesco, by Father Leo Patrem, O.F.M., in the Oriente Serafico, Assisi, 1895, Vol. vii, nn. 4-12.

^26:1 See Bonav. Leg. Maj., IV, 11.

^26:2 Muller: Anfange des Minoriten-Orders und der Bussbruderschaften (Freiburg, 1885), p. 4, seq.

^26:3 Sabatier: Vie de S. Francois d'Assise (Paris, 1894), p. 288, seq.

^26:4 More than a century ago--in t768--Fr. Suyskens demonstrated that the lengthy Rule of twenty-three chapters could not have been presented to Pope Innocent by St. Francis in its present form. (See Acta S. S., t. ii, Oct.) All agree that the first Rule in its original form was very short and simple.

^26:5 Prof. Muller was therefore right in attempting to reconstruct the Rule in its original form out of this longer one. He has almost conclusively demonstrated that the opening words of this original Rule were: "Regula et vita istorum fratrum haec est." (See Anfange, pp. 14-25; 185-188.) Prof. Boehmer has also attempted to reconstruct it from various writings. See his Analekten, p. 27. See also 2 Cel. 3, 110; Speculum Perfectionis (ed. Sabatier), c. 4, n. 42.

^27:1 His exposition of the Rule may be found in the Monumenta Ordinis Minorum (Salamanca, 1511, tract. 11, fol. 46 v) and in the Firmamenta (Paris, 1512, p. iv, fol. 34 v). In chapter 6 (Mon., fol. 67 v; Firm., fol. 48 r) he says: "This he lays down at greater length in the original rule as follows: 'When it may be necessary let the friars go for alms,'" etc. (see below, <page 43>). On Hugo de Digne see Sbaralea, Supplementum, p. 360; also Salimbene, Chron. Parmensis, 1857, passim.

^27:2 His exposition of the Rule has never been published, although a critical edition is promised by Fr. Van Ortroy, S.J. (See Anal. Bolland., t. xxi, p. 441 seq.) Meanwhile it may be found at St. Isidore's, Rome, in the codex 1/92; at the Vatican lib., in cod. Ottob. 522 (in part only) and Ottob. 666, and at the Royal lib. of Munich in cod. 23648. In this exposition Clareno says (cod. Ottob. 666, fol. 50 v): "In the Rule which Pope Innocent conceded to him and approved . . . it was written thus: 'The Lord commands in the Gospel,'" etc. (see below, <page 41>). Clareno died in 2337. On his writings see Fr. Ehrle, S.J., in the Archiv, vol. I (1885), pp. 509-69.

^27:3 To be sure, the traditional Legend of the Three Companions says of St. Francis: "He made many rules and tried them, before he made that which at the last he left to the brothers." (See Legenda III Sociorum, n. 35.) But unless these words are understood as referring to different versions of the same Rule, they only raise a new difficulty against the authenticity of this Legend.

^28:1 "And the Blessed Francis seeing Brother Caesar learned in the Scriptures commissioned him to embellish with evangelical language the Rule which he himself had put together in simple words." Chron. Fr. Jordani a Jano: Analecta Franc., t. I, page 6, n. 15. Brother Jordan also notes "that according to the first Rule the Friars fasted on Wednesday and Friday." (L.c., P. 4, 0. II.)

^28:2 See Speculum Perfectionis (ed. Sabatier), Appendix, p. 300; also Les Nouveaux memoires de l'Academie de Bruxelles, t. XXIII, pp. 29-33. Jacques de Vitry died as Cardinal Bishop of Frascati in 1244, leaving a number of writings in which St. Francis figures prominently.

^28:3 2 Cel., 3, 90.

^28:4 See below, <page 42>.

^28:5 See below, <page 34>.

^28:6 Canon Knox Little: St. Francis of Assisi (1904), Appendix, p. 321.

^29:1 See Van Ortroy, S.J., Annal. Bolland., t. xxiv, fasc. iii, 1905, p. 413.

^29:2 See below, <page 44>.

^29:3 See 2 Cel., 3, 110.

^29:4 See Mon., fol. 68 v; Firm., fol. 49 r.

^29:5 See Cod. Ottob. 666, fol. 99 V.

^29:6 See Speculum, fol. 193 V.

^29:7 "Celle de 1210 et celle qui fut approuvee par le pape le [p. 30] 29 Novembre, 1223," he writes, "n'avaient guere de commun que le nom." . . . "Celle de 1210 seule est vraiment franciscaine. Celle de 1223 est indirectement l'oeuvre de l'Eglise."--Vie de S. Francois, p. 289.

^30:1 See Le Monnier: History of St. Francis, p. 337.

^30:2 See Seraphicae Legislationis Textus Originales (Quaracchi, 1897), p. 35.

^30:3 This letter, which is dated "in the tenth year of the Pontificate of Pope Honorius," may be found in the Annalibus Hannoniae Fr. Jacobi de Guisia, lib. XXI, cap. xvii; see Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Scriptores, t. XXX, P. I, p. 294.

^30:4 See Mon., fol. 46 V; Firm., fol. 34 v.

^31:1 See Ehrle: "Controversen uber die Anfange des Minoritenordens" in the Zeitschrift fur Katholische Theologie, t. XI, p. 725, seq.

^31:2 "A partir de Bonaventure," he writes, "la regle primitive tombe dans l'oubli. Les Franciscaines Spirituels du commencement du XIV siecle ne songerent pas a l'en tirer." See Spec. Perf. (ed. Sab.), p. ix.

^31:3 In preparing the Quaracchi text, which is the one I translate here, the codices at St. Antony's and St. Isidore's, and [p. 32] the Florentine codex at Ognissanti were used, besides the versions of this Rule found in the Speculum, Minorum, Monumenta, and Firmamenta (see Introduction for description of these codices and editions). The expositions of the Rule by Hugo de Digne and Angelo Clareno, already mentioned, have often been consulted, as well as the Conformities of Bartholomew of Pisa. The text of the first Rule, given in part in the Conformities, often agrees with the MSS. of Ognissanti and St. Isidore's.

^32:1 This last sentence is omitted in Mon. and Firm., also by Wadding.

^32:2 Matt. 19: 21.

^32:3 Matt. 16: 24.

^33:1 Luke 14: 26.

^33:2 See Matt. 19: 29.

^34:1 From the Latin caparo. See Du Cange, Glossar. latin.

^34:2 See the bull Cum secundum of Honorius III, dated September 22, 1220 (Bullarium Franciscanum, t. 1, p. 6.)

^34:3 Luke 9: 62.

^34:4 See Matt. 11: 8; Luke 7: 25.

^35:1 See Mark 9: 28.

^35:2 Matt. 6: 16.

^36:1 See Luke 10: 8.

^36:2 Matt. 7: 22.

^36:3 See Tob. 4: 6.

^36:4 Matt. 20: 28.

^37:1 Heb. 10: 31.

^38:1 See Matt. 9: 12.

^38:2 Matt. 20: 25.

^38:3 See Matt. 23: 11.

^38:4 See Luke 22: 26.

^38:5 See Ps. 118: 21.

^39:1 See Mark 8: 36.

^40:1 Ps. 127: 2.

^40:2 II Thess. 3: 10.

^40:3 See I Cor. 7: 24.

^40:4 St. Jerome says: "Semper facito aliquid boni operis, ut diabolus te inveniat occupatum." Epis. 125 (alias 4), n. 11.

^40:5 St. Anselm says: "Otiositas inimica est animae." Epist. 49.

^41:1 See I Peter 4: 9.

^41:2 See above, page <page 28>.

^41:3 See Luke 12: 15, and 21: 34.

^41:4 See Leg. III. Soc., n. 35.

^41:5 Eccle. 1: 2.

^42:1 O., Is. and Pis. read "money for alms;" Clar. and Spec. read "alms of money;" An., Mon. and Wadding read "money or alms."

^42:2 I Tim. 6: 8.

^43:1 Is. 50:7.

^44:1 Rom. 14: 3.

^44:2 Mark 2: 26.

^44:3 Luke 21: 34-35.

^45:1 See Acts 13: 48.

^45:2 Apoc. 3: 19.

^45:3 See 2 Cel. 3, 110; also Hugo le Digne, l.c., fol. 68 v. and Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), chap. 42.

^45:4 See II Tim. 2: 14.

^45:5 Luke 17: 10.

^45:6 Matt. 5: 22.

^46:1 John 15: 12.

^46:2 Jas. 22: 18.

^46:3 I John 3: 18.

^46:4 Tit. 3: 2.

^46:5 Rom. 1: 29-30.

^46:6 Tit. 3: 2.

^46:7 Is. 38: 15.

^46:8 Luke 13: 24.

^46:9 Matt. 7: 14.

^46:10 See above, <page 29>.

^47:1 This prohibition refers to a vow of obedience made by a woman to her spiritual director, as Fr. Van Ortroy points out. See Anal. Boll., t. xxiv, fasc. iv, p. 523.

^47:2 Matt. 5: 28.

^47:3 See Luke 9: 3; 10: 4-8.

^47:4 See Matt. 5: 39.

^48:1 See Luke 6: 29-30.

^48:2 Matt. 10: 16.

^49:1 I Pet. 2: 13.

^49:2 John 3: 5.

^49:3 Matt. 10: 32.

^49:4 Luke 9: 26.

^49:5 Mark 8: 35; Luke 9: 24.

^50:1 Matt. 5: 10.

^50:2 John 15: 20.

^50:3 See Matt. 10: 23.

^50:4 Matt. 5: 11-12.

^50:5 Luke 6: 23.

^50:6 Luke 12: 4.

^50:7 Matt. 24: 6.

^50:8 Luke 21: 19.

^50:9 Matt. 10: 22.

^50:10 See I John 4: 8.

^51:1 Luke 10: 20.

^51:2 James 1: 2.

^51:3 Matt. 6: 2.

^52:1 See Luke 18: 19.

^53:1 James 5: 16.

^54:1 John 6: 55.

^54:2 Luke 22: 19.

^54:3 I Thess. 5: 18.

^54:4 Matt. 3: 2.

^54:5 Luke 3: 8.

^54:6 Luke 6: 38.

^54:7 Luke 6: 37.

^54:8 See Mark 11: 26.

^54:9 See James 5: 16.

^54:10 See John 8: 44.

^55:1 Matt. 5: 44.

^55:2 See I Peter 2: 21.

^55:3 See Matt. 26: 50.

^55:4 See Matt. 15: 19, and Mark 7: 21-22.

^56:1 See Matt. 13: 19-23; Mark 4: 15-20; Luke 8: 11-15.

^56:2 Matt. 8: 22.

^57:1 Matt. 12: 43-45; see Luke 11: 24-26.

^57:2 See I John 4: 16.

^58:1 Luke 21: 36.

^58:2 See Mark 11: 25.

^58:3 Luke 18: 1.

^58:4 John 4: 24.

^58:5 I Peter 2: 25.

^58:6 See John 20: 11 and 25.

^58:7 See Matt. 23: 8-10.

^58:8 John 15: 7.

^58:9 Matt. 18: 20.

^58:10 Matt. 28: 20.

^58:11 John 6: 64.

^58:12 John 14: 6.

^60:1 See John 17: 6-26.

^60:2 The Speculum Minorum condenses this chapter.

^60:3 See Gen. 1: 26; 2: 15.

^60:4 See John 17: 26.

^60:5 Matt. 25: 34.

^61:1 See Matt. 17: 5.

^62:1 See Deut. 6: 5; Mark 12: 30 and 33; Luke 10: 27.

^62:2 See Luke 18: 19.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECOND RULE OF THE FRIARS MINOR. [*1]

1.--In the Name of the Lord begins the life of the Minor Brothers.

The Rule and life of the Minor Brothers is this, namely, to observe the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, by living in obedience, without property and in chastity. Brother Francis promises obedience and reverence to the Lord Pope Honorius and to his successors canonically elected and to the Roman Church. And let the other brothers be bound to obey Brother Francis and his successors.

2.--Of those who wish to embrace this Life and how they ought to be received.

If any wish to embrace this life and come to our brothers, let them send them to their provincial

[p. 65]

ministers, to whom alone and not to others is accorded the power of receiving brothers. But let the ministers diligently examine them regarding the Catholic faith and the Sacraments of the Church. And if they believe all these things, and if they will confess them faithfully and observe them firmly to the end, and if they have no wives, or, if they have and their wives have already entered a monastery, or have, with the authority of the diocesan bishop, given them permission after having made a vow of continence, and if the wives be of such an age that no suspicion may arise concerning them, let them [the ministers] say to them the word of the holy Gospel, [*1] that they go and sell all their goods and strive to distribute them to the poor. If they should not be able to do this, their good will suffices. And the brothers and their ministers must take care not to be solicitous about their temporal affairs, that they may freely do with their affairs whatsoever the Lord may inspire them. If, however, counsel should be required, the ministers shall have power of sending them to some God-fearing men by whose advice their goods may be distributed to the poor. Afterwards, let them give them clothes of probation, to wit, two tunics without a hood and a cord and breeches and a chaperon reaching to the cord, unless at some time the same ministers may decide otherwise according to God. The year of probation being finished, they shall be received

[p. 66]

to obedience, promising to observe always this life and rule. And according to the command of the Lord Pope [*1] in no wise shall it be allowed them to go out of this religion, because, according to the holy Gospel: "No man putting his hand to the plough and looking back is fit for the kingdom of God." [*2] And let those who have already promised obedience have one tunic with a hood, and if they wish it another without a hood. And those who are obliged by necessity may wear shoes. And let all the brothers be clothed in poor garments and they may patch them with pieces of sackcloth and other things, with the blessing of God. I admonish and exhort them not to despise or judge men whom they see clothed in fine and showy garments using dainty meats and drinks, but rather let each one judge and despise himself.

3.--Of the Divine Office, and of Fasting; and how the Brothers must go through the world.

Let the clerics perform the Divine Office according to the order of the holy Roman Church, with the exception of the Psalter; wherefore they may have breviaries. [*3] But let the laics say twenty-four Paternosters for Matins; five for

[p. 67]

[paragraph continues] Lauds; for Prime, Tierce, Sext and Nones,--for each of these, seven; for Vespers, however, twelve, for Compline seven; and let them pray for the dead.

And let them fast from the feast of All Saints until the Nativity of the Lord. But the holy Lent which begins from Epiphany and continues for forty days, which the Lord has consecrated by His holy fast, [*1]--may those who keep it voluntarily be blessed by the Lord and those who do not wish may not be constrained. But they must fast during the other one until the Resurrection of the Lord. At other times, however, they shall not be obliged to fast, except on Fridays. But in time of manifest necessity the brothers shall not be bound to corporal fasting.

I indeed counsel, warn, and exhort my brothers in the Lord Jesus Christ that when they go through the world they be not litigious nor contend in words, [*2] nor judge others; but that they be gentle, peaceful, and modest, meek and humble, speaking honestly to all as is fitting. And they must not ride on horseback unless compelled by manifest necessity or infirmity. Into whatsoever house they may enter let them first say: Peace be to this house! And, according to the holy Gospel, it is lawful to eat of all foods which are set before them. [*3]

[p. 68]

4.--That the Brothers must not receive money.

I strictly enjoin on all the brothers that in no wise they receive coins or money, either themselves or through an interposed person. Nevertheless, for the necessities of the sick and for clothing the other brothers, let the ministers and custodes alone take watchful care through spiritual friends, according to places and times and cold climates, as they shall see expedient in the necessity, saving always' that, as has been said, they shall not receive coins or money.

5.--Of the manner of working.

Let those brothers to whom the Lord has given the grace of working labor faithfully and devoutly, so that in banishing idleness, the enemy of the soul, they do not extinguish the spirit of holy prayer and devotion, to which all temporal things must be subservient. They may, however, receive as the reward of their labor, the things needful for the body for themselves and their brothers, with the exception of coins or money, and that humbly, as befits the servants of God and the followers of most holy poverty.

6.--That the Brothers shall appropriate nothing to themselves: and of seeking Alms and of the Sick Brothers.

The brothers shall appropriate nothing to themselves, neither a house nor place nor any-

[p. 69]

thing. And as pilgrims and strangers [*1] in this world, serving the Lord in poverty and humility, let them go confidently in quest of alms, nor ought they to be ashamed, because the Lord made Himself poor for us in this world. This, my dearest brothers, is the height of the most sublime poverty which has made you heirs and kings of the kingdom of heaven: poor in goods, but exalted in virtue. Let that be your portion, for it leads to the land of the living; [*2] cleaving to it unreservedly, my best beloved brothers, for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, never desire to possess anything else under heaven.

And wheresoever the brothers are and may find themselves, let them mutually show among themselves that they are of one household. And let one make known his needs with confidence to the other, for, if a mother nourishes and loves her carnal son, how much more earnestly ought one to love and nourish his spiritual brother! And if any of them should fall into illness, the other brothers must serve him as they would wish to be served themselves.

7.--Of the Penance to be imposed on Brothers who sin.

If any of the brothers, at the instigation of the enemy, sin mortally by those sins for which it has been ordained among the brothers that

[p. 70]

recourse should be had to the provincial ministers alone, the aforesaid brothers are bound to have recourse to them as soon as possible, without delay. But let the ministers themselves, if they are priests, impose penance on them with mercy; if however they are not priests, let them have it imposed by other priests of the Order, as it may seem to them most expedient, according to God. And they must beware lest they be angry or troubled on account of the sins of others, because anger and trouble impede charity themselves and in others.

8.--Of the Election of the Minister General of this Brotherhood, and of the Whitsun Chapter.

All the brothers are bound always to have one of the brothers of this religion as minister general and servant of the whole brotherhood, and they are strictly bound to obey him. At his death the election of a successor must be made by the provincial ministers and custodes in the Whitsun Chapter, in which the provincial ministers are always bound to convene at the same time, wheresoever it may be appointed by the minister general, and that once in three years or at a longer or shorter interval as may be ordained by the said minister. And if at any time it should be apparent to the whole of the provincial ministers that the aforesaid minister general is not sufficient for the service and the common welfare of the brothers, let the

[p. 71]

aforesaid ministers, to whom the election has been committed, be bound to elect for themselves another as custos in the name of the Lord. But after the Whitsun Chapter the ministers and custodes may each, if they wish and it seem expedient to them, convoke their brothers to a chapter in  their custodies once in the same year.

9.--Of Preachers.

The brothers must not preach in the diocese of any bishop when their doing so may be opposed by him. And let no one of the brothers dare to preach in any way to the people, unless he has been examined and approved by the minister general of this brotherhood, and the office of preaching conceded to him by the latter. I also warn and exhort the same brothers that in the preaching they do their words be fire-tried and pure [*1] for the utility and edification of the people, announcing to them vices and virtues, punishment and glory, with brevity of speech because the Lord made His word short upon earth. [*2]

10.--Of the Admonition and Correction of the Brothers.

Those brothers who are ministers and servants of the other brothers, shall visit and admonish their brothers, and shall humbly and charitably correct them, not commanding them

[p. 72]

anything against their souls and our Rule. The brothers however who are subject must remember that, for God, they have renounced their own will. Wherefore I order them strictly to obey their ministers in all things which they have promised the Lord to observe and are not against their souls and our Rule. And wheresoever there are brothers who see and know that they are not able to observe the rule spiritually, they ought to and can recur to their ministers. And let the ministers receive them charitably and kindly and show so great familiarity toward them that they [the culprits] may speak and act with them as masters with their servants, for thus it ought to be, since the ministers are the servants of all the brothers.

I also warn and exhort the brothers in the Lord Jesus Christ that they beware of all pride, vainglory, envy, covetousness, [*1] the cares and solicitudes of this world, of detraction and murmuring. Let not those who are ignorant of letters care to learn letters, but let them consider that, beyond all, they should desire to possess the spirit of the Lord and His holy operation, to pray always to Him with a pure heart and to have humility, patience in persecution and in infirmity and to love those who persecute, reprove, and accuse us, because the Lord has said: "Love your enemies . . . and pray for them that persecute and calumniate you." [*2] "Blessed are they that suffer persecution

[p. 73]

for justice' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." [*1] "But he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved." [*2]

11.--That the Brothers must not enter the Monasteries of Nuns.

I strictly command all the brothers not to have suspicious intimacy, or conferences with women, and let none enter the monasteries of nuns except those to whom special permission has been granted by the Apostolic See. And let them not be godfathers of men or women, that [*3] scandal may not arise on this account among the brothers or concerning the brothers.

12.--Of those who go among the Saracens and other Infidels.

Let all of the brothers who by divine inspiration desire to go amongst the Saracens or other infidels, ask leave therefor from their provincial ministers. But the ministers must give permission to go to none except to those whom they see are fitted to be sent.

Moreover, I enjoin on the ministers, by obedience, that they ask of the Lord Pope one of the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church to be governor, protector, and corrector of this

[p. 74]

brotherhood, so that being always subject and submissive at the feet of the same holy Church, grounded in the Catholic faith, [*1] we may observe poverty and humility and the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which we have firmly promised.

Footnotes

^64:1 This is the text of 1223 and represents the Rule at present observed throughout the first Franciscan Order. It is here translated according to the text of the original Bull which is preserved at the Sacro Convento in Assisi. A duplicate of this document, contained in the Pontifical Register at the Vatican Library, has been consulted for certain passages less legible in the original.

^65:1 See Matt. 19: 21.

^66:1 See above, page <page 34>, note .

^66:2 Luke 9: 62.

^66:3 This passage: ex quo habere poterunt breviaria, may also be rendered: "as soon as they can have breviaries." (See Wadding, Opusc., p. 179.) But the latter translation has less foundation.

^67:1 See Matt. 4: 2.

^67:2 See Tit. 3: 2 and II Tim. 2: 14.

^67:3 See Luke 10: 5 and 8.

^69:1 See I Peter 2: 11.

^69:2 See Ps. 141: 6. It was this Psalm that St. Francis recited at the hour of death.

^71:1 See Ps. 11: 7 and 17: 31.

^71:2 See Rom. 9: 28.

^72:1 See Luke 12: 15.

^72:2 Matt. 5: 44.

^73:1 Matt. 5: 10.

^73:2 Matt. 10: 22.

^73:3 This is comformable to the original bull, which reads nec hac occasione; but most of the printed texts give ne, "lest scandal arise," Instead of nec.

^74:1 See Col. 1: 23.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

  

V.

  

FRAGMENTS FROM THE RULE OF THE SISTERS OF ST. CLARE.

Of the "many writings" [*1] left by St. Francis to the Poor Ladies at St. Damian's, only two fragments are known to exist, and these have been preserved to us through St. Clare herself, in so far as she incorporated them in the sixth chapter of her Rule. We have it on the authority of Pope Gregory IX that St. Francis wrote for St. Clare and her first companions a formula vitae, or "little rule," at the beginning of their religious life. [*2] But it was this same Pope Gregory IX, then known as Cardinal Ugolino, who about 1219 composed a Rule for the Poor Ladies, which was accepted by St. Francis and confirmed by Honorius III. [*3] This Rule, as the Pontiff himself declares, was solemnly professed by Clare and her Sisters and observed by them for many years in a praiseworthy manner. [*4] Pope Innocent IV bears witness to the same effect. Writing to Blessed Agnes, Princess of Bohemia (who had founded a house of the Second Order at Prague), of this Rule, written by Cardinal

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] Ugolino, he says: The Sisters of the Monastery of St. Damian and all others of your Order have laudably observed it from the time of its profession until now." [*1] These words were written on November 13, 1243.

In view of such testimony it is obviously a mistake to assert, as Wadding and some other writers do, that St. Clare abandoned this Rule in 1224, and professed another one written by St. Francis. It is also erroneous to suppose that St. Francis ever wrote a Rule for the Poor Ladies. [*2] The one written about 1219, by Cardinal Ugolino, was recast by St. Clare herself toward the close of her life, and made to conform as far as possible to the Second Rule written by St. Francis for the Friars Minor. The Rule of the Poor Ladies, thus recast by St. Clare in a new form, was confirmed by Innocent IV, August 9, 1253, just two days before the death of the holy abbess. [*3]

In the sixth chapter of this Rule, St. Clare describes the circumstances under which the two fragments of St. Francis' writings here given were composed. "After the Most High Heavenly Father deigned by His grace to enlighten my heart," St. Clare tells us, "to do penance after the example and teaching of our most blessed father, St. Francis, a little while after his own conversion, I, together with

[p. 77]

my sisters, voluntarily promised him obedience. But, seeing that we feared no poverty, toil, sorrow, abasement and contempt of the world, nay rather that we held them in great delight, the blessed father, moved by compassion, wrote us a rule of life [*1] in this form . . . ." Then follows the first of the two fragments given below. Further on in the same chapter of her Rule, the holy abbess adds: "To the end that we and also those who might come after us should never fall away from the most holy poverty which we had undertaken, he again wrote to us shortly before his death [*2] his last wish, saying . . . ." [*3] Then follows the second of the two fragments here given.

Both these pieces, which Wadding took for letters [*4] addressed to St. Clare, are here translated according to the text of the Rule contained in the original bull of Innocent IV. [*5] They are as follows:

  

1. FORM OF LIFE WHICH ST. FRANCIS WROTE FOR ST. CLARE. [*6]

Since, by divine inspiration, you have made yourselves daughters and handmaids of the Most

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] High Sovereign King, the Heavenly Father, and have espoused yourselves to the Holy Ghost, choosing to live according to the perfection of the holy Gospel, I will, and I promise to have always, by myself and my brothers, a diligent care and special solicitude for you, as for them. [*1]

  

2. LAST WISH WHICH ST. FRANCIS WROTE TO ST. CLARE.

I, little brother Francis, wish to follow the life and poverty of Jesus Christ our Most High Lord and of His Most Holy Mother and to persevere therein until the end. And I beseech you all, my ladies, and counsel you, to live always in this most holy life and poverty. And watch yourselves well that you in no wise depart from it through the teaching or advice of any one.

Footnotes

^75:1 "Plura scripta tradidit nobis," Test. B Clarae. See Seraphicae Legislationis textus originales, p. 276.

^75:2 "When Clare," he says, "and some other devout women in the Lord chose to serve under the same observance of religion, Blessed Francis gave them a little rule of life" (formulam vitae tradidit). See the bull Angelis gaudium of May 11, 1238 (Bullar. Franc., t. I, p. 242).

^75:3 See Bullar., I, 11 and 13: the letters Prudentibus Virginibus: Ann. Min. I, 312: Gubernatis, Orb. Seraph. II, 603: also Bullar. I, 4, n. (a). The Rule may he found in the bull Cum omnis vera of Gregory IX, of May 24, 1239. See Bullar., t. I, p. 263.

^75:4 See Bullar., t. I, p. 242.

^76:1 See Bullar., t. I, p. 315.

^76:2 On the origin of the Second Order and the early Rule, see Lemmens: "Die Anfange des Clarissenordens" in the Romische Quartalschrift, t. XVI, 1902, pp. 93-124, which is in the nature of a rejoinder to Dr. Lempp's article with the same title, published in Brieger's Zeitschrift fur Kirchengeschichte, XIII, 181-245.

^76:3 This Rule is contained in the bull Solet annuere, of Innocent IV. See Seraphicae Legislationis textus originales, page 49 seq. See also Bullar., I, 167; Ann. Min., III, 287.

^77:1 Forma vivendi. See Seraph. Legislat., p. 62.

^77:2 The biographers place the writing of this fragment in the autumn of 1220, after St. Francis returned from the East.

^77:3 See Seraph. Legislat., p. 63.

^77:4 They are numbered IV and V among the Episiolae in his edition of the Opuscula.

^77:5 This bull, which had been lost for several centuries, was brought to light early in 1893, after a protracted search in different countries; it was found wrapped within an old mantle of Saint Clare, preserved in the Monastery of Santa Chiara, at Assisi. See Seraph. Legislat., pp. 2, seq. See also G. Cozza-Luzi: Un autografo di Innocenzo IV e Memorie di S. Chiara, ed. 2da., Rome, 1895.

^77:6 Some critics regard this fragment as a promise or engagement accompanying the formula vitae or as the beginning of [p. 78] the formula itself, and believe that the text of the latter, now lost, was also inserted originally in the sixth chapter of St. Clare's Rule. Be this as it may, it is certain that this chapter has been completely changed in several editions. In the vernacular versions of it, based on Wadding, the two fragments here given do not appear at all. See Fr. Van Ortroy, S.J., in Anal. Boll., t. xxiv, fasc. iii, p. 412.

^78:1 See 2 Cel. 3, 132.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

VI.

  

TESTAMENT OF THE HOLY FATHER ST. FRANCIS.

The opuscule which St. Francis called his Testament is a precious document of the highest authority. Renan forsooth denied its authenticity, but rashly, for, as M. Sabatier rightly remarks, [*1] this is not to be questioned. [*2] The Testament corresponds throughout with the other writings of St. Francis, and moreover reveals his character and spirit in every line. But we are not reduced to internal proofs for its; genuinity. All the historians, including Thomas of Celano, [*3] and St. Bonaventure, [*4] mention it, [*5] while Gregory IX cites it textually in his bull Quo elongati of September 28, 1230. We know from this bull that the Saint's Testament was published a few days only before his death [*6] Everything seems to point to its having been written at the hermitage of the Celle near Cortona, during St. Francis' last visit there (summer of 1226), though some think it was dictated to Angelo Tancredi, one of the Three Companions, in the little hut nearest the Portiuncula which served as an infirmary and in which St. Francis died.

According to M. Sabatier, St. Francis wrote more than one testament. Indeed, the French critic goes so far as to say that at the end of each of his crises the Saint made his will anew, [*7] and in support of this assertion cites Chapter 87 of his own edition of the

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] Speculum Perfectionis, in which we read that during an illness (seemingly in April, 1226), St. Francis caused Brother Benedict of Prato to write down a blessing and some words of advice "in token of memory and benediction and testament." But surely from this narration we may not deduce the general proposition that St. Francis wrote "several testaments." The early Legends are silent except as to the one Testament here given, and all the passages which different writers quote "from the Testament'' may be found in this one,--if we except two passages in M. Sabatier's edition of the Speculum Perfectionis. But it is not difficult to see that in both these places the Speculum is in error. In the ninth chapter it repeats incorrectly what Brother Leo elsewhere [*1] relates, and in the fifty-fifth chapter the compiler of the Speculum is still more astray, as a comparison of this chapter with chapter twenty-seventh of Father Lemmens [*2] edition of the Speculum clearly indicates. Both editions of the Speculum tell in almost the same words of St. Francis' love for the Church of the Portiuncula. M. Sabatier's edition says: "At his death he caused it to be written in the Testament that all the brothers should do likewise;" whereas Father Lemmens' edition reads as follows: "Toward his death he bequeathed this Church to the brothers as a testament.'"

The Testament is to be found among St. Francis' works in twelve of the codices above described, [*3] to

[p. 81]

wit, those at Assisi, [*1] Berlin, Florence (Ognissanti MSS.), St. Floriano, Liegnitz, Paris (Nat. lib. and Mazarin MSS. 989), Prague and Rome (St. Antony's and both Vatican MSS.), as well as in a fifteenth century MS. at the Hague (Municip. lib. cod. K. 54, fol. 3 v). The text here translated is that of the Assisi codex collated with those of Ognissanti, Florence, and St. Antony's, Rome, and with the versions of the Testament contained in the Monumenta (fol. 274 v) and Firmamenta [*2] (fol. 16 v). Here begins the:

  

TESTAMENT OF THE HOLY FATHER ST. FRANCIS.

The Lord gave to me, Brother Francis, thus to begin to do penance; for when I was in sin it seemed to me very bitter to see lepers, and the Lord Himself led me amongst them and I showed mercy to them. [*3] And when I left them, that which had seemed to me bitter was changed for me into sweetness of body and soul. And afterwards I remained a little and I left the world. And the Lord gave me so much [*4] faith

[p. 82]

in churches that I would simply pray and say thus: "We adore Thee Lord Jesus Christ here [*1] and in all Thy churches which are in the whole world, and we bless Thee because by Thy holy cross Thou hast redeemed the world."

After that the Lord gave me, and gives me, so much faith in priests who live according to the form of the holy Roman Church, on account of their order, [*2] that if they should persecute me, I would have recourse to them. And if I had as much wisdom as Solomon had, and if I should find poor priests of this world, [*3] I would not preach against their will in the parishes in which they live. And I desire to fear, love, and honor them and all others as my masters; and I do not wish to consider sin in them, for in them I see the Son of God and they are my masters. And I do (his because in this world, I see nothing corporally of the most high Son of God Himself except His most holy Body and Blood, which they receive and they alone administer to others. And I will that these most holy mysteries be honored and revered above all things and that they be placed in precious places. Wheresoever I find His most holy Names and written words in unseemly places, I wish to collect them, and I ask that they may be collected and put in a becoming place. And we

[p. 83]

ought to honor and venerate all theologians and those who minister to us the most holy Divine Words as those who minister to us spirit and life. [*1]

And when the Lord gave me some brothers, no one showed me what I ought to do, but the Most High Himself revealed to me that I should live according to the form of the holy Gospel. [*2] And I caused it to be written in few words and simply, and the Lord Pope confirmed it for me. And those who came to take this life upon themselves gave to the poor all that they might have and they [*3] were content with one tunic, patched within and without, by those who wished, [*4] with a cord and breeches, and we wished for no more.

We clerics said the Office like other clerics; the laics said the Paternoster, and we remained in the churches [*5] willingly enough. And we were simple and subject to all. And I worked with my hands and I wish to work and I wish firmly that all the other brothers should work at some labor which is compatible with honesty. Let those who know not [how to work] learn, not through desire to receive the price of labor but for the sake of example and to repel idleness. And when the price of labor is not given to us,

[p. 84]

let us have recourse to the table of the Lord, begging alms from door to door.

The Lord revealed to me this salutation, that we should say: "The Lord give thee peace." [*1] Let the brothers take care not to receive on any account churches, poor dwelling-places, and all other things [*2] that are constructed for them, unless they are as is becoming the holy poverty which we have promised in the Rule, always dwelling there as strangers and pilgrims. [*3]

I strictly enjoin by obedience [*4] on all the brothers that, wherever they may be, they should not dare, either themselves or by means of some interposed person, [*5] to ask any letter in the Roman curia either for a church [*6] or for any other place, nor under pretext of preaching, nor on account of their bodily persecution; but, wherever they are not received let them flee to another land to do penance, with the blessing of God. And I wish to obey the, minister general of this brotherhood strictly and the guardian whom it may please him to give me. And I wish to be so captive in his hands that I cannot go or act beyond his obedience and his will because he is my master. And although I

[p. 85]

am simple and infirm, I desire withal always to have a cleric who will perform the office with me as it is contained in the Rule.

And let all the other brothers be bound to obey their guardian and to perform the office according to the Rule. And those who may be found not performing the office according to the Rule and wishing to change it in some way, or who are not Catholics, let all the brothers wherever they may be, if they find one of these, be bound by obedience to present him to the custos who is nearest to the place where they have found him. And the custos shall be strictly bound, by obedience, to guard him strongly day and night as a prisoner so that he cannot be snatched from his hands until he shall personally place him in the hands of his minister. And the minister shall be firmly bound by obedience to send him by such brothers as shall watch him day and night like a prisoner until they shall present him to the Lord of Ostia, who is master protector, and corrector of this brotherhood. [*1]

And let not the brothers say: This is another Rule; for this is a remembrance, a warning, and an exhortation and my Testament which I, little Brother Francis, make for you, my blessed brothers, in order that we may observe in a more Catholic way the Rule which we have promised to the Lord. And let the minister general and all the other ministers and custodes be bound by

[p. 86]

obedience not to add to these words or to take from them. And let them always have this writing with them beside the Rule. And in all the Chapters they hold, when they read the Rule let them read these words also. And I strictly enjoin on all my brothers, clerics and laics, by obedience, not to put glosses on the Rule or on these words saying: Thus they ought to be understood; but as the Lord has given me to speak and to write the Rule and these words simply and purely, so shall you understand them simply and purely [*1] and with holy operation observe them until the end.

And whoever shall observe these things [*2] may he be filled in heaven with the blessing of the Most High Father and may he be filled on earth with blessing of His Beloved Son together with the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, and all the Powers of heaven and all the saints. And I, Brother Francis, your little one and servant, in so far as I am able, I confirm to you within and without, this most holy blessing. [*3] Amen. [*4]

Footnotes

^79:1 Sabatier; Vie de S. Francois; Etude des Sources.

^79:2 See also Goetz, l.c., t. XXII, pp. 372 seq.

^79:3 See 1 Cel. 17; 2 Cel. 3, 99.

^79:4 See Bonav., Leg. Maj., III, a.

^79:5 It is also expressly cited in the Leg. III Soc. 11 and 29.

^79:6 "Circa ultimum vitae suae," etc. See Bullarium Franc., t. I, p. 63.

^79:7 "A la fin de chacune de ces crises, il faisait de nouveau [p. 81] son testament." Speculum Perf. (ed. Sabatier), p. xxxiii, note 2. See also Speculum (ed. Lemmens), No. 30.

^80:1 See S. Francisci Intentio regulae, nn. 14 and 15, in the Documenta Antiqua Franciscana, P. I, p. 97.

^80:2 See Documenta Antiqua Franciscana, P. II, p. 60.

^80:3 See page <page 3>.

^81:1 The text of the Testament given by M. Sabatier in his edition of the Speculum Perf. is that of this Assisi MS.

^81:2 It may also be found in the Speculum Minorum (Tract. III, 8 r) and in the Annales of Wadding (ad an. 1226, 35).

^81:3 See 1 Cel. 17, where this passage of the Testament is quoted. See also Bonav. Leg. Maj., II, 6; and Leg. III Soc. 11. Some texts instead of "feci misericordiam cum illis" give "feci moram cum illis": "I made a sojourn with them." See Miscell. Franc., III (1888), p. 70. It is interesting to note here how St Francis on the eve of his death, casting a backward glance over the ways by which he had been led, dwells on this incident which had marked a new era in his life.

^81:4 Cod. As. reads "talem fidem," "such faith."

^82:1 Cod. As. and O. omit "here." (See 1 Cel. 45; and Bonav. Leg. Maj. 43, where this prayer may be found.) Cod. An. Firm. and Wadd. insert "here."

^82:2 Order, i.e., sacerdotal character.

^82:3 Priests of the world, i.e., secular priests.

^83:1 See 2 Cel. 3, 99, where this passage of the Testament is quoted; see also Bonav. Epis. de tribus quaestionibus in which it is also referred to. (Opera Omnia, t. VIII, p. 335.)

^83:2 See Leg. III Soc. 29, for reference to this passage.

^83:3 Cod. O. reads: eramus "we were content."

^83:4 Cod. As. omits qui volebant, "by those who wished."

^83:5 Firm, and Wadd. add: "poor and neglected churches."

^84:1 See Bonav. Leg. Maj., 111, 2.

^84:2 Cod. As. omits "other things," and O. omits "all other things."

^84:3 See Documenta antiqua Franciscana, P. I, page 98, n. 15, where this passage is cited among the Verba quae scripsit Frater Leo.

^84:4 Cod. O. omits "by obedience."

^84:5 Cod. An. omits this clause.

^84:6 Cod. O. omits "either for a church."

^85:1 Cardinal Ugolino, afterward Gregory IX, was then Bishop of Ostia, and Protector of the Order.

^86:1 Cod. As. and Mon. for "purely" read "without gloss;" Firm. and Wadd. add "without gloss."

^86:2 Cod. An. and O. read "this" for, "these things."

^86:3 Cod. O. adds "to him who caused these words to be written, be all honor, all praise and glory forever and ever."

^86:4 See 1 Cel. 34, for the blessing given by St. Francis on his deathbed to Elias and the Order.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

VII.

  

OF LIVING RELIGIOUSLY IN A HERMITAGE.

We learn from St. Bonaventure [*1] and the Fioretti [*2] that as companions began to flock to St. Francis, the man of God hesitated for a while between adopting a life of prayer or of preaching. Although, as we know, he finally decided in favor of the apostolate, yet withal he never altogether separated the contemplative from the active life. A precious witness to this fact is found in the Regulation for the brothers during their sojourn in hermitages with which we are now concerned. To understand the scope of this peculiar piece of legislation, it must be borne in mind that at the beginning of the Franciscan movement the friars had no settled domicile. [*3] The wide world was their cloister. [*4] Possessing nothing they wandered about like children careless of the day, teaching or preaching, passing the night in hay-lofts or under church

[p. 88]

porches, in lazarettos, or deserted huts and grottoes. [*1] The need of having some kind of permanent retreat where they might retire at times to pray or rest, resulted in the institution of hermitages. These little solitudes, to which Francis loved to withdraw, may be found wherever the Saint went. The Celle near Cortina, the Careen on Mount Subasio, Greccio in the valley of Rieti, and the more solitary hermitages, like Lo Speco, form, as some one has said, a series of documents, about St. Francis' life, quite as important as the written ones. And not a little of his spirit still lingers in such of these hermitages as yet remain. It was for the government of small loci [*2] like these that the present special little Rule was written. Its attribution to St. Francis has not been questioned. The quaint simplicity of its conception proclaims its authenticity, and in none of the codices does it bear the name of any other author than St. Francis. It may have been written about 1217; its composition certainly belongs to the first decade of. the Order.

In the ancient collections of St. Francis' writings found in the codices at Florence (Ognissanti), Foligno, Rome (St. Isidore's MS. 1/25 and the Vatican MS. 7650), as well as in copies of the compilation which begins Fac secundum exemplar, this Instruction is found at the end of the Admonitions. But in the greater number of the early Codices the Admonitions close as in the present translation, and the

[p. 89]

opuscule on hermitages is preferably separated from them, as it is in the Assisian codex and that of St. Isidore's, Rome (MS. 1/73). The text which follows is based on the Assisi MS., which has been collated with that of Ognissanti and those at St. Isidore's and with the version of this Regulation given by Bartholomew of Pisa in his Conformities. [*1] Here is the text:

  

OF LIVING RELIGIOUSLY IN A HERMITAGE.

Let those who wish to live religiously in hermitages, be three brothers or four at most. Let two of them be mothers and have two sons, or at least one. Let the two former lead the life of Martha and the other two the life of Mary Magdalene. [*2]

Let those who lead the life of Mary have one cloister [*3] and each his own place, so that they may not live or sleep together. And let them always say Compline of the day toward sunset, [*4] and let them be careful to keep silence and to say their Hours and to rise for Matins, and let them

[p. 90]

seek first "the kingdom of God and His justice." [*1] And let them say Prime and Tierce at the proper time, and, after the hour of Tierce, they may break silence and may speak and, when it is pleasing to them, they may go to their mothers and may ask an alms from them for the love of the Lord God, like little poor ones. [*2] And after that, let them say Sext and Nones and Vespers at the appointed time.

And they must not allow any [*3] person to enter into the cloister where they live, or let them eat there. Let those brothers who are mothers endeavor to keep apart from every person and, by the obedience of their custos, let them guard their sons from every person, so that no one may speak with them. And let these sons not speak with any person except with their mothers and with their custos, when it shall please him to visit them with the blessing of God. [*4] But the sons must sometimes in turn assume the office of mothers, for a time, according as it may seem to them to dispose. Let them strive to observe all the above diligently and earnestly. [*5]

Footnotes

^87:1 See Bonav. Leg. Maj., XII, 1, where the Saint is represented as discoursing on the relative merits and advantages of the active and contemplative life. Wadding gives this discourse among the Monastic Conferences he attributes to St. Francis. See Opuscula, Coll. XIV, p. 318.

^87:2 See Floretum S. Francisci, ed. Sabatier, cap. 16, p. 60. This chapter, which is one of the most interesting from a critical point of view, represents St. Francis as consulting St. Clare and Brother Sylvester on the subject of his doubt.

^87:3 See First Rule, chap. vii (above, <page 40>); also Speculum Perf., ed. Sabatier, pp. 25-26.

^87:4 As is most poetically described by the author of the Sacrum Commercium. Show me your cloister, asks the Lady Poverty of the friars. And they, leading her to the summit of a hill, showed her the wide world, saying: This is our cloister, O Lady Poverty. (See The Lady Poverty, by M. Carmichael, p. 128.)

^88:1 See 1 Cel. 1, 17; and Leg. III Soc. 55. Such grottoes may still be seen in St. Francis' country; they serve as a shelter for beggars and gypsies.

^88:2 St. Francis habitually uses the word locus or place to designate the habitations of the friars (see above, Rule II, chap. vi, p. 68).

^89:1 See "Franciscus in admonitionibus suis" (fruct. xii, P. 11, cap. 30). It was from this text that Wadding took the Regulation for his edition of the Opuscula in which it figures under the heading Collationes Monasticae III.

^89:2 The figure which presents Mary and Martha as types of the contemplative and active life was already a familiar one. See Gregor., VI Moral., c. 37, n. 61: "Quid per Mariam, quae verba Domini residens audiebat, nisi contemplativa vita exprimitur? Quid per Martham exterioribus obsequiis occu patam nisi activa vita signatur?"

^89:3 Cod. As. after cloister reads: "in which each one shall have his own cell."

^89:4 Cod. As. reads: "immediately after sunset."

^90:1 Luke 12: 31.

^90:2 This is the reading of the Cod. As. and Is.; other texts read the "poorest beggars."

^90:3 Cod. O. adds: "any woman or person whatsoever."

^90:4 The text in Cod. As. ends here.

^90:5 See 2 Cel. 3, 113.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

  

PART II.

[p. 92]

  

SIX LETTERS OF ST. FRANCIS

[p. 93]

  

THE LETTERS OF ST. FRANCIS.

OF the seventeen letters attributed to St. Francis in Wadding's edition of the Opuscula, five cannot be admitted as genuine, at least in the form given in that work, and the rest need, with two exceptions, to be reclassified.

In the first category, we must place the familiar letter in which St. Francis gives St. Antony permission to teach theology (Epistle III, in Wadding's edition), and which has been excluded by the Quaracchi editors as doubtful on the ground that it exists in too many different forms. [*1] The letters to Brother Elias, to the Provincial Ministers, and to the Custodes (Epistles VII, IX, and XIV, in Wadding's edition), were translated by Wadding into Latin from a Spanish text, [*2] and have not come down to us in their original form. Hence they do not figure in the Quaracchi edition. Neither does the letter (Epis. XVII, in Wadding's edition) to "Brother" Giacoma dei Settisoli, which is clearly an extract from Chapter XVIII of the Actus B. Francisci et Sociorum ejus. [*3] Following the

[p. 94]

[paragraph continues] Quaracchi editors, I have excluded these five letters from the present work.

As regards the reclassification of the other letters attributed to St. Francis by Wadding, Epistles IV, V, and XIII in his edition are without doubt genuine writings of St. Francis, but they are not letters; at least, the oldest MSS. do not give them in epistolary form. The two former are fragments of a "rule of life" and a "last wish," written by St. Francis for St. Clare; No. XIII is an Instruction on the Blessed Sacrament. All three are given elsewhere in the present volume in their proper form. [*1] For the rest, the Epistles numbered I and II by Wadding form the text of one and the same letter "To all the Faithful;" those numbered VI and VIII seem to be a summary of the genuine letter "To a Minister," and No. X is part of the letter "To the General Chapter" also given below, while Epistles XI and XII form but one letter in the oldest codices and belong to this same letter to the General Chapter. The only two letters, then, of St. Francis which, both as regards matter and form, may be accepted as Wadding gives them, are numbers VIII and XV, addressed to the

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] Rulers and to Brother Leo respectively. In a word, as a result of this process of elimination and reclassification, only five of the seventeen letters ascribed to St. Francis by Wadding remain to us, namely:--

1. Letter to all the Faithful (Ep. I and II of Wadding).

2. Letter to the General Chapter (Ep. X, XI, and XII of Wadding).

3. Letter to a Minister (Ep. VI and VIII of Wadding).

4. Letter to the Rulers (Ep. XV of Wadding).

5. Letter to Brother Leo (Ep. XVI of Wadding).

To these five letters, the Quaracchi editors have added the undoubtedly authentic letter of St. Francis to the Custodes, [*1] making six in all. Such are the six letters which I have here rendered into English. Let us now consider each of them in order.

Footnotes

^93:1 On this letter see Appendix.

^93:2 Wadding drew on the Spanish text of Rebolledo (Chron, P. I, l. II, c. xxvii) and himself appears to have had misgivings, at least as regards the authenticity of Epistle VII.

^93:3 See Actus B. Francisci, etc., ed. Sabatier, p. 63. M. Sabatier attributes the authorship of this compilation (which contains, as is now known, among other matters, the original Latin text of the traditional Fioretti) to Fra Ugolino di Monte Giorgio, and believes its date to be between 1280 and 1320. It is, however, from Thomas of Celano that we know St. [p. 94]Francis to have written a letter to the Lady Giacoma (See Tr. de Miraculis in Anal. Bolland., t. xviii). See also Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), c. XII, for reference to this letter. The narrative of Celano renders the text of the letter given in the Actus very doubtful. The fact that the expression "St. Mary of the Angels" is used in it to designate the Portiuncula is in itself sufficient to militate against its authenticity. Neither St. Francis nor his companions ever employed this term; they invariably said "St. Mary of the Portiuncula." Any document, therefore, containing the former expression bespeaks a fourteenth century origin at earliest. See Frere Jacqueline: Recherches Historiques, by Fr. Edouard d'Alencon, Paris, 1899.

^94:1 See above, pp. <page 23>, <page 77>, <page 78>.

^95:1 The letter which Wadding translated from the Spanish, under this title and numbered XIV, appears to have been an incomplete version of the letter here given in full.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 96]

  

I.

  

LETTER TO ALL THE FAITHFUL.

The authenticity of this letter has never been called into question. The text itself and the consensus of codices alike bespeak its genuineness. Its inspiration is, as the Quaracchi editors have pointed out, kindred to that of St. Francis' other writings. Moreover, many of the sentiments contained in this letter, written in great part in the words of the Gospel, are expressed by the Saint in almost the self-same language in the Rules and elsewhere. [*1]

In the spring of 1215, St. Francis suffered again from an attack of fever similar to that which had prostrated him in Spain. It was then, his biographers tell us, [*2] that the Saint, unable as he was to preach, was moved by the zeal that devoured him, to put his message into writing. As a result we have this the first and longest of his letters, addressed to all the Faithful,--a precious example of his far-reaching solicitude and all embracing sympathy. There is a simplicity in the superscription and opening words of this letter characteristic of the Middle Ages. Then was the time when men believed that if they had a good idea or a deep feeling on any subject, the world at large had but to learn of this idea or feeling and it would immediately adopt it. It was thus that some bishops of the south of France, having established

[p. 97]

the Truce of God, wrote "to all the archbishops, bishops, priests and clerics inhabiting all Italy" to recommend to them "this new method come from heaven" of reestablishing and fixing peace among men. Even so Dante, in the excess of his grief, wrote "to all the princes of the earth" to make known to them that, in losing Beatrice, "the earth had lost its spring and the future of the world was threatened." [*1] Thus too St. Francis undertook in the present letter to recall "to all the Christians who are in the whole world," those eternal truths which are ever old and ever new, convinced as he was that the world must needs walk in their light if it only realized them more. For the rest, as has been remarked, the description it contains of the death of a rich man is, from a literary point of view, rightly considered the most carefully composed bit of St. Francis' writing that has come down to us.

A fragment containing this realistic picture was published in 1900 by M. Sabatier, [*2] who believed it to be a new and complete opuscule of St. Francis. But the very Incipit of the piece, "The body grows feeble, death approaches . . ." and the Explicit, "dies a bitter death," clearly show that, with the exception of a few words at the opening, this "nouveau opuscule" is nothing more or less than an extract from St. Francis' letter to all the Faithful.

Wadding, as I have already noted, following the lead of Rodolfo di Tossignano, [*3] unskilfully divided this letter into two distinct epistles (I and II in his

[p. 98]

edition). He has also distributed the letter into twelve chapters with separate titles. No doubt he was justified in doing so by the example of some codices, but the Quaracchi editors, following the best MSS., have omitted this division and it will not be found in the present translation. [*1]

The letter to all the Faithful may be found entire in seventeen of the codices mentioned above, to wit, those at Assisi (fol. 23); Berlin (fol. 105); Florence (Ognissanti MS., fol. 7); St. Floriano (fol. 36); Foligno (fol. 25); Lemberg (fol. 341); Liegnitz (fol. 136); Munich (fol. 31); Oxford (fol. 98); Paris (Maz. MS. 1743, fol. 137; Maz. MS. 989, fol. 193; Prot. theol. fac. MS., fol. 88); Rome (St. Isidore's MSS. 1/25, fol. 18 and 1/7, fol. 15; Vatican MSS. 4354, fol. 43, and 7650, fol. 16), and at Dusseldorf (cod. B 132, fol. not numbered).

Fragments of the letter may also be found in the codices at Luttich (fol. 158); Naples (F. 24, fol. 107), and Volterra (fol. 148). [*2] For the text contained in the Quaracchi edition, the editors took as a basis the MSS. of Assisi and Ognissanti, collating these with the codices at St. Isidore's and with the versions of the letter given in the Monumenta (tract II, fol. 278 r) and the Conformities (fruct. XII, P. 11). [*3] It is the Quaracchi text that I have here translated as follows:

  

1.--LETTER TO ALL THE FAITHFUL.

To all Christians, religious, clerics, and laics, men and women, to all who dwell in the whole

[p. 99]

world, Brother Francis, their servant and subject, presents reverent homage, wishing true peace from heaven and sincere charity in the Lord.

Being the servant of all, I am bound to serve all and to administer the balm-bearing words of my Lord. [*1] Wherefore, considering in my mind that, because of the infirmity and weakness of my body, I cannot visit each one personally, I propose by this present letter and message [*2] to offer you the words of our Lord Jesus Christ who is the Word of the Father and the words of the Holy Ghost which are "spirit and life." [*3]

This Word of the Father, so worthy, so holy and glorious, whose coming the most High Father announced from heaven by His holy archangel Gabriel to the holy and glorious Virgin Mary [*4] in whose womb He received the true flesh of our humanity and frailty, He, being rich [*5] above all, willed, nevertheless, with His most Blessed Mother, to choose poverty.

And when His Passion was nigh, He celebrated the Pasch with His disciples and, taking bread, He gave thanks and blessed and broke saying: Take ye and eat: this is My Body. And, taking the chalice, He said: This is My Blood of the New Testament, which shall be shed for you and for many unto remission of

[p. 100]

sins. [*1] After that He prayed to the Father, saying: "Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from Me." [*2] "And His sweat became as drops of blood, trickling down upon the ground." [*3] But withal, He gave up His will to the will of the Father, saying: Father, Thy will be done: not as I will, but as Thou wilt. [*4] Such was the will of the Father that His Son, Blessed and Glorious, whom He gave to us, and who was born for us, [*5] should by His own Blood, sacrifice, and oblation, offer Himself on the altar of the Cross, not for Himself, by whom "all things were made," [*6] but for our sins, leaving us an example that we should follow His steps. [*7] And He wishes that we should all be saved by Him [*8] and that we should receive Him with a pure heart and a chaste body. But there are few who wish to receive Him and to be saved by Him, although His yoke is sweet and His burden light. [*9]

Those who will not taste how sweet the Lord is [*10] and who love darkness rather than the light, [*11] not wishing to fulfil the commandments of God are cursed: of them it is said by the prophet: "They are cursed who decline from Thy commandments." [*12] But, O how happy and blessed

[p. 101]

are those who love the Lord, who do as the Lord Himself says in the Gospel: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart and with thy whole soul and . . . thy neighbor as thyself." [*1] Let us therefore love God and adore Him with a pure heart and a pure mind because He Himself, seeking that above all, says: "The true adorers shall adore the Father in spirit and in truth." [*2] For all who "adore Him, must adore Him in spirit and in truth." [*3] And let us offer Him praises and prayers day and night, saying: "Our Father who art in heaven," for "we ought always to pray, and not to faint." [*4]

We ought indeed to confess all our sins to a priest and receive from him the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. [*5] He who does not eat His Flesh and does not drink His Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. [*6] Let him, however, eat and drink worthily, because he who receives unworthily "eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, not discerning the Body of the Lord," [*7]--that is, not discerning it from other foods.

Let us, moreover, "bring forth fruits worthy of penance." [*8] And let us love our neighbors as ourselves, and, if any one does not wish to

[p. 102]

love them as himself or cannot, [*1] let him at least do them not harm, but let him do good to them.

Let those who have received the power of judging others, exercise judgment with mercy, [*2] as they hope to obtain mercy from the Lord. For let judgment without mercy be shown to him that doth not mercy. [*3] Let us then have charity and humility and let us give alms because they wash souls from the foulness of sins. [*4] For men lose all which they leave in this world; they carry with them, however, the reward of charity and alms which they have given, for which they shall receive a recompense and worthy remuneration from the Lord.

We ought also to fast and to abstain from vices and sins [*5] and from superfluity of food and drink, and to be Catholics. We ought also to visit Churches frequently and to reverence clerics not only for themselves, if they are sinners, but on account of their office and administration of the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which they sacrifice on the altar and receive and administer to others. And let us all know for certain that no one can be saved except by the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ and by the holy words of the Lord which clerics say and announce and distribute and they alone administer and not others. But religious

[p. 103]

especially, who have renounced the world, are bound to do more and greater things, but " not to leave the other undone." [*1]

We ought to hate our bodies with [their] vices and sins, because the Lord says in the Gospel that all vices and sins come forth from the heart. [*2] We ought to love our enemies and do good to them that hate us. [*3] We ought to observe the precepts and counsels of our Lord Jesus Christ. We ought also to deny ourselves and to put our bodies beneath the yoke of servitude and holy obedience as each one has promised to the Lord. And let no man be bound by obedience to obey any one in that where sin or offence is committed.

But let him to whom obedience has been entrusted and who is considered greater become as the lesser [*4] and the servant of the other brothers, and let him show and have the mercy toward each of his brothers that he would wish to be shown to himself if he were in the like situation. And let him not be angry with a brother on account of his offence, but let him advise him kindly and encourage him with all patience and humility.

We ought not to be "wise according to the flesh" [*5] and prudent, but we ought rather to be simple, humble, and pure. And let us hold our bodies in dishonor and contempt because through our fault we are all wretched and corrupt,

[p. 104]

foul and worms, as the Lord says by the prophet: "I am a worm and no man, the reproach of men and the outcast of the people." [*1] We should never desire to be above others, but ought rather to be servants and subject "to every human creature for God's sake." [*2] And the spirit of the Lord [*3] shall rest upon all those who do these things and who shall persevere to the end, and He shall make His abode and dwelling in them, [*4] and they shall be children of the heavenly Father [*5] whose works they do, and they are the spouses, brothers and mothers of our Lord Jesus Christ. We are spouses when by the Holy Ghost the faithful soul is united to Jesus Christ. We are His brothers when we do the will of His Father who is in heaven. [*6] We are His mothers when we bear Him in our heart and in our body through pure love and a clean conscience and we bring Him forth by holy work which ought to shine as an example to others.

O how glorious and holy and great to have a Father in heaven! O how holy, fair, and lovable to have a spouse in heaven! [*7] O how holy and how beloved, well pleasing and humble, peaceful and sweet and desirable above all to have such a brother who has laid down His life for His sheep, [*8] and who has prayed for us to the Father,

[p. 105]

saying: Father, keep them in Thy Name whom Thou hast given Me. Father, all those whom Thou hast given Me in the world were Thine, and Thou hast given them to Me. And the words which Thou gayest Me I have given to them; and they have received them, and have known in very deed that I came forth from Thee, and they have believed that Thou didst send Me. I pray for them: not for the world: bless and sanctify them. And for them I sanctify Myself that they may be sanctified in one as We also are. And I will, Father, that where I am, they also may be with Me, that they may see My glory in My kingdom. [*1]

And since He has suffered so many things for us and has done and will do so much good to us, let every creature which is in heaven and on earth and in the sea and in the abysses render praise to God and glory and honor and benediction; [*2] for He is our strength and power who alone is good, [*3] alone most high, alone almighty and admirable, glorious and alone holy, praiseworthy and blessed without end forever and ever. Amen.

But all those who do not do penance and who do not receive the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, but who give themselves to vices and sins and walk after evil concupiscence and bad desires and who do not observe what they have promised, corporally they serve the world

[p. 106]

and its fleshly desires and cares and solicitudes for this life, but mentally they serve the devil, deceived by him whose sons they are and whose works they do; blind they are because they see not the true light,--our Lord Jesus Christ. They have no spiritual wisdom, for they have not in them the Son of God who is the true wisdom of the Father: of these it is said: "their wisdom was swallowed up." [*1] They know, understand, and do evil and wittingly lose their souls. Beware, ye blind, deceived by your enemies--to wit, by the world, the flesh and by the devil--for it is sweet to the body to commit sin and bitter to serve God because all vices and sins come forth and proceed from the heart of man, as it is said in the Gospel. [*2]

And you have nothing of good in this world or in the future. You think to possess for long the vanities of this world, but you are deceived; for a day and an hour will come of which you think not and do not know and are ignorant of. The body grows feeble, death approaches, neighbors and friends come saying: "Put your affairs in order." And his wife and his children, neighbors and friends, make believe to weep. And looking, he sees them weeping and is moved by a bad emotion, and thinking within himself he says: "Behold, I place my soul and body and my all in your hands." Verily, that man is cursed who confides and exposes his soul and body and his all in such hands. Wherefore, the Lord

[p. 107]

says by the prophet: "Cursed be the man that trusteth in man." [*1] And at once they cause a priest to come and the priest says to him: "Wilt thou do penance for all thy sins? " He answers: "I will." "Wilt thou from thy substance, as far as thou canst, satisfy for what thou hast done and for the things in which thou hast defrauded and deceived men." [*2] He answers: "No."--And the priest says: "Why not?"--"Because I have put everything into the hands of my relatives and friends." And he begins to lose the power of speech and thus this miserable man dies a bitter death. [*3]

But let all know that wheresoever or howsoever a man may die in criminal sin, without satisfaction--when he could satisfy and did not satisfy--the devil snatches his soul from his body with such violence and anguish as no one can know except him who suffers it. And all talent and power, learning and wisdom [*4] that he thought to possess are taken from him. [*5] And his relatives and friends take to themselves his substance and divide it and say afterwards: "Cursed be his soul because he could have acquired and given us more than he did, and did

[p. 108]

not acquire it." But the worms eat his body. And thus he loses soul and body in this short life and goes into hell, where he shall be tormented without end.

In the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. [*1] All to whom this letter may come, I, Brother Francis, your little servant, pray and conjure you by the charity which God is, [*2] and with the will to kiss your feet, to receive these balm-bearing words [*3] of our Lord Jesus Christ with humility and charity and to put them in practice kindly and to observe them perfectly. [*4] And let those who do not know how to read have them read often and let them keep them by them with holy operation unto the end, for they are spirit and life. [*5] And those who do not do this shall render an account on the day of Judgment before the tribunal of Christ. And all those who shall receive them kindly and understand them and send them to others as example, if they persevere in them unto the end, [*6] may the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost bless them. Amen.

Footnotes

^96:1 Compare for example the passage on <page 101>, beginning "Let us therefore love God," etc., with Chapter XXII of the First Rule (<page 53>); and the prayer of Christ given on <page 105>, with the conclusion of the same chapter (<page 59>).

^96:2 See Le Monnier, l.c., p. 202, and Knox Little, l.c., p. 164. Wadding, Annales, ad. an. 1213, places the writing of this letter two or three years earlier, which seems less probable.

^97:1 See Le Monnier, l.c., p. 203. To him I am indebted for these quotations.

^97:2 See his edition of Bartholi, Tractatus, Appendix, p. 132 seq.

^97:3 See Historiarum Seraphicae Religionis libri tres (Venice, 1585), fol. 194 r, for that part of the letter which Wadding gives as Epistola I.

^98:1 It has been adopted in the new French edition of St. Francis' works. See Opuscules, pp. 122-135.

^98:2 It was from this fourteenth century MS. that M. Sabatier edited as a new opuscule the fragment above mentioned.

^98:3 Bartholomew of Pisa here inserts the greater part of the letter passim.

^99:1 Cod. O. reads: "all the words of the Lord."

^99:2 Cod. O. reads: "by this present letter and now."

^99:3 John 6: 64.

^99:4 See Luke 1: 31.

^99:5 See II Cor. 8: 9.

^100:1 See Matt. 26: 26-28; Luke 22: 19-20; I Cor. 11: 24-25.

^100:2 Matt. 26: 39.

^100:3 Luke 22: 44.

^100:4 See Matt. 26: 42 and 39.

^100:5 Cod. O. omits: "and was born for us."

^100:6 John 1: 3.

^100:7 See I Peter 2: 21.

^100:8 Cod. O. omits: "And He wishes that we should all be saved by Him."

^100:9 See Matt. 11: 30.

^100:10 See Ps. 33: 9.

^100:11 See John 3: 39.

^100:12 Ps. 118: 21.

^101:1 Matt. 22: 37-39.

^101:2 John 4: 23.

^101:3 John 4: 24.

^101:4 Luke 18: 1.

^101:5 Cod. O. adds: "For the Lord says, who does not eat," etc.

^101:6 See John 6: 54.

^101:7 I Cor. 11: 29.

^101:8 Luke 3: 8.

^102:1 Cod. As. and editions omit "or cannot."

^102:2 Cod. O. reads: "judgment and mercy."

^102:3 See Jas. 2: 13.

^102:4 See Tob. 4: t 1.

^102:5 See Eccli. 3: 32.

^103:1 Luke 11: 42.

^103:2 See Matt. 15: 18-19.

^103:3 See Luke 6: 27.

^103:4 See Luke 22: 26.

^103:5 I Cor. 1: 26.

^104:1 Ps. 21: 7.

^104:2 I Peter 2: 13.

^104:3 See Is. 11: 2.

^104:4 See John 14: 23.

^104:5 See Matt. 5: 45.

^104:6 See Matt. 12: 50.

^104:7 Cod. As. and that of Volterra with the Mon. add: "the Paraclete."

^104:8 See John 10: 15.

^105:1 See John 17: 6-24.

^105:2 See Apoc. 5: 13.

^105:3 See Luke 18: 19.

^106:1 Ps. 106: 27.

^106:2 See Matt. 15: 19.

^107:1 Jer. 17: 5.

^107:2 Cod. O. and Pis. read: "Wilt thou satisfy for the things taken unjustly,--that is, those things by which thou hast cheated thy neighbor."

^107:3 Cod. As. and Mon. omit: "a bitter death." Cod. Pis. and Volterra omit "miserable man."

^107:4 Cod. As. and Mon. omit "wisdom."

^107:5 See Luke 8: 18.

^108:1 These words are not found except in Cod. As., which omits the following sentence: "All to whom this letter may come."

^108:2 See I John 4: 16.

^108:3 Cod. As. and Mon. read: "that these words and others."

^108:4 Cod. As. and Mon. omit what follows up to "And all those."

^108:5 See John 6: 64.

^108:6 See Matt. 10: 22.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

  

II.

  

LETTER TO ALL THE FRIARS.

It was at the end of his days [*1] when he was ill, [*2] that St. Francis wrote this letter to the Minister General and to all the Friars. In it he confesses all his sins to God, to the Saints and to the Friars, and in weighty words urges once again what was ever uppermost in his mind and heart: reverence toward the Blessed Sacrament, observance of the Rule and the Divine Office. The same desires and counsels contained in this letter may also be found in the Testament, and there is little doubt that both works were composed about the same time.

This letter, like the preceding one, was wrongly divided by Rodolfo di Tossignano. [*3] Wadding following suit, made three separate epistles out of it, [*4] an error all the more remarkable since Bartholomew of Pisa in his Conformities (fruct. xii, P. 11, n. 47) and before him Ubertino da Casale in the Arbor Vitae (l. v, c. vii, fol. 224) had edited the text correctly. Moreover, this useless division, which is not called for by the context of the letter but is rather in conflict with it, is not found in any of the early MS. collections containing St. Francis' writings.

The letter to all the Friars may be found in fourteen of the MSS. mentioned above as containing the letter to all the Faithful, to wit, those of Assisi, Dusseldorf,

[p. 110]

[paragraph continues] Florence (Ognissanti), St. Floriano, Foligno, Liegnitz, Munich, Oxford, Paris (all three MSS.), and Rome (both MSS. at St. Isidore's and cod. 4354 of the Vatican library). It is also contained in eight other codices: (1) Capistran (munic. lib. cod. xxii, fol. 85 r); (2) Freiburg in Switzerland (lib. ad Conventual Conv., cod. 23, 1. 60); (3) Paris (nat. lib. cod. 18327, fol. 159 v); (4-5) Subiaco (monast. lib. cod. 120, fol. 325 and 212, fol. 184); (6-7) Rome (St. Antony's cod., fol. 61 r and 80 r, and Vatic. lib., cod. B. 82, fol. 147 v); (8) Volterra (Guarnacci lib., cod. 225, fol. 151 r). Of these last named codices, the two Roman MSS. and that of Volterra date from the fourteenth century; the other five from the fifteenth.

For the Quaracchi text of the letter, which is here translated, the MSS. of Assisi, [*1] St. Antony's, Ognissanti, and St. Isidore's, were collated with the versions of it given in the Arbor Vitae (l. v, cap. vii, fol. 224 v), Monumenta (fol. 231 v) and Firmamenta (fol. 21 r). [*2] It may be noted that in placing the prayer, "Almighty, Eternal God," etc., at the end of the letter, the Quaracchi editors have followed the order of the Assisian, Antonian, Liegnitz, and both Mazarin MSS. [*3] But enough by the way of introduction to Letter II, which St. Francis addressed:--

[p. 111]

  

TO ALL THE FRIARS.

In the name of the Highest Trinity and Holy Unity of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. [*1]

To all the reverend and much beloved brothers, to [*2] the minister general of the Order of Minors, its lord, and to the other ministers general who shall come after him, and to all the ministers and custodes and priests of the same brotherhood, humble in Christ, and to all the simple and obedient brothers, the first and the last, Brother Francis, a mean and fallen man, your little servant, gives greeting in Him who has redeemed and washed us in His Precious Blood, [*3] and whom when you hear His Name adore ye with fear and reverence, prostrate on the ground; [*4] the Lord Jesus Christ, such is the Name [*5] of the most High Son, blessed forever. Amen.

[p. 112]

Hear, my lords, my sons and my brothers, and with your ears receive my words. [*1] Incline the ear [*2] of your heart and obey the voice of the Son of God. Keep His commandments with all your heart and fulfil His counsels with a perfect mind. Praise Him for He is good [*3] and extol Him in your works, [*4] for therefore He has sent you through all the world that by word and deed you may bear witness to His voice, [*5] and you may make known to all that there is no other Almighty besides Him. [*6] Persevere under discipline [*7] and obedience and with a good and firm purpose fulfil what you have promised Him. The Lord God offers Himself to you as to His sons. [*8]

Wherefore, brothers, kissing your feet and with the charity of which I am capable, I conjure you all to show all reverence and all honor possible to the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom the things that are in heaven and the things that are on earth are pacified and reconciled to Almighty God. [*9] I also beseech in the Lord all my brothers who are and shall be and desire to be priests [*10] of the Most High that, when they wish to celebrate Mass, being pure, they offer the true Sacrifice

[p. 113]

of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ purely, with reverence, with a holy and clean intention, not for any earthly thing or fear or for the love of any man, as it were pleasing men. [*1] But let every will, in so far as the grace of the Almighty helps, be directed to Him, [*2] desiring thence to please the High Lord Himself alone because He alone works there [in the Holy Sacrifice] as it may please Him, for He Himself says: "Do this for a commemoration of Me;" [*3] "if any one doth otherwise he becomes the traitor Judas [*4] and is made guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. [*5]

Call to mind, priests, my brothers, what is written in the law of Moses: how those transgressing even materially died by the decree of the Lord without any mercy. [*6] How much more and worse punishments he deserves to suffer "who hath trodden under foot the Son of God and hath esteemed the Blood of the testament unclean by which he was sanctified and hath offered an affront to the spirit of grace." [*7] For man despises, soils, and treads under foot the Lamb of God when, as the Apostle says, [*8] not discerning and distinguishing the holy bread of Christ from other nourishments or works, he

[p. 114]

either eats unworthily or, if he be worthy, he eats in vain and unbecomingly since the Lord has said by the prophet: Cursed be the man that doth the work of the Lord deceitfully. [*1] And He condemns the priests who will not take this to heart saying: "I will curse your blessings." [*2]

Hear ye, my brothers: If the Blessed Virgin Mary is so honored, as is meet, because she bore Him in [her] most holy womb; if the blessed Baptist trembled and did not dare to touch the holy forehead of God; if the sepulchre in which He lay for some time, is venerated, how holy, just, and worthy ought he to be who touches with his hands, who receives with his heart and his mouth, and proffers to be received by others Him who is now no more to die but to triumph in a glorified eternity: on whom the angels desire to look. [*3]

Consider your dignity, brothers, priests, and be holy because He Himself is holy. [*4] And as the Lord God has honored you above all through this mystery, even so do you also love and reverence and honor Him above all. It is a great misery and a deplorable weakness when you have Him thus present to care for anything else in the whole world. Let the entire man be seized with fear; let the whole world tremble; let heaven exult when Christ, the Son of the Living God, is on the altar in the hands of the priest. O admirable height and stupendous condescension!

[p. 115]

[paragraph continues] O humble sublimity! O sublime humility! that the Lord of the universe, God and the Son of God, so humbles Himself that for our salvation He hides Himself under a morsel of bread. Consider, brothers, the humility of God and "pour out your hearts before Him, [*1] and be ye humbled that ye may be exalted by Him. [*2] Do not therefore keep back anything for yourselves that He may receive you entirely who gives Himself up entirely to you.

Wherefore I admonish and exhort in the Lord, that, in the places in which the brothers live, only one Mass be celebrated in the day, according to the form of holy Church. [*3] If, however, there be many priests in the place, let one be contented, through love of charity, by hearing the celebration of another priest, for the Lord Jesus Christ replenishes those who are worthy of it, present and absent. He, although He may seem to be present in many places, nevertheless remains undivided and suffers no change; but One everywhere He works as it may please Him with the Lord God the Father, and the

[p. 116]

[paragraph continues] Holy Ghost the Paraclete, world without end. Amen.

And since "he that is of God heareth the words of God," [*1] we who have been more specially destined for the divine offices, ought, in consequence, not only to hear and do what God says, but also--in order to impress upon ourselves the greatness of our Creator and our subjection to Him--to watch the vessels and other objects which contain His holy words. On that account I warn all my brothers and I strengthen them in Christ, wheresoever they may find the divine written words to venerate them so far as they are able, and if they are not well preserved or if they lie scattered disgracefully in any place, let them, in so far as it concerns them, collect and preserve them, honoring in the words the Lord who has spoken. For many things are sanctified by the word of God, [*2] and by the power of the words of Christ the Sacrament of the Altar is effected.

Moreover I confess all my sins to God the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost and to the Blessed Mary ever Virgin and to all the Saints in heaven and on earth and to the minister general of this our religion as to my venerable Lord, and to all the priests of our order and to all my other blessed brothers. I have offended in many ways through my grievous fault, especially because I have not observed the Rule which I have promised to the Lord and

[p. 117]

[paragraph continues] I have not said the office as prescribed by the Rule either by reason of my negligence or weakness or because I am ignorant and simple. Wherefore, by all means as far as I am able, I beseech my lord, the general minister, to cause the Rule to be inviolably observed by all, and let the clerics say the office with devotion before God, not attending to melody of voice but to harmony of mind, so that the voice may be in accord with the mind and the mind in accord with God, so that they may please God by purity of mind and not coax the ears of the people by voluptuousness of voice. As for myself I promise to keep these things strictly, as the Lord may give me grace, and I leave them to the brothers who are with me to be observed in the office and in the other appointed regulations. But whosoever of the brothers will not observe them, I do not hold them as Catholics or as my brothers and I do not wish either to see them or speak [with them], until they have done penance. I say this also of all others who setting aside the discipline of the Rule, go wandering about; for our Lord Jesus Christ gave His life lest He might lose the obedience of the most Holy Father. [*1]

I, Brother Francis, a useless man and unworthy creature of the Lord God, say to Brother Elias, the minister of our whole religion, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and to all the ministers general who shall be after him and to the other custodes

[p. 118]

and guardians of the brothers, who are and shall be, that they have this writing with them, put it in practice and  preserve it. And I entreat them to guard jealously those things which are written in it and to cause them to be carefully observed according to the good pleasure of the Almighty God now and ever as long as this world may last.

Blessed be you by the Lord who shall have done these things and may the Lord be with you forever. Amen.

Almighty, eternal, just, and merciful God, give to us wretches to do for Thee what we know Thee to will and to will always that which is pleasing to Thee; so that inwardly purified, inwardly illumined and kindled by the flame of the Holy Ghost, we may be able to follow in the footsteps of Thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and by Thy grace alone come to Thee the Most High, who in perfect Trinity and simple Unity livest and reignest and gloriest God Almighty forever and ever. Amen. [*1]

Footnotes

^109:1 So Ubertino da Casale tells us in his Arbor Vitae, finished on Mount La Verna, September 28, 1305 (l. v, cap. vii).

^109:2 As we learn from the rubric in the Assisi MS. 338: "De lictera et ammonitione beatissimi patris nostri Francisci quam misit fratribus ad capitulum quando erat infirmus."

^109:3 Hist. Seraph., fol. 173 v.

^109:4 Epistles X, XI, and XII in his edition.

^110:1 Following this MS., Mgr. Faloci edited the first part of the letter (to "world without end. Amen,"--see page 116) in his Miss. Frances, t. VI, P. 94.

^110:2 The Mon. and Firm., like Rodolfo (fol. 273 v), give only the first part of the letter, which Wadding makes Epis. XII.

^110:3 It is placed immediately before the letter in the other family of MSS. mentioned in the Introduction, to which the Ognissanti MS. belongs.

^111:1 Cod. As. omits this invocation.

^111:2 Cod. As. adds "to Brother A, minister general." It has been surmised that St. Francis wished this letter to be read at the opening of all subsequent chapters, with a view to perpetuating his spiritual presence among the brothers. In this hypothesis, the copyist was supposed to fill in here the initial of the minister general governing the order at the time he wrote. The fact that A is the initial given at the head of the Assisian MS. may afford a clue to the date of its composition (Albert of Pisa governed the order 1239-40, and Aymon of Faversham, 1240-44), but in the body of the letter (see below, <page 117>) the minister general is referred to as Brother H [Helias (?) 1232-39]. Cod. An. at the head of the letter reads Brother T [Thomas of Farignano (?), 1367-73].

^111:3 See Apoc. 1: 5.

^111:4 See Gen. 19:1 and elsewhere.

^111:5 See Luke 1: 32.

^112:1 See Acts 2: 14.

^112:2 See Isa. 55: 3.

^112:3 See Ps. 135: 1.

^112:4 See Tob. 13: 6.

^112:5 Cod. An. reads: "you may make all stand dumbfounded who oppose Him in word or deed."

^112:6 See Tob. 13:4.

^112:7 See Heb. 12:7.

^112:8 See Heb. 12: 7.

^112:9 See Col. 1: 20.

^112:10 The word priests is added in Cod. As., and by Ubertino.

^113:1 See Eph. 6: 6, and Col. 3:22.

^113:2 Cod. As. reads: "to the Lord."

^113:3 Luke 22: 39.

^113:4 Cod. O., Mon., and Firm., with Ubertino, omit the rest of this sentence.

^113:5 See I Cor. 11: 27.

^113:6 See Heb. 10: 28.

^113:7 Heb. 10: 29.

^113:8 See I Cor. 11:29.

^114:1 See Jerem. 48: 10.

^114:2 Mal. 2: 2.

^114:3 See I Pet. 1: 12.

^114:4 See Levit. 11: 44.

^115:1 See Ps. 61: 9.

^115:2 See I Pet. 5: 6.

^115:3 Philip Melanchthon in his Apology (Augsburg Confession, art. on the Mass) usurped these words of St. Francis to defend his erroneous teaching against private Masses. But there is nothing in this letter or elsewhere to show that St. Francis reprehended such Masses in any way. On the contrary, as the Bollandists point out, the words "according to the form of holy Church" refer to the rite of the Roman Church to be followed in the celebration of Mass and not to the one Mass to be celebrated daily. (See Acta S.S., t. II, Oct., pp. 998-999).

^116:1 John 8: 47.

^116:2 See I Tim. 4: 5.

^117:1 See Philip. 2: 8.

^118:1 This prayer, which, as I have said, is found in some MSS. at the head and in others at the foot of the present letter, is separated from it altogether by Wadding, who (p. rot) places it immediately after the sheet given by St. Francis to Brother Leo. There it is also found in the new French edition of the Opuscula (p. 25).

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 119]

  

III.

  

TO A CERTAIN MINISTER.

The tenor of this letter seems to indicate that it was written before the confirmation of the Second Rule by Pope Honorius; [*1] and very likely in the early part of 1223. All the early MSS. attribute it to St. Francis and, as regards both matter and form, it closely resembles the Saint's other writings. There is, however, no small diversity of opinion as to whom it was addressed. But from the wording of the last paragraph of the letter, referring to the chapter: "thou wilt be there with thy brothers," it would appear to have been sent to some provincial minister rather than to the minister general. Moreover, as Professor Goetz rightly remarks, [*2] the beginning of the letter implies that this minister had proposed some doubts or difficulties as to the manner of dealing with brothers who had fallen into sin. Hence the abrupt opening of the letter, "I speak to thee on the subject of thy soul," etc., refers to some question which the letter is intended to answer, and from the fact that patience is commended "more than a hermitage," the Quaracchi editors think we might infer that the minister in question was desirous of embracing a solitary life. Be this as it may, I am unable to

[p. 120]

agree with M. Sabatier in so far as he finds in this letter "more objurgations and reproaches than counsels." [*1]

The letter exists in the Vatican MS. 7650, St. Isidore's MS. 1/25 and the Ognissanti and St. Floriano codices above described. The first part of it may also be found in the National Library at Naples (Cod. XII, F. 32). An abridgment of the Letter is given by Rodolfo; [*2] a different abstract is found in the Conformities. [*3] In the more complete summary furnished by Wadding, [*4] it might be possible with M. Sabatier [*5], and Dr. Lempp, [*6] owing to the omission of a large piece of the letter, to read into St. Francis' words the precept that a brother guilty of mortal sin should be absolved without any penance. But with the full text of the letter before us, any such attempt is, needless to say, impossible, as Mr. Carmichael has clearly shown. [*7]

The complete text of this important letter was first

[p. 121]

published by Fr. Edouard d'Alencon, Archivist General of the Capuchins, in his Spicilegium Franciscanum, [*1] next by M. Sabatier in his edition of Bartholi, [*2] and again by Dr. Lempp in his monograph on Elias. [*3] Besides these we have now the versions of Professor Boehmer and the Quaracchi edition. The latter text, which I have here rendered into English, is based on the MSS. of Ognissanti and St. Isidore's (cod. 1/25) which have been collated with the Neapolitan MS. already referred to and the editions of the letter published by Fr. Edouard d'Alencon and M. Sabatier.

Now for the text of the letter

  

TO A CERTAIN MINISTER. [*4]

To Brother N. . . Minister; may Me Lord bless thee.

I speak to thee as best I can on the subject of thy soul; that those things which impede thee

[p. 122]

in loving the Lord God and whosoever may be a hindrance to thee, whether brothers or others, even though they were to strike thee,--all these things thou oughtest to reckon as a favor. And so thou shouldst desire and not otherwise. And let this be to thee for true obedience from the Lord God and from me; for this I know surely to be true obedience. And love those that do such things to thee and wish not other from them, save in so far as the Lord may grant to thee; and in this thing love them,--by wishing that they may be better Christians. [*1] And let this be to thee more than a hermitage. [*2] And by this I wish to know if thou lovest God and me His servant and thine, to wit: that there be no brother in the world who has sinned, how great soever his sin may be, who after he has seen thy face shall ever go away without thy mercy, if he seek mercy, [*3] and, if he seek not mercy, ask

[p. 123]

thou him if he desires mercy. And if he afterwards appears [*1] before thy face a thousand times, love him more than me, to the end that thou mayest draw him to the Lord, and on such ones always have mercy. And this thou shouldst declare to the guardians, when thou canst, that thou art determined of thyself to do thus.

Concerning all the chapters that are in the Rule that speak of mortal sins [*2] we shall at the chapter of Whitsuntide, God helping, with the counsel of the brothers, make such a chapter as this: If any brother, at the instigation of the enemy, sin mortally, let him be bound by obedience to have recourse to his guardian. And let all the brothers who know him to have sinned, not cause him shame or slander him, but let them have great mercy on him and keep very secret the sin of their brother, for they that are healthy need not a physician, but they that are ill. [*3] And let them be likewise bound by obedience to send him to his custos with a companion. And let the custos himself care for him mercifully as he himself would wish to be cared for by others if he were in a like situation.

[And if he should fall into any [*4] venial sin, let him confess to his brother priest, and if there be no priest there let him confess to his brother, until he shall find a priest who shall absolve him

[p. 124]

canonically, as has been said,] [*1] and let them have absolutely no power of enjoining other penance save only this: go and sin no more. [*2]

In order that this writing may be able to be better observed, have it by thee until Whitsuntide: thou wilt be there with thy brothers. And these and all other things which are less in the Rule, thou shalt, the Lord God helping, take care to fulfil.

Footnotes

^119:1 It refers to "the chapters which speak of mortal sin" which are only found in the First Rule (see pp. <page 37>, <page 47>, <page 53>), and speaks of proposed changes in the Rule which could not, as is clear, have been made after November, 1223. In particular the subject of the tenth chapter of the new Rule discussed in the Chapter held at Portiuncula, June 11th of that year (see Spec. Perf., ed. Sabatier, c. t), is mentioned as not yet definitely settled.

^119:2 See Quellen, etc t. XXII, p. 547.

^120:1 " . . . plus des objurgations et des reproches que des conseils."--Sabatier, Bartholi, p. 120.

^120:2 Hist. Seraph., fol. 177 v.

^120:3 Fruct. XXII, P. 11, n. 46. The part here given is that which Wadding exhibits as Epis. VI. M. Sabatier is clearly mistaken in regarding these different abstracts of the letter published separately as so many complete epistles. He says: ". . Frere Elie ne se corrigeant pas, le saint ne cessa pas de lui faire des recommendations identiques," l.c., p. 119.

^120:4 See Epis. VIII. This is a different and longer version than that given in the Conformities. Wadding gives yet another abstract of the letter as Epis. VII. This he translated from the Spanish, though he confesses misgivings as to the authenticity of its form.

^120:5 See his edition of Bartholi, pp. 113-131.

^120:6 See Frere Elie de Cortone, p. 51, where the idea of abolishing penances is described as "so Franciscan."

^120:7 See "The Writings of St. Francis," in the Month, January, 1904, pp. 161-164.

^121:1 In 1899; after the Vatican MS. 7650, and the Foligno codex. See Epistola S. Francisci ad ministrum generalem in sua forma authentica cum appendice de Fr. Petro Catanii.

^121:2 In 1900, after the Ognissanti MS. See his Bartholi, p. 113.

^121:3 In 1900. See his Frere Elie de Cortone, p. 50 seq.

^121:4 This is the superscription of the Neapolitan MS. According to the greater number of codices the letter is addressed: "To Brother N . . . Minister." The MSS. of Foligno and St. Isidore's read: "To Brother N . . . Minister General," and some Italian versions cited by M. Sabatier (see Bartholi, p. 121, note 1) add the name of Brother Elias (see also Rodolfo, l.c., fol. 177 v.). The rubric in the second family of MSS. already described (See Introd.) reads simply "Letter which St. Francis sent to the Minister General as to the way to be followed regarding brother subjects sinning mortally or venially." Wadding (Opusc., p. 25, n. 1) thinks the letter was addressed to Peter of Catana. See Speculum Minorum, fol. 218 v.

^122:1 For the rendering of this doubtful passage: et in hoc dilige eos ut velis quod sint meliores Christiani, I have translated the Latin text as given in the Isidorean MS. 1/25, in the Conformities (fol. 132, v), in Wadding's edition (Epis. VIII), and in that of Quaracchi (p. 108). In the Ognissanti MS., however, this passage reads et non velis "and do not desire that they be better Christians." This reading has been followed by Fr. Edouard d'Alencon and M. Sabatier. The latter thinks St. Francis is here referring to ungrateful and recalcitrant lepers whom he was wont to call Christians. But in that hypothesis the passage might be translated "and do not desire to make them better lepers!"

^122:2 Cod. O. for eremitorium reads meritorium. But may not this very improbable reading be that most common thing in early MSS.,--the slip of a copyist?

^122:3 Cod. O. omits the remainder of this sentence.

^123:1 The Neapolitan MS. for "appears" reads "sins."

^123:2 Chaps. V, XIII, and XX of the first Rule. (See above, pp. <page 37>, <page 47>, and <page 53>.)

^123:3 See Matt. 9: 12.

^123:4 Cod. O. reads: "another."

^124:1 In chap. XX of the First Rule (see above, <page 53>). The passage enclosed in brackets is the part omitted by Wadding and those who have followed him.

^124:2 See John 8: 11.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

  

IV.

  

TO THE RULERS OF THE PEOPLE.

This letter is known to us only by the testimony of the Ven. Francis Gonzaga, O.F.M., [*1] who, speaking of the Province of Aragon in his work on the origin of the Seraphic Order, [*2] mentions that Bl. John Parenti, first Minister General after St. Francis (1227-1232), brought a copy of the letter into Spain. On the good faith of Gonzaga, Wadding included this letter in his edition of the Opuscula, where it figures as Epist. XV. As the style of the letter and the ideas it embodies corresponded so admirably with the writings of St. Francis, the Quaracchi editors and Professor Goetz, [*3] have not hesitated to accept it as genuine. No copy of the letter other than that transcribed by Wadding has so far been found, and it is according to his text of 1623 that it is here translated:--

  

TO THE RULERS OF THE PEOPLE.

To all podestas, and consuls, judges and governors, in whatever part of the world, and to all others to whom this letter may come, Brother Francis, your little and contemptible servant, wishes health and peace to you.

Consider and see that the day of death draws nigh. [*4] I ask you, therefore, with such reverence as I can, not to forget the Lord on account of the cares and solicitudes of this world and not to

[p. 126]

turn aside from His commandments, for all those who forget Him and decline from His commandments are cursed [*1] and they shall be forgotten by Him. [*2] And when the day of death comes, all that which they think they have shall be taken away from them. [*3] And the wiser and more powerful they may have been in this world, so much the greater torments shall they endure in hell. [*4]

Wherefore, I strongly advise you, my lords, to put aside all care and solicitude and to receive readily the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ in holy commemoration of Him. And cause so great honor to be rendered the Lord by the people committed to you, that every evening it may be announced by a crier or by another sign to the end that praises and thanks shall resound to the Lord God Almighty from all the people. And if you do not do this, know that you are beholden to render an account before your Lord God Jesus Christ on the day of Judgment. Let those who keep this writing with them and observe it know that they are blessed by the Lord God.

Footnotes

^125:1 Minister General of the Order, 1579-1587, afterwards Bishop of Mantua (see Acta Ordinis Minorum, 1904, p. 265).

^125:2 De Origine Seraphicae Religionis Franciscanae (Venice 1603), p. 806.

^125:3 See Quellen, etc., p. 535.

^125:4 See Gen. 47: 39.

^126:1 See Ps. 118: 21.

^126:2 See Ezech. 33: 12.

^126:3 See Luke 8: 18.

^126:4 See Wis. 6: 7.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 127]

  

V.

  

TO ALL THE CUSTODES.

Wadding seems to have known of this letter indirectly. At least he gives us a shorter letter addressed to the custodes. The beginning of the epistle he numbers XIV is similar to the one which is translated here and seems to be an incomplete summary of the latter. It is difficult, however, to decide conclusively, since the original form of the letter, which Wadding translated from the Spanish, is wanting. The solution of the question would be to ascertain from what source this Spanish letter was drawn.

The letter was first published in its present form by M. Sabatier in 1900 from a fourteenth century MS. in the Guarnacci library at Volterra. [*1] The Quaracchi text is also based on this codex, than which no other version of the letter is known to exist. Internal arguments might, however, be adduced to establish the authenticity of the letter, which is as follows:--

  

TO ALL THE CUSTODES.

To all the custodes of the Brothers Minor to whom this letter shall come, Brother Francis, your servant and little one in the Lord God, sends greeting with new signs of heaven and earth [*2] which on the part of the Lord are great and most excellent and which are accounted least of all by many religious and by other men.

I entreat you more than if it were a question

[p. 128]

of myself that, when it is becoming and it may seem to be expedient, you humbly beseech the clerics to venerate above all the most holy Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ and His Holy Name and written words which sanctify the body. [*1] They ought to hold as precious the chalices, corporals, ornaments of the altar, and all that pertain to the Sacrifice. And if the most holy Body of the Lord be lodged very poorly in any place, let It according to the command of the Church be placed by them and left in a precious place, and let It be carried with great veneration and administered to others with discretion. The Names also and written words of the Lord, wheresoever they may be found in unclean places, let them be collected, and they ought to be put in a proper place.

And in all the preaching you do, admonish the people concerning penance and that no one can be saved except he that receives the most sacred Body and Blood of the Lord. [*2] And while It is being sacrificed by the priest on the altar and It is being carried to any place, let all the people on bended knees render praise, honor, and glory to the Lord God Living and True.

And you shall so announce and preach His praise to all peoples that at every hour and when the bells are rung praise and thanks shall always be given to the Almighty God by all the people through the whole earth.

[p. 129]

And to whomsoever of my brothers, custodes, this writing shall come, let them copy it and keep it with them and cause it to be copied for the brothers who have the office of preaching and the care of brothers, and let them unto the end preach all those things that are contained in this writing: let them know they have the blessing of the Lord God and mine. And let these be for them through true and holy obedience.

Footnotes

^127:1 Cod. 225, mentioned above (<page 110>). See Sabatier's Bartholi, p. 135.

^127:2 Seemingly an allusion to the mysteries of the Eucharist.

^128:1 An obvious reference to the formula of consecration.

^128:2 See John 6: 54.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

  

VI.

  

TO BROTHER LEO.

The authenticity of this letter cannot be challenged. The original autograph is jealously preserved at the Cathedral of Spoleto. In Wadding's time it was kept at the Conventual church in that place, but subsequently disappeared in some way and there was no trace of it until 1895, when Father Cardinali, a priest of Spoleto, placed it in the hands of Mgr. Faloci. The latter presented it to Pope Leo XIII and, after reposing for some three years in the Vatican, it was, at the request of Mgr. Serafini, Archbishop of Spoleto, returned to the cathedral there. [*1] Only one other autograph of St. Francis is known to exist. [*2] The scope of the letter is obvious: it is a word of tender encouragement and counsel to the Frate pecorello de Dio, St. Francis' most intimate companion and friend, who at the time was harassed with doubts and fears. The form of the letter seems to present some difficulties to certain critics. For example, St. Francis at the outset uses the words: F. Leo F. Francisco tuo salutem et pacem. It is, of course, clear that this superscription cannot be interpreted in such a way as to make Brother Leo the author of the letter; in that case it would be Francisco suo, and no one, so far as I know, has ever attempted this violence to the text. But there have been some who, thinking St. Francis did not know the difference between a dative and a nominative,

Click to enlarge

LETTER OF ST. FRANCIS TO BROTHER LEO, PRESERVED AT SPOLETO. (See page <page 130>.)

[p. 131]

have not hesitated to tamper with the text so as to bring the Latin of the Poverello into conformity with what they think to be better grammar. [*1] I confess that .I find no difficulty in translating the superscription as it stands in the original autograph. As a general rule, no doubt, it is the sender of a letter that greets the one to whom it is sent. But, in this case, the humility of St. Francis has led him to change parts and he appeals for a blessing instead of bestowing one. I find myself therefore in thorough accord with Mr. Carmichael's clever solution of this question and agree with him that St. Francis, always imaginative, meant what he wrote, and that "there is really a deep, sweet, and most pathetic meaning in the Saint's peculiar mode of address." Accordingly, the superscription ought to read "Brother Leo, wish thy brother Francis health and peace." It is thus, following Mr. Carmichael, that I have translated it here.

As regards the use of the plural (faciatis) in the body of the note which perplexed Wadding, since the singular seems to be called for, some think with the Quaracchi editors that the Saint, writing so familiarly to Leo, adopts the Italian form; others, with M. Sabatier, [*2] that Brother Leo had spoken in the name of a group. Perhaps it may not be amiss to recall in this connection, what Celano tells us of St. Francis' method of composition [*3] as well as of the letter

[p. 132]

of the Saint mentioned by Eccleston, in which there was faulty Latin. [*1] A French critic [*2] thinks we might perhaps be justified in identifying the letter referred to by Eccleston with the one to Brother Leo now under consideration. Be this as it may, the context of the present letter leads one to suppose that at the time it was written Brother Leo was not yet habitually with St. Francis. In this hypothesis, we must fix the date of its composition not later than 1220. [*3] It need not be wondered at if, after nearly seven centuries, some words in the autograph letter preserved at Spoleto are difficult to read. Hence some trifling variants occur in the texts published by Wadding [*4] and Faloci. [*5] The Quaracchi text which I have here translated is edited after the original:--

  

TO BROTHER LEO.

Brother Leo, wish thy brother Francis health and peace!

I say to thee: Yes, my son, and as a mother; for in this word and counsel I sum up briefly all the words we said on the way, and if afterwards thou hast need to come to me for advice, thus I advise you: In whatever way it seemeth best to thee to please the Lord God and to follow His

[p. 133]

footsteps and poverty, so do with the blessing of the Lord God and in my obedience. And if it be necessary for thee on account of thy soul or other consolation and thou wishest, Leo, to come to me, come! [*1]

Footnotes

^130:1 See Gli Autografi di Francesco, by Mgr. Faloci (Misc. Franc., t. VI, p. 33), and La Calligrafia di S. Francesco, by the same author (Misc. Franc., t. VII, p. 67).

^130:2 The Blessing given to Brother Leo (see below, Part III).

^131:1 See, for example, the parallel Latin and Italian text given by Father Bernardo da Fivizzano, O.M.Cap., in his edition of the Oposculi (Florence, 1880), which reads: "F. Leo Frater Franciscus tuus salutem et pacem."

^131:2 "Ce pluriel montre bien que Frere Leon avait parle au nom d'un groupe."--Sabatier: Vie de S. Francois, p. 301.

^131:3 When he caused any letters to be written by way of salutation or admonition, he would not suffer any letter or syllable [p. 132] in them to be erased, though they were often superfluous or unsuitably placed. (See 1 Cel. 82.)

^132:1 See Eccleston: De Adventu Minorum in Angliam (Mon. Germ. hist., Scriptores, t. XXVIII, p. 563), although another reading is given in the Anal. Franc., t. I, p. 232, and by Fr. Cuthbert, O.S.F.C., The Friars, etc., p. 267.

^132:2 Fr. Ubald d'Alencon, Opuscules, p. 23.

^132:3 See Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), p. lxiv, note 3.

^132:4 Opuscula, Epist. XVI.

^132:5 Misc. Franc., t. VI, p. 39.

^133:1 It is interesting to compare with this letter the somewhat similar expressions of encouragement used by St. Francis to Brother Richer. See 1 Cel. 1, 49; Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), c. 2 and 16; Actus B. Francisci, c. 36 and 39.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 134] [p. 135]

  

PART III

[p. 136]

  

PRAYERS OF ST. FRANCIS

[p. 137]

  

I.

  

THE PRAISES.

THIS opuscule is composed of two parts: a paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer and the Praises properly so-called. It is contained in all the early MS. collections of St. Francis' works [*1] either in its entirety as it is given here, or in part--that is, the Paraphrase without the Praises or vice versa. With the exception of a single codex which attributes the paternity of this paraphrase to the Blessed Brother Giles, [*2] the third companion of St. Francis, the MSS. authorities are unanimous in ascribing the entire work to St. Francis. This fact, taken in conjunction with the internal argument in its favor, puts the authority of the Praises beyond doubt, in the opinion of the Quaracchi editors. M. Sabatier is of like mind and even expresses regret [*3] that Professor Boehmer [*4] should have been

[p. 138]

misled into classing the Praises as doubtful or unauthentic. Those who accept the French critic's views as to the value of his Speculum Perfectionis will find in that remarkable work an additional argument in favor of the genuinity of the complete opuscule now engaging our attention. In particular M. Sabatier applies to the present Praises what is said in the Speculum of the penance imposed by St. Francis on the brothers at Portiuncula for speaking idle words. [*1]

The Quaracchi Fathers have edited the text of the Praises according to the Assisian, Antonian, and Isidorean (1/25) MSS. and have collated these early versions with the editions of the Praises given in the Monumenta (fol. 275 v), Firmamenta (fol. 18 v), and the Liber Conformitatum (fruct. xii, P. II, c. vi). [*2] The result of their labors is here translated as follows:--

[p. 139]

  

PRAISES.

Here are begun the Praises which the most blessed Father Francis composed; and he said them at all the Hours of the day and night and before the Office of the Blessed Virgin Mary, beginning thus: "Our Father, most holy, who art in heaven," etc., with "Glory be to the Father." Then the Praises, Holy, Holy, etc., are to be said. [*1]

Our Father, most holy, our Creator, Redeemer, and Comforter.

Who art in heaven, in the angels and in the saints illuminating them unto knowledge, for Thou, O Lord, art light; inflaming them unto love, for Thou, O Lord, art Love; dwelling in them and filling them with blessedness, for Thou, O Lord, art the highest Good, the eternal Good from whom is all good and without whom is no good.

Hallowed be Thy Name: may Thy knowledge shine in us that we may know the breadth of Thy benefits, the length of Thy promises, the height of Thy majesty, and the depth of Thy judgments. [*2]

Thy Kingdom come, that Thou mayest reign in us by grace and mayest make us come to Thy Kingdom, where there is the clear vision of Thee,

[p. 140]

the perfect love of Thee, the blessed company of Thee, the eternal enjoyment of Thee.

Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven, that we may love Thee with the whole heart by always thinking of Thee; with the whole soul by always desiring Thee; with the whole mind by directing all our intentions to Thee and seeking Thy honor in all things and with all our strength, by spending all the powers and senses of body and soul in the service of Thy love and not in anything else; and that we may love our neighbors even as ourselves, drawing to the best of our power all to Thy love; rejoicing in the good of others as in our own and compassionating [them] in troubles and giving offence to no one.

Give us this day, through memory and understanding and reverence for the love which He had for us and for those things which He said, did, and suffered, for us,--our daily bread, Thy Beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.

And forgive us our trespasses, by Thy ineffable mercy in virtue of the Passion of Thy Beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the merits and intercession of the most Blessed Virgin Mary and of all Thy elect.

As we forgive their that trespass against us, and what we do not fully forgive, do Thou, O Lord, make us fully forgive, that for Thy sake we may truly love our enemies and devoutly intercede for them with Thee; that we may render no evil for evil, but in Thee may strive to do good to all.

[p. 141]

And lead us not into temptation, hidden or visible, sudden or continuous.

But deliver us from evil, past, present, and to come. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

 

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, who is and who was and who is to come. [*1] Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever. [*2]

Worthy art Thou, O Lord, our God, to receive praise, glory and honor, and benediction. [*3] Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

The Lamb that was slain is worthy to receive power and divinity and wisdom and strength and honor and benediction. [*4] Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

Let us bless the Father and the Son with the Holy Ghost. Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. [*5] Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

Give praise to God all ye His servants and you that fear Him, little and great. [*6] Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

Let the heavens and the earth praise Him, the Glorious, and every creature which is in heaven and on earth and under the earth, in the seas and all that are in them. [*7] Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

[p. 142]

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be world without end. Amen. Let us praise and exalt Him above all forever.

Prayer.

Almighty, most holy, most high, and supreme God, highest good, all good, wholly good, who alone art good. To Thee we render all praise, all glory, all thanks, all honor, all blessing, and we shall always refer all good to Thee. Amen.

Footnotes

^137:1 It is found in the Assisi MS. 338 and in the compilation beginning Fac secundum exemplar contained in the Berlin, Lemberg, Liegnitz MSS. and the Vatican codex 4354, as well as in the other family of MSS. represented by the Ognissanti and Foligno MSS. and the codices of St. Isidore's (1/25) and the Vatican 7650.

^137:2 A fourteenth century codex at St. Isidore's Rome (MS. 1/73, fol. 10 v). But I have not found it in any of the collections of Brother Giles' Dicta which I have had occasion to consult in preparing the new English version of the same I hope soon to publish.

^137:3 See Opuscules, fasc. x, pp. 136-537. As a postscript to his Examen M. Sabatier gives the text of the paraphrase of the Our Father after the rare edition of the Speculum (Morin).

^137:4 See Analekten, p. 75.

^138:1 "He also ordained and ordered it to be strictly observed that any friar who either when doing nothing or at work with the others, uttered idle words, shall say one Our Father, praising God at the beginning and end of the prayer; and if conscious of his fault he accuse himself, he shall say the one Our Father and the Praises of the Lord for his own soul. . . . And if on reliable testimony he is shown to have used idle words, he shall repeat the Praises of the Lord at the beginning and at the end aloud so as to be heard and understood by the surrounding friars," etc. Further on we read: "The Praises of the Lord the most Blessed Father always said himself, and with ardent desire taught and impressed upon the friars that they should carefully and devotedly say the same." See Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), c. 82. I have quoted this passage from Lady de la Warr's translation, pp. 121-122. See also Opuscules, fasc. x, p. 137, where M. Sabatier, speaking of the relation of the Speculum to the Praises, says: "Les deux documents se correspondent, se corroborent et se garantissent l'un l'autre."

^138:2 The Conformities, edition of 1510, gives the complete text as the handiwork of St. Francis.

^139:1 Such is the rubric which precedes the Praises in the Assisian MS.

^139:2 See Eph. 3: 18.

^141:1 See Apoc. 4: 8.

^141:2 See Dan. 3: 57.

^141:3 See Apoc. 4: 11.

^141:4 See Apoc. 5: 12.

^141:5 See Dan. 3: 57.

^141:6 See Apoc. 19: 5.

^141:7 See Apoc. 5: 13.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

II.

  

SALUTATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN.

This little prayer enjoys the same title to authenticity as the preceding opuscule, and Professor Boehmer [*1] and M. Sabatier [*2] are in complete accord with the Quaracchi editors as to its genuinity. With the exception of the Assisi codex, it is found in all the early MS. collections containing the Praises. The text here translated is based on the MS. at Ognissanti and St. Isidore's (1/25), which were collated by the Quaracchi editors with the versions given in the Conformities (fruct. xii, P. II, c. v.) and the Speculum B. Francisci (ed. 1 and 2, fol. 127 r).

  

SALUTATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. [*3]

Hail, holy Lady, most holy Queen, Mother of God, Mary who art ever Virgin, chosen from Heaven by the most Holy Father, whom He has consecrated with the most holy beloved Son and the Ghostly Paraclete, in whom was and is all the fulness of grace and all good. Hail thou His palace! [*4] Hail thou His tabernacle.! [*5] Hail thou His house. Hail thou His garment! Hail thou His handmaid! Hail thou His Mother and all ye holy virtues which by the grace and

[p. 144]

illumination of the Holy Ghost thou infusest in the heart of the faithful, that from infidels ye mayest make them faithful to God. [*1]

Footnotes

^143:1 Analekten, p. xxvii.

^143:2 Opuscules, fasc. x, p. 134.

^143:3 The text given by Wadding (Opusc., p. 105) was copied by him from an Irish MS. at Salamanca.

^143:4 Cod. Is. omits from "Hail thou His tabernacle" to "Hail thou His handmaid," inclusive.

^143:5 Wadding omits from "Hail thou His house" to " Hail thou His handmaid," inclusive.

^144:1 The text of the Conformities and Wadding here add the second part of the antiphon given below in the Office of the Passion beginning "Mother of our most Holy Lord Jesus Christ," etc. In the Speculum (ed. Morin, 1509) this Salutation is followed by another prayer to the Blessed Virgin (see Sabatier, Opuscules, fasc. x, p. 164); but from the beginning of the seventeenth century, the second prayer is no longer found in the text of the Speculum (see the edition of Spoelberch, P. I, pp. 176-178, and Wadding, Opusc., p. 107). In the opinion of Professor Boehmer this Salutation ought to follow immediately after the Salutation of the Virtues given above (<page 20>). See his Analekten, pp. vi and xxviii. They are found in this order in the Spec. Vitae of 3504 and the Vatican MS. 4354.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 145]

  

III.

  

PRAYER TO OBTAIN DIVINE LOVE.

The authenticity of this prayer, accepted by the Quaracchi editors, rests on the authority of St. Bernardine of Siena [*1] and Ubertino da Casale, [*2] both of whom are quoted in its behalf by Wadding. The prayer is here translated according to the text given by Ubertino in his Arbor Vitae Crucifixae composed on La Verna in 1305. [*3] It follows:--

  

PRAYER.

I beseech Thee, O Lord, that the fiery and sweet strength of Thy love may absorb my soul from all things that are under heaven, that I may die for love of Thy love as Thou didst deign to die for love of my love.

Footnotes

^145:1 St. Bernardine died in 1444. See his Opera Omnia, t. II, sermo 60, art. II, c. II.

^145:2 See Arbor Vitae, l. v, c. iv.

^145:3 See Ehrle, Archiv, etc., vol. II, pp. 374-416, as to the writings of Ubertino.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

IV.

  

THE SHEET WHICH ST. FRANCIS GAVE BROTHER LEO.

The earliest witness to this document is Thomas of Celano, who in his Second Life (written about 1247) records that "while the Saint was remaining secluded in his cell on Mount La Verna, one of the companions conceived a great desire to have some memorial from words of the Lord written by the hand of St. Francis and briefly annotated by him. . . . One day Blessed Francis called him, saying, 'Bring me paper and ink, for I wish to write the words of God and His praises which I have been meditating in my heart.' What he asked for being straightway brought, he writes with his own hand the praises of God and the words which he [his companion] wished, and lastly a blessing of the brother, saying: 'Take this sheet (chartulam) for thyself and until the day of thy death guard it carefully.' All temptation was at once driven away; the letter is kept and worked wonders for the time to come." [*1]

The original autograph of the sheet here described by Celano is reverently preserved in the sacristy of the Sacro Convento at Assisi. [*2] It has been mentioned in the archives of the convent since 1348 and is borne in procession annually at the opening of the feast of the "Perdono" or Portiuncula Indulgence. Many pages have been consecrated by scholars [*3] to

[p. 147]

this small, crumpled piece of parchment and as they are easily accessible it would be superfluous to touch here upon the controversial minutiae connected with it. Suffice it to say that on the reverse side of the sheet containing the Praises is found the Biblical blessing. The latter was dictated to Brother Leo, but at the bottom St. Francis himself wrote the personal blessing, adding what Wadding described as a "large and mysterious thau or letter T" which he was wont to use as his signature, as both Celano [*1] and St. Bonaventure [*2] inform us.

To authenticate this relic Brother Leo himself added to it three notes; the first reads: "Blessed Francis wrote with his own hand this blessing for me, Brother Leo;" and the second: "In like manner he made this sign thau together with the head with his own hand." More valuable still is the third annotation, since it fixes the date of this precious document. I give it in full: "Blessed Francis two years before his death kept a Lent in the place of Mount La Verna in honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of the Lord, and of the blessed Michael the Archangel, from the feast of the Assumption of the

[p. 148]

holy Virgin Mary until the September feast of St. Michael. And the hand of the Lord was laid upon him; after the vision and speech of the Seraph and the impression of the Stigmata of Christ in his body he made and wrote with his own hand the Praises written on the other side of the sheet, giving thanks to the Lord for the benefits conferred on him."

An examination of the original autograph shows that, while the side of the sheet containing the Blessing is excellently preserved, the other one on which the Praises are written, is, for the most part, illegible and in consequence some variants are to be found in different MS. versions of it. After a careful collation of these MSS. with the autograph, the Quaracchi editors found the Assisi codex 344 more conformable to the original than any other. It is after this fourteenth century MS. of the library of the Sacro Convento and which appears to have been copied from the autograph, that the Quaracchi editors published the text which I now translate:--

  

PRAISES OF GOD.

Thou art holy, Lord God, who alone workest wonders. Thou art strong. Thou art great. Thou art most high. Thou art the Almighty King, Thou, holy Father, King of heaven and earth. Thou art the Lord God Triune and One; all good. Thou art good, all good, highest good, Lord God living and true. Thou art charity, love [*1] Thou art wisdom. Thou art humility. Thou art patience. Thou art security. Thou art quietude. Thou art joy and gladness. Thou

Click to enlarge

AUTOGRAPH BLESSING GIVEN BY ST. FRANCIS TO BROTHER LEO, PRESERVED IN THE SACRO CONVENTO AT ASSISI. (See page <page 146>.)

[p. 149]

art justice and temperance. Thou art all riches to sufficiency. [*1] Thou art beauty. Thou art meekness. Thou art protector. Thou art guardian and defender. Thou art strength. Thou art refreshment. Thou art our hope. Thou art l our faith. Thou art our great sweetness. Thou art our eternal life, great and admirable Lord, God Almighty, merciful Saviour.

After this expression of the mystical ardors which consumed the Poverello comes:--

  

THE BLESSING OF BROTHER LEO.

May the Lord bless thee and keep thee. May He shew His face to thee and have mercy on thee. May He turn His countenance to thee and give thee peace. [*2] Brother LeTo [*3] may the Lord bless thee.

Footnotes

^146:1 2 Cel. 2, 18; see also Bonav. Leg. Maj., XI, 9, where the narration is clearly borrowed from Celano.

^146:2 A photograph of the reliquary containing it is here reproduced.

^146:3 For example Papini La Storia di S. Francesco, t. I, p. 130, n. 8, Grisar, see Civilta Cattolica, fasc. 1098 (1896), p. 723; Mgr. Faloci Pulignani, Misc. Franc., t. VI (1895), p. 34; Fr. [p. 147] Edouard d'Alencon, La Benediction de St. Francois; M. Sabatier, Spec. Perf., pp. lxvii-lxx; Reginald Balfour, The Seraphic Keepsake; and Montgomery Carmichael, La Benedizione di San Francesco. See also Fr. Saturnino da Caprese, O.F.M., Guida Illustrate della Verna (Prato, 1902), p. 93. On the testimony of three leading German palaeographers, Wattenbach, Dziatzko and Meyer, see Theol. Literatur-Zeitung, Leipzig, 1895, PP. 404 and 627.

^147:1 Says Celano: "The sign thau was more familiar to him than other signs. With it only he signed sheets for despatch and he painted it on the walls of the cells anywhere." See Tr. de Miraculis, in Anal. Boll., t. xviii, pp. 114-115.

^147:2 "He signed it upon all the letters he directed." See Bonav. Leg. Maj., IV, 3.

^148:1 These words seem to he transposed in the autograph.

^149:1 From this point to the end of the Praises the autograph is illegible.

^149:2 See Num. 6: 24-26.

^149:3 Mr. Balfour points out that the position of. Leo's name in relation to the thau is intentional and that the thau thus becomes a cross of blessing, St. Francis, following the practice of all old Missals and Breviaries, having placed it so as to divide the name of the person blessed. See The Seraphic Keepsake, p. 106.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

V.

  

THE CANTICLE OF THE SUN.

Of the several "cantica in vulgari" which St. Francis composed, the only one that has come down to us, as far as is known, is the "Praises of the Creatures," or, as it is now more commonly called, "The Canticle of the Sun." Celano, who alludes to this laud, says of St. Francis that he was of the race of Ananias, Azarias and Misael, inviting all creatures with him to glorify Him who made them. [*1] It is this side of St. Francis' thoughts which finds expression in the Canticle; and in this particular order of ideas modern religious poetry has never produced anything comparable to this sublime improvisation into which have passed alike "all the wealth of the Saint's imagination and all the boldness of his genius." [*2] Tradition tells us that Fra Pacifico had a hand in the embellishment of this laud, [*3] about which a whole controversial literature has grown. [*4] Some light may perhaps be thrown on this delicate question in the new critical edition of the Canticle promised by Luigi Suttina.

The Canticle appears to have been composed toward the close of the year 1225 in a poor little hut near the Monastery of San Damiano, whither St.

[p. 151]

[paragraph continues] Francis had retired on account of his infirmities, and, if we may believe the tradition which finds formal expression in the Speculum Perfectionis, two strophes were subsequently added by the Saint to the original composition,--the eighth strophe upon the occasion of a feud between the Bishop and the magistrates of Assisi, and the ninth one when the Saint recognized the approach of death. M. Renan, with what Canon Knox Little [*1] calls "his characteristic inaccuracy," asserts that we do not possess the Italian original of the Canticle, but have only an Italian translation from the Portuguese, which was in turn translated from the Spanish. [*2] And yet the original Italian text exists, as M. Sabatier notes, [*3] not only in numerous MSS. in Italy and France, notably in the Assisi MS. M 338 [*4] and at the Mazarin Library, [*5] but also in the Book of the Conformities.

The Canticle is accepted as authentic by Professors Boehmer and Goetz in their recent works on the Opuscula of St. Francis. If it does not figure in the Quaracchi edition, the reason is that the Bibliotheca Franciscana Ascetica Medii Aevi, of which the Opuscula forms part, is confined to works written in Latin, and hence M. Sabatier's animadversions on the "theological preoccupations" of the Quaracchi editors are altogether aside the mark.

The text of the Canticle here translated is that of the Assisi MS. 338 (fol. 33), from which the version

[p. 152]

given in the Conformities (pars. 2, fol. ii) [*1] differs only by some unimportant variants. The following is an attempt to render literally into English the naif rhythm of the original Italian, which necessarily disappears in any formal rhymed translation:

[canticle]

          HERE BEGIN THE   PRAISES OF THE CREATURES WHICH THE BLESSED FRANCIS MADE TO THE PRAISE AND   HONOR OF GOD WHILE HE WAS ILL AT ST. DAMIAN'S:

     
   Most high, omnipotent, good Lord,
 Praise, glory and honor and benediction all, are Thine.
 To Thee alone do they belong, most High,
 And there is no man fit to mention Thee.

Praise be to Thee, my Lord, with all Thy creatures,
 Especially to my worshipful brother sun,
 The which lights up the day, and through him dost Thou brightness give;
 And beautiful is he and radiant with splendor great;
 Of Thee, most High, signification gives.

Praised be my Lord, for sister moon and for the stars,
 In heaven Thou hast formed them clear and precious and fair. [p. 153]

Praised be my Lord for brother wind
 And for the air and clouds and fair and every kind of weather,
 By the which Thou givest to Thy creatures nourishment.
 Praised be my Lord for sister water,
 The which is greatly helpful and humble and precious and pure.

Praised be my Lord for brother fire,
 By the which Thou lightest up the dark.
 And fair is he and gay and mighty and strong.

Praised be my Lord for our sister, mother earth,
 The which sustains and keeps us
 And brings forth diverse fruits with grass and flowers bright.

Praised be my Lord for those who for Thy love forgive
 And weakness bear and tribulation.
 Blessed those who shall in peace endure,
 For by Thee, most High, shall they be crowned.
 Praised be my Lord for our sister, the bodily death,
 From the which no living man can flee.
 Woe to them who die in mortal sin;
 Blessed those who shall find themselves in Thy most holy will,
 For the second death shall do them no ill.

Praise ye and bless ye my Lord, and give Him thanks,
 And be subject unto Him with great humility.

Footnotes

^150:1 See 2 Cel. 3, 138-139, and 1 Cel. 80.

^150:2 See Cherance, Life of St. Francis, p. 260.

^150:3 See on this head Ozanam, Les Poetes Franciscains, p. 82, and Matthew Arnold, Essays on Criticism, pp. 243-248. Mr. Arnold's translation of the Canticle is well known.

^150:4 For a list of the more important studies on it, see Speculum Perfectionis (ed. Sabatier), p. 289; L. Suttina, Appunti bibliografici di studi francescani, p. 19; also Gasparry's Italian Literature to the death of Dante, p. 358.

^151:1 See his St. Francis of Assisi, p. 235, note 2.

^151:2 See Nouvelles Etudes d'histoire religieuse, p. 331.

^151:3 Vie de S. Francois, p. xxxiv and chap. xviii.

^151:4 This text was published by Fr. Panfilo da Magliano, O.F.M., in his Storia Compendiosa, also by M. Sabatier in his Vie de S. Francois and later in his Speculum, pp. 334-35.

^151:5 Professor Boehmer published the text of the Maz. MS. 1350 in his Sonnengesang v. Fr. d'A., in 1871.

^152:1 I have had the advantage of studying two of the oldest MSS. of this work known,--those of the convents of La Verna and Portiuncula.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 154]

  

VI.

  

THE OFFICE OF THE PASSION.

Although the early biographies of St. Francis are silent as to this opuscule, its authenticity is guaranteed by the Legend of St. Clare written by Thomas of Celano toward the end of his life. [*1] In reference to the holy abbess' devotion to the Passion we are told by Celano that she "learned and frequently recited with attachment the Office of the Cross which Francis, the lover of the Cross, had instituted." [*2] This passage was rightly understood by Wadding as referring to the Office of the Passion which many early MSS. attribute to St. Francis, and the character of which altogether squares with the Saint's writings. Composed, as it is, of a simple and devout combination of Scriptural texts, this document is at once a witness to St. Francis' ardent devotion to the Crucified and a precious example of his method of prayer. It comprises five parts:

1. For the three last days of Holy Week and for week-days throughout the year.

2. For the Paschal season.

3. For Sundays and feast-days throughout the year.

4. For Advent.

5. For Christmas and the days following, to the close of the Epiphany octave.

The text of the Office given in the Quaracchi edition is that of the Assisi MS. 338, only a few rubrical notes having been omitted. The Office may also be

[p. 155]

found in MSS. at Oxford, [*1] Berlin, [*2] and Liegnitz [*3] already described. [*4] It has never before, so far as I know, been translated into English. Here it is:--

  

OFFICE OF THE PASSION OF THE LORD.

Here begin the Psalms which our most blessed Father Francis arranged to reverence and recall and praise the Passion of the Lord. And they begin from Compline on Maundy Thursday because on that night our Lord Jesus Christ was betrayed and taken captive. And note that the Blessed Francis was wont to say this office thus: First he said the Prayer which the Lord and Master taught us: Our Father most holy, [*5] with the Praises, to wit, Holy, Holy, Holy. [*6] When he had finished the Praises with the Prayer he began this antiphon, namely: Holy Mary. First he said the Psalms of the holy Virgin; besides he said other Psalms which he had selected, and at the end of all the Psalms which he said, he said the Psalms of the Passion, the Psalm being finished he said the antiphon, namely, Holy Virgin Mary. When this antiphon was finished, the office was completed.

I.--AT COMPLINE.

Ant. Holy Virgin Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 55: 9. O God, I have declared to Thee my life; Thou hast set my tears in Thy sight.

[p. 156]

Ps. 40: 8. All my enemies devised evils against me.

Ps. 70: 10. They have consulted together.

Ps. 108: 5. And they have repaid me evil for good and hatred for my love.

Ps. 108: 4. Instead of making me a return of love they detracted me; but I gave myself to prayer.

Ps. 21: 12. My holy Father, King of heaven and earth, depart not from me; for tribulation is near and there is none to help.

Ps. 55: 10. When I cry unto Thee, then shall mine enemies be turned back; behold I know that thou art my God.

Ps. 37: 12. My friends and my neighbors have drawn near and stood against me; and they that were near me stood afar off.

Ps. 87: 9. Thou hast put away my acquaintance far from me; they have set me an abomination to them; I was delivered up and came not forth.

Ps. 21: 20. Holy Father, remove not Thy help far from me: My God, look toward my help.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord, the God of my salvation,--Glory be. Holy Virgin Mary, there is none like unto Thee born in the world among women, daughter and handmaid

[p. 157]

of the most high King, the heavenly Father! Mother of our most holy Lord Jesus Christ, Spouse of the Holy Ghost; pray for us, with St. Michael Archangel, and all the Virtues of heaven, and all the Saints, to thy most holy, beloved Son, our Lord and Master. Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning is now and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Note that the foregoing antiphon is said at all the Hours and it is said for antiphon, chapter, hymn, versicle, and prayer, and at Matins and at all the Hours likewise. He said nothing else in them except this antiphon with its Psalms. At the completion of the office Blessed Francis always said: Let us bless the Lord God living and true; let us refer praise, glory, honor, blessing and all praise to Him, always. Amen. Amen. Fiat. Fiat.

 

AT MATINS.

Ant. Holy Virgin Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 87: 2. O Lord, the God of my salvation, I have cried in the day and night before Thee.

Ps. 87: 3. Let my prayer come in before Thee; incline Thy ear to my petition.

Ps. 68: 19. Attend to my soul and deliver it: save me because of my enemies.

[p. 158]

Ps. 21: 10. For Thou art He that hast drawn me out of the womb; my hope from the breasts of my mother;

Ps. 21: 11. I was cast upon Thee from the womb. From my mother's womb Thou art my God;

Ps. 21: 12. Depart not from me.

Ps. 68: 20. Thou knowest my reproach and my confusion and my shame.

Ps. 68: 21. In Thy sight are all they that afflict me: my heart hath expected reproach and misery.
 And I looked for one that would grieve together with me, but there was none, and for one that would comfort me and I found none.

Ps. 85: 14. O God, the wicked are risen up against me and the assembly of the mighty have sought my soul; and they have not set Thee before their eyes.

Ps. 87: 5. I am counted among them that go down to the pit; I am become as a man without help,

Ps. 87: 6. free among the dead.
 Thou art my Father, most holy, my king and my God.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord God of my salvation.

[p. 159]

AT PRIME.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 56: 1. Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; for my soul trusteth in Thee.

Ps. 56: 2. And in the shadow of Thy wings will I hope, until iniquity pass away.

Ps. 56: 3. I will cry to my most holy Father, the Most High: to God, who hath done good to me;

Ps. 56: 4. He hath sent from heaven and delivered me; He hath made them a reproach that trod upon me.
 God hath sent His power and His truth.

Ps. 17: 18. He delivered me from my strongest enemies and from them that hated me; for they were too strong for me.

Ps. 56: 7. They prepared a snare for my feet; and they bowed down my soul; they dug a pit before my face; and they are fallen into it.

Ps. 56: 8. My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready; I will sing, and rehearse a psalm.

Ps. 56: 9. Arise, O my glory, arise psaltery and harp;
 I will arise early.

[p. 160]

Ps. 56: 10. I will give praise to Thee, O Lord, among the people; I will sing a psalm to Thee among the nations;

Ps. 56: 11. For Thy mercy is magnified even to the heavens; and Thy truth unto the clouds.

Ps. 56: 12. Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and Thy glory above all the earth.

 

AT TIERCE.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 55: 2. Have mercy on me, O God, for man hath trodden me under foot; all the day long he hath afflicted me, fighting against me.

Ps. 55: 3. My enemies have trodden on me all the day long; for they are many that make war against me.

Ps. 40: 8. All my enemies devised evil against me;

Ps. 70: Jo. they have taken counsel together.

Ps. 40: 7. They went out and spoke to the same purpose.

Ps. 21: 8. All they that saw me have laughed me to scorn; they have spoken with the lips and wagged the head.

Ps. 21: 7. But I am a worm and no man, a

[p. 161]

reproach of men and outcast of the people.

Ps. 30: 12. I am become a reproach among all my enemies and very much to my neighbors; and a fear to my acquaintance.

Ps. 21: 20. Holy Father, remove not Thy help far from me; my God, look toward my defense.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord God of my salvation. Glory be, etc.

 

AT SEXT.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 141: 2. L cried to the Lord, with my voice; with my voice I made my supplication to the Lord.

Ps. 141: 3. I pour out my prayer in His sight; and before Him I declare my trouble.

Ps. 141: 4. When my spirit failed me, then Thou knewest my paths. In this way wherein I walked, they have hidden a snare for me.

Ps. 141: 5. I looked on my right-hand, and beheld, and there was no one that would know me. Flight hath failed me; and there is no one that hath regard to my soul.

[p. 162]

Ps. 68: 8. Because for Thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my face.

Ps. 68: 9. I am become a stranger to my brethren; and an alien to the sons of my mother.

Ps. 68: 10. Holy Father, the zeal of Thy house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached Thee are fallen upon me.

Ps. 34: 15. And they rejoiced against me and gathered together; scourges were gathered together upon me and I knew not.

Ps. 68: 5. They are multiplied above the hairs of my head who hate me without cause;
 My enemies are grown strong who have wrongfully persecuted me; then did pay I that which I took not away.

Ps. 34: 11. Unjust witnesses rising up, have asked me things I knew not.

Ps. 34: 12. They repaid me evil for good and

Ps. 37: 21. detracted me; because I followed goodness.
 Thou art my Father, most holy; my King and my God.

Ps. 37: 23. Attend unto my help, O Lord God of my salvation.

[p. 163]

 

AT NONES.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Lam. 1: 12. O all ye that pass by, attend and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow.

Ps. 21: 17. For many dogs have encompassed me; the council of the malignant hath besieged me.

Ps. 21: 18. They looked and stared upon me;

Ps. 21: 19. they parted my garments among them and upon my vesture cast lots.

Ps. 21: 17. They have dug my hands and my feet;

Ps. 21: 18. they numbered all my bones.

Ps. 21: 14. They have opened their mouth against me: as a lion ravening and roaring.

Ps. 21: 15. I am poured out like water and all my bones are scattered.
 And my heart is become like melting wax in the midst of my bowels.

Ps. 21: 16. My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue hath cleaved to my jaws.

Ps. 68: 22. And they gave me gall for my food: and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.

Ps. 21: 16. And Thou hast brought me into the dust of death;

[p. 164]

Ps. 68: 27. and they have added to the grief of my wounds.
 I slept and rose again; and my most holy Father received me with glory.

Ps. 72: 24. Holy Father, Thou hast held my right hand; and by Thy will Thou hast conducted me and hast received me with glory.

Ps. 72: 25. For what have I in heaven; and besides Thee what do I desire upon earth?

Ps. 45: 11. Be still and see that I am God, saith the Lord; I will be exalted among the nations and I will be exalted in the earth.
 Blessed is the Lord God of Israel,

Ps. 33: 23. who has redeemed the souls of His servants with His own most holy Blood; and none of them that trust in Him shall offend.

Ps. 95: 13. And we know that He cometh; for He will come to judge justice.

 

AT VESPERS.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 46: 2. O clap your hands, all ye nations, shout unto God with the voice of joy.

[p. 165]

Ps. 46: 3. For the Lord is high, terrible: He is a great king over all the earth.
 For the most holy Father of heaven, our King, before ages sent His beloved Son from on high:

Ps. 73: 12. and hath wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Ps. 95: 11. Let the heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad, let the sea be moved and the fulness thereof:

Ps. 95: 12. the fields and all that are in them shall be joyful.

Ps. 95: 1. Sing unto Him a new canticle; sing unto the Lord, all the earth.

Ps. 95: 4. For the Lord is great and exceedingly to be praised;
 He is to be feared above all gods.

Ps. 95: 7. Bring to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the gentiles, bring to the Lord glory and honor.

Ps. 95: 8. Bring to the Lord glory unto His Name.
 Bring your own bodies and bear His holy cross; and follow His most holy precepts even unto the end.

Ps. 95: 9. Let all the earth be moved at His presence;

Ps. 95: 10. say among the gentiles that the Lord hath reigned.

[p. 166]

It is said up to this place daily from Good Friday until the feast of the Ascension. On the feast of the Ascension, however, these versicles are added over and above:

And He ascended unto heaven; and sitteth on the right-hand of the most Holy Father in heaven.

Ps. 56: 12. Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; and Thy glory above all the earth.

Ps. 95: 13. And we know that He cometh: for He will come to judge justice.

And note that from the Ascension until the Advent of the Lord this Psalm is said daily in the same manner, namely: "O clap your hands," with the foregoing versicles, "Glory be to the Father" being said where the Psalm ends, namely, "for He will come to judge with justice."

Note that the foregoing Psalms are said from Good Friday until Easter Sunday: they are said in the same manner from the octave of Whitsunday until the Advent of the Lord and from the octave of the Epiphany until Maundy Thursday, [*1] except on Sundays, and the principal feasts, on which they are not said: on the other days however they are said daily.

HOLY SATURDAY AT COMPLINE.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 69: 2. O God, etc. (Ps. 69), as in the Psalter.

It is said daily at Compline until the octave of Pentecost.

[p. 167]

 

EASTER SUNDAY AT MATINS.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 97: 1. Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle: for He hath done wonderful things. His right hand hath sanctified His Son; and His arm is holy.

Ps. 97: 2. The Lord hath made known His salvation; He hath revealed His justice in the sight of the gentiles.

Ps. 41: 9. In the day time the Lord hath commanded His mercy: and a canticle to Him in the night.

Ps. 117: 24. This is the day which the Lord hath made: let us rejoice and be glad in it.

Ps. 117: 26. Blessed be He that cometh in the name of the Lord.

Ps. 117: 27. The Lord is God and He hath shone upon us.

Ps. 95: 11. Let the heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad: let the sea be moved and the fulness thereof.

Ps. 95: 12. The fields shall rejoice and all that are in them.

Ps. 95: 7. Bring to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the gentiles, bring to the Lord glory and honor:

Ps. 95: 8. bring to the Lord glory unto His Name.

[p. 168]

It is said up to this place daily from Easter Sunday to the feast of the Ascension at all the Hours except at Vespers and Compline and Prime. On the night of the Ascension these verses are added:--

Ps. 67: 33. Sing ye to God, ye kingdoms of the earth: sing ye to the Lord: sing ye to God,

Ps. 67: 34. who mounteth above the heaven of heavens to the east. Behold He will give to His voice the voice of power:

Ps. 67: 35. give ye glory to God for Israel: His magnificence and His power is in the clouds.

Ps. 67: 36. God is wonderful in His saints: the God of Israel is He who will give power and strength to His people. Blessed be God.

And note that this Psalm is said daily from the Ascension of the Lord until the octave of Whitsunday with the foregoing versicles at Matins and Tierce and Sext and Nones: "Glory be to the Father," being said where "Blessed be God " is said, and not elsewhere. Also note that it is said in the same manner only at Matins on Sundays and the principal feasts, from the octave of Whitsunday until Maundy Thursday because on that day the Lord ate the Pasch with His disciples, or the other Psalm may be said at Matins or at Vespers when one wishes, to wit, "I will extol Thee, O Lord," as it is in the Psalter, and this from Easter Sunday to the feast of the Ascension and not longer.

 

AT PRIME.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. Have mercy on me, etc.--as above, p. <page 159>.

[p. 169]

 

AT TIERCE, SEXT AND NONES.

Psalm. Sing ye to the Lord, etc.--as above, p. <page 167>.

 

AT VESPERS.

Psalm. O clap your hands, etc.--as above, p. <page 164>.

Here begin the other psalms which our most blessed Father Francis likewise arranged which are to be said in place of the foregoing psalms of the Passion of the Lord on Sunday and the principal festivities from the octave of Whitsunday until Advent and from the octave of the Epiphany until Maundy Thursday.

 

AT COMPLINE.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. O God, etc. (Ps. 69),--as it is in the Psalter.

 

AT MATINS.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. Sing ye to the Lord, etc.,--as above, p. <page 167>.

 

AT PRIME.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. Have mercy on me, etc.,--as above, p. <page 159>.

 

AT TIERCE.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 65: 1. Shout with joy to God, all the earth.

Ps. 65: 2. Sing ye a Psalm to His name: give glory to His praise.

Ps. 65: 3. Say unto God, How terrible are Thy works, O Lord: in the multitude

[p. 170]

of Thy strength Thy enemies shall lie to Thee.

Ps. 65: 4. Let all the earth adore Thee and sing to Thee: let it sing a psalm to Thy Name.

Ps. 65: 16. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what great things He hath done for my soul.

Ps. 65: 17. I cried to Him with my mouth: and I extolled Him with my tongue.

Ps. 17: 7. And He heard my voice from His holy temple: and my cry came before Him.

Ps. 65: 8. O bless our God, ye gentiles: and make the voice of His praise to be heard.

Ps. 71: 17. And in him shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed: all nations shall magnify Him.

Ps. 71: 18. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only doth wonderful things.

Ps. 71: 19. And blessed be the Name of His majesty forever: and the whole earth shall be filled with His majesty. Amen. Amen.

 

AT SEXT.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 19: 2. May the Lord hear thee in the day of tribulation: may the Name of the God of Jacob protect thee: may He

[p. 171]

Ps. 19: 3. send thee help from the sanctuary and defend thee out of Sion:

Ps. 19: 4. be mindful of all thy sacrifices, and may thy whole burnt-offering be made fat;

Ps. 19: 5. Give thee according to thy own heart, and confirm all thy counsels.

Ps. 19: 6. We will rejoice in thy salvation; and in the Name of our God we shall be exalted.

Ps. 19: 7. The Lord fulfil all thy petitions: now I know that the Lord hath sent Jesus Christ His Son,

Ps. 9: 9. and will judge the people with justice.

Ps. 9: 10. And the Lord is become a refuge for the poor: a helper in due time of tribulation.

Ps. 9: 11. And let them trust in Thee who know Thy Name.

Ps. 143: 1. Blessed be the Lord my God:

Ps. 58: 17. for Thou art become my support and refuge in the day of my trouble.

Ps. 58: 18. Unto Thee, O my helper, will I sing: for God is my defence, my God, my mercy.

 

AT NONES.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 70: 1. In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped, let me never be put to confusion.

[p. 172]

Ps. 70: 2. Deliver me in Thy justice and rescue me: incline Thine ear unto and save me.

Ps. 70: 3. Be Thou unto me, O God, a protector and a place of strength: that Thou mayest make me safe.

Ps. 70: 5. For Thou art my patience, O Lord; my hope, O Lord, from my youth.

Ps. 70: 6. By Thee have I been confirmed from the womb, from my mother's womb Thou art my protector: of Thee I shall continually sing.

Ps. 70: 8. Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may sing Thy glory; Thy greatness all the day long.

Ps. 68: 17. Hear me, O Lord, for Thy mercy is kind; look upon me according to the multitude of Thy tender mercies.

Ps. 68: 18. And turn not away Thy face from Thy servant; for I am in trouble, hear me speedily.

Ps. 143: 1. Blessed be the Lord my God.

Ps. 58: 17. For Thou art become my support and refuge in the day of my trouble.

Ps. 58: 18. Unto Thee, O my helper, will I sing; for God is my defence, my God, my mercy.

 

AT VESPERS.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. O clap your hands. . . as above, p. <page 164>.

[p. 173]

Here begin other Psalms which our most blessed Father Francis likewise arranged; which are to be said in place of the foregoing Psalms of the Passion of the Lord from the Advent of the Lord until Christmas eve and not longer.

 

AT COMPLINE.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. How long, O Lord (Ps. 12), as it is found in the Psalter.

 

AT MATINS.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 85: 12. I will praise Thee, O Lord, most Holy Father, King of heaven and earth; because

Ps. 85: 17. Thou hast comforted me.

Ps. 24: 5. Thou art God my Saviour.

Ps. 11: 6. I will deal confidently and will not fear.

Ps. 117: 14. The Lord is my strength and my praise; and is become my salvation.

Exod. 15: 6. Thy right hand, O Lord, is magnified in strength;
 Thy right hand, O Lord, hath slain the enemy:

Exod. 15: 7. And in the multitude of Thy glory Thou hast put down Thy adversaries.

Ps. 68: 33. Let the poor see and rejoice: seek ye God and your soul shall live.

[p. 174]

Ps. 68: 35. Let the heavens and the earth praise Him: the sea and everything that creepeth therein.

Ps. 68: 36. For God will save Sion and the cities of Juda shall be built up.
 And they shall dwell there: and acquire it by inheritance.

Ps. 68: 37. And the seed of His servants shall possess it: and they that love His Name shall dwell therein.

 

AT PRIME.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. Have mercy on me, etc.--as above, p. <page 159>.

 

AT TIERCE.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. Shout with joy, etc.--as above, p. <page 169>.

 

AT SEXT.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. May the Lord hear thee in the day, etc.--as above, <page 170>.

 

AT NONES.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped--as above, p. <page 171>.

 

AT VESPERS.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm. O clap your hands, etc.--as above, p. <page 164>.

Also note that the whole Psalm is not said but up to the verse, "Let all the earth be moved"; understand

[p. 175]

however that the whole verse "Bring your own bodies" must be said. At the end of this verse "Glory be to the Father" is said. And thus it is said daily at Vespers from Advent until Christmas eve.

 

CHRISTMAS DAY AT VESPERS.

Ant. Holy Mary.

Psalm.

Ps. 80: 2. Rejoice to God our helper.

Ps. 46: 2. Shout unto God, living and true, with the voice of triumph.

Ps. 46: 3. For the Lord is high, terrible: a great king over all the earth.
 For the most holy Father of heaven, our king, before ages sent His Beloved Son from on high and He was born of the Blessed Virgin, holy Mary.

Ps. 88: 27. He shall cry out to me: Thou art my Father;

Ps. 88: 28. And I will make Him My Firstborn, high above the kings of the earth.

Ps. 41: 9. In the day time the Lord hath commanded His mercy: and a canticle to Him in the night.

Ps. 117: 24. This is the day which the Lord hath made: let us rejoice and be glad in it.
 For the beloved and most holy Child has been given to us and born for us by the wayside.

[p. 176]

Luke 2: 7. And laid in a manger because He had no room in the inn.

Luke 2: 14. Glory to God in the highest; and on earth peace to men of good will.

Ps. 95: 11. Let the heavens rejoice and the earth be glad, and let the sea be moved and the fulness thereof.

Ps. 95:12. The fields shall rejoice and all that are in them.

Ps. 95: 1. Sing to Him a new canticle; sing to the Lord, all the earth.

Ps. 95: 4. For the Lord is great and exceedingly to be praised: He is to be feared above all gods.

Ps. 95: 7. Bring to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the gentiles, bring to the Lord glory and honor.

Ps. 95: 8. Bring to the Lord glory unto His Name. Bring your own bodies and bear His holy cross and follow His most holy precepts even unto the end.

And note that this Psalm is said from Christmas until the octave of the Epiphany at all the Hours.

Footnotes

^154:1 It was soon after the canonization of St. Clare, about 1256, that Celano undertook the task of compiling this legend by order of Alexander IV.

^154:2 See Acta S.S., t. II, Aug., p. 761.

^155:1 See Little in Opuscules, t. I, p. 276.

^155:2 See Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), p. cxcvi.

^155:3 See Opuscules, t. I, p. 55. This MS. contains only the first part of the Office; it ends with the words the "Lord hath reigned."

^155:4 See above, p. 3-4. Other MSS. containing the Office are enumerated by Wadding. See also Boehmer's Analekten.

^155:5 See above, <page 139>.

^155:6 See above, <page 141>.

^166:1 The Oxford Codex here reads "until Easter Sunday."

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 177]

  

APPENDIX

[p. 178] [p. 179]

  

APPENDIX.

  

SOME LOST, DOUBTFUL, AND SPURIOUS WRITINGS.

DOUBTLESS we should have expected every fragment of St. Francis' writings to have been preserved with loving care throughout the ages. But when we consider the conditions under which some of them were composed and the vicissitudes they afterwards passed through, we need not be surprised if all of them have not come down to us. On the contrary. For if we may believe such writers as Ubertino da Casale, serious attempts were made in certain quarters toward the close of the thirteenth century to suppress altogether part of the Saint's writings. [*1] Be this as it may, it is certain that several of these precious documents disappeared in the course of time. Among such lost treasures we must reckon the primitive Rule of the Friars in the form approved by Innocent III in 1209. [*2] Again only two fragments seem to have survived of the "many writings" which, as has been already mentioned, St. Francis addressed to the Poor Ladies at St.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] Damian's. [*1] Whether or not either of these fragments is to be identified with a letter written by St. Francis to console the Clares, of which we read in the Speculum and the Conformities, it is well nigh impossible to determine. [*2] Celano speaks [*3] of a letter to St. Antony of Padua, different apparently from the one known to us, and of others to Cardinal Ugolino. [*4] So, too, Eccleston [*5] tells of letters written to the brothers in France and at Bologna. [*6]

As to the famous letter of St. Francis to St. Antony commissioning the latter to teach theology, there is no small diversity of opinion. It is given for the first time in the Liber Miraculorum, [*7] and also in the Chron. XXIV Generalium. [*8] M. Sabatier, who was, I believe, the first to call the authenticity of this letter into question, [*9]

[p. 181]

now seems less inclined to reject it. [*1] Professor Goetz [*2] has decided for, and Professor Boehmer [*3] against it. The Quaracchi editors, in excluding this letter from their edition of the Opuscula, by no means intended to deny that St. Francis wrote to fratri Antonio, [*4] but they were unable to determine which if any of the three different forms of this letter now in circulation might be the genuine one. Since the matter is sub judice, [*5] so to say, I think, with Mr. Carmichael, this letter might find a place among the "Doubtful Works" of St. Francis. [*6]

Apropos of the Saint's doubtful works it seems proper to say a word as to the Rule of the Brothers and Sisters of Penance. Although this Rule--like that of the Clares--is wanting in all the early MS. collections of St. Francis' writings, we know from Bernard of Besse [*7] that St.

[p. 182]

[paragraph continues] Francis, with the cooperation of Cardinal Ugolino, wrote a Rule for these Tertiaries. What became of this document? It is generally conceded that the Rule of this Third Order as it stands in the Bull Supra montem of Nicholas IV in 1289 [*1] is not the handiwork of St. Francis; and for the rest the early history of the Third Order is uncertain, as all Franciscan students are aware. [*2] But what are we to think of the much older text of this Rule published by M. Sabatier in 1901, after MS. XX of the convent at Capistran in the Abruzzi? [*3] Father Mandonnet, O.P., has tried to prove that the first twelve of the thirteen chapters comprising this document discovered by M. Sabatier, represent the Rule of 1221 in its primitive state. [*4] I would fain share the opinion of the learned Dominican on this head, but the objection raised against it by the Quaracchi editors seems to me insuperable. It amounts to this: In Chapter VI,  section 4, of this Regula Antiqua there is a clear allusion to a

[p. 183]

[paragraph continues] Bull of March 30, 1228, [*1] which it is difficult to regard as an interpolation. Moreover, as Fr. Ubald d'Alencon points out, [*2] the mention of coin in circulation at Ravenna is also hard to explain in an Umbrian writer. Perhaps this document may prove to be St. Francis' Rule for Tertiaries put into legislative form, with the addition of a few minor regulations. Meanwhile, following the example of the Quaracchi editors, I have abstained from including it among the authentic writings of St. Francis. [*3]

Coming next to St. Francis' poems, although he doubtless wrote some few canticles besides the Canticle of the Sun, the two others given by Wadding can hardly be accepted as his, at least in their present form. I refer to the Amor de caritade [*4] and In foco l'amor mi mise. [*5] True, they are both attributed to St. Francis by St. Bernardine of Siena, [*6] but they are also found among the works of Jacopone da Todi, [*7] although Ozanam thinks that at most they were only retouched by the latter. [*8] The tendency nowadays is to ascribe

[p. 184]

all the early Franciscan poetry to Jacopone. When the critical edition of this extraordinary man's works is published at Quaracchi, some needed light will no doubt be thrown on this delicate question; then too, perhaps, Pacifico, the "King of Verses," and " most courtly doctor of singers," may at length come into his own. Meanwhile a number of poems found in a fifteenth century manuscript at the National Library at Naples, once at the convent of Aquila in the Abruzzi, and lately ascribed to St. Francis, are clearly apocryphal, as Professor Ildebrando della Giovanna has sufficiently demonstrated.

Wadding himself regarded the seven sermons of St. Francis he gives as of doubtful authenticity. And rightly, for they are from the work of Fr. Louis Rebolledo, already mentioned. [*1] The twenty-eight Collationes are, pace Fr. Mandonnet, who regards them as genuine, [*2] rightly rejected by Professor Goetz, who points out how Wadding compiled them from various sources. [*3] Many are translated from an Italian MS. at Fano in the Marches of which we know neither the age nor the parentage. [*4] But they seem to be mere transcripts from the early legends. Thus Collatio I is an adaptation of Celano (1, 2)

[p. 185]

and Collatio XIV is taken almost verbatim from St. Bonaventure, while Collatio V is an accommodation of Celano and St. Bonaventure; XXVI and XXVIII are abridged from the Speculum; XXIV is found in the Chron. XXI V Gen., and so on. It is therefore to the authors of these works and not to St. Francis that these conferences are to be ascribed.

At the end of his edition of the Opuscula Wadding has collected several "Prayers of St. Francis" of which the text is more than doubtful. Let us see why. Take for example the prayers said to have been used by St. Francis "at the beginning of his conversion" or "in time of sickness" or "at the elevation." One searches in vain among the early MS. collections for any trace of these prayers, nor is mention of them to be found [*1] elsewhere. As regards the prayer "to obtain Poverty," it has long been known that it was not written by St. Francis himself. Wadding found it in the Arbor Vitae (l. v., cap. iii), but Ubertino da Casale is there quoting from the Sacrum Commercium B. Francisci cum Domina Paupertate. [*2] The latter work is not an historical narrative, but an exquisite allegory in which St. Francis' own tale of his mystic espousals with the Lady Poverty is most poetically expanded by one of his

[p. 186]

followers, [*1] and consequently Ubertino did not pretend in citing such a work to give this prayer as the actual composition of Francis. [*2]

In some MS. collections and library catalogues certain works may be found ascribed to St. Francis which are obviously spurious. For example, the Epistola B. Francisci ad Fr. Bernardum, found in at least two fifteenth century codices, [*3] is nothing else but the letter of St. Bonaventure continens XXV memoralia. [*4]

Sbaralea [*5] mentions copies of a book of the "Sayings" of St. Francis as existing at Assisi and Ferrara, [*6] but a careful search has failed to reveal any trace of them. He also refers to a MS. (B. 31) in the Vallicellian Library at Rome in which "the sayings of St. Francis are found with the Rule," [*7] but this codex is also missing. In this library, however, there is a codex (B. 82, fol. 141 r) which contains a "Sermon delivered by St. Francis at the end of his life." [*8] The

[p. 187]

number of patristic citations this work contains is alone sufficient to demonstrate its spuriousness.

The Francisci Collationes cum fratribus, catalogued among the Latin MSS. of the Royal Library at Munich [*1] as being contained in a fifteenth century MS. at that library (cod. 11354), are a selection from the Dicta of the Blessed Brother Giles, as is evident from the Incipit of the prologue and the text of the first collation. [*2] Their attribution to St. Francis is therefore an error of the catalogue. The Verba S. Francisci de Paupertate, mentioned in the same catalogue as contained in Cod. 5998, fol. 189, are an excerpt from Chap. VI of the Second Rule of the Friars Minor. [*3]

This attribution of writings to St. Francis which clearly do not belong to him is rarely intentional; it is often the result of error. For the rest, it was easiest for compilers and librarians unacquainted with the authorship of certain Franciscan works, and not eager to undertake deep researches as to their origin, to ascribe them to the common father of all Franciscan literature and the source of its inspiration.

Since every new revelation of St. Francis must be a priceless gain, it is devoutly to be wished that the present energetic research work among

[p. 188]

the sources of Franciscan history may happily bring to light some of St. Francis' writings not known to us save through the formal attestation of the early legends and chronicles, or at least put us in possession of complete copies of such as have come down to us only in fragmentary form.

Meanwhile I conclude this volume by wishing its readers their full share in the blessing which St. Francis himself has promised to those who receive his words kindly: Omnes illi et illae, qui ea benigne recipient, benedicat eis Pater et Filius et Spiritus Sanctus. Amen.

Footnotes

^179:1 "Et toto conatu fuerunt solliciti annulare scripta beati patris nostri Francisci, in quibus sua intentio de observantia regulae declaratur."--See Archiv., III, pp. 168-169.

^179:2 See above, <page 26>.

^180:1 We need not despair of finding others; the Clares' archives have mostly escaped spoliation.

^180:2 See Spec. Perf. (ed. Sabatier), c. 108, and ed. Lemmens, c. 18. See also the Conformities (I, fol. 185), and above, <page 75>.

^180:3 See 2 Cel. 3, 99.

^180:4 See 1 Cel. 82. See also Leg III Soc., 67, where the Incipit of the letters is given.

^180:5 De Adventu Minorum in Angliam. See Mon. Germ. Hist., Script., t. XXVIII, p. 563, and Anal. Franc., t. I, p. 232, note 4. See also Fr. Cuthbert's translation of Eccleston, p. 64.

^180:6 Prof. Herkless in his Francis and Dominic, p. 54, cites some passages from a letter which St. Francis "wrote to his friends at Bologna " in 1228. One searches in vain for any trace of such a letter among the early collections of St. Francis' writings.

^180:7 See ed. Acta S.S., no. 20.

^180:8 See Anal. Franc., t. III, p. 132.

^180:9 Vie de S. Francois, p. 322.

^181:1 See Opuscules, fasc. x, p. 128, note 1.

^181:2 Die Quellen, etc., p. 20. He places its composition between 1222 and 1225.

^181:3 Analekten, p. vii.

^181:4 In the Liegnitz MS. and the Vatican Codex 4354 the present letter is addressed fratri Antonio episcopo meo, which corresponds with the direction given by Celano (2 Cel. 3, 99).

^181:5 On this letter see also Papini (Storia, t. I, p. 118, n. 1), Muller (Anfange, p. 103), Lempp (Zeitschrift, t. XII, pp. 425, 438), Lepitre (S. Antoine, p. 73), and de Kerval (S. Antonii, etc., p. 259, n. 1).

^181:6 Another less well known letter to St. Antony, giving him permission "to build a church near the city wall of Patti," is sometimes attributed to St. Francis. But the text is most improbable and gives rise to colossal historic difficulties. See Lepitre, S. Antoine, p. 120, note, and Fr. Edouard d'Alencon, Etudes Franc., t. XII, p. 36r.

^181:7 Liber de Laudibus in Anal. Franc., t. III, p. 686.

^182:1 The text of this Rule (which was the one in force for Franciscan Tertiaries until the promulgation of the Apostolic Constitution Misericors Dei Filius, by Leo XIII, May 30, 1883) may be found in Seraph. Legisl., pp. 77-94. For the new Rule substituted by Leo XIII, see Acta ad Tertium Franciscalem Ordinem spectantia (Quaracchi, 901), pp. 72-87.

^182:2 See Anal. Boll., t. xviii, p. 294.

^182:3 Regula Antiqua Fratrum et Sororum de Poenitentia. See Opuscules, t. I, p. 17. Boehmer also gives the text in his Analekten.

^182:4 "La regle donnee en 1221 . . . dans son etat primitif." See his Les Regles et le gouvernement de l'ordo de poenitentia au XIIIe Siecle in Opuscules, t. I, p. 175.

^183:1 The Bull Detestanda humani generis of Gregory IX.

^183:2 Opuscules de S. Francois, p. 28.

^183:3 There is an English translation of it. See Third Orders, etc., by Adderley and Marson (Mowbray, 1902).

^183:4 Rosetti translated part of this poem in his Dante and his Circle, attributing it to St. Francis.

^183:5 See Misc. Franc., 1888, pp. 96 and 190, for two interesting texts of this poem.

^183:6 Opera omnia, t. IV, sermo 16 and 4 (see Acta S.S., t. II, Oct., p. 1003).

^183:7 Jacopone, lib. VI, chap. XVI, and lib. VII, chap. VI.

^183:8 Les Poetes Franciscains, p. 90.

^184:1 See Wadding, Opusc., p. 508 ff.

^184:2 See his Les Origines de l'ordo de Poenitentia; see also the Revue Thomiste, pp. 295-314.

^184:3 Quellen, etc., XXII, 362. But see above, <page 89>, n.  also.

^184:4 "Codiculus quidam vestustus MS. Italico idiomati exaratus mihi a Fano Piceni urbe, ad Metaurum amnem extructa, transmissus." See Wadding, Opusc., p. 285.

^185:1 The text of the prayer "in time of sickness" is given by Bonav. Leg. Maj., XIV, 2.

^185:2 Latin text published in 1900 by Fr. Ed. d'Alencon, and English translation by Montgomery Carmichael (The Lady Poverty) in 1901.

^186:1 See Chron. XXIV Generalium in Anal. Franc., t. III, p. 283.

^186:2 It is none the less a pearl of Franciscan literature. See the beautiful rendering of it which forms the appendix to Mr. Carmichael's translation of the Sacrum Commercium.

^186:3 At Vicenza (Bertol. lib. cod. G. I. 10. 24, fol. 89 r), also the Capistran MS. XXI, fol. 180 r.

^186:4 See Bonav. Opera omnia, t. VIII, p. 491.

^186:5 Supplementum, p. 244.

^186:6 Liber Dictorum cujus initium Quid faciet homo et finis Oratio semper est praemittenda.

^186:7 "Dicta S. Francisci, cum regula extant," he says.

^186:8 It is entitled: "Praedicatio quaedam quam fecit B. Franciscus Fratribus suis circa finem mortis sui corporis." It abounds in quotations from SS. Basil, Chrysostom, Augustine, Isidore, Gregory, and Bernard.

^187:1 See Catal. codicum latinorum, t. II, P. II, p. 27, n. 214.

^187:2 See Dicta B. Aegidii (Quaracchi, 1905), pp. 1-51.

^187:3 As to the "Perfectiones S. Francisci, quas dedit fratri Junipero,'' found at Paris (nat. lib., cod. 18327, fol. 158 r), see Monumenta, tr. II, fol. 281 r.

     The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

THE following list of works is intentionally limited. Its aim is to give collectively and in alphabetical order a fuller reference to the principal and most accessible sources of information cited in the course of the present volume.

Acta Sanctorum quotquot toto orbe coluntur, collegit Joannes Bollandus, etc. (ed. 3).

Actus B. Francisci et Sociorum ejus. Ed. Sabatier, Paris, 1902.

Prof. Alessandri: Inventario dei Manoscritti della biblioteca del conv. di S. Francesco di Assisi. Forli, 1894.

Analecta Bollandiana. [*1] Brussels.

Analecta Franciscana. Quaracchi.

Matthew Arnold: Essays in Criticism. Macmillan, 1875.

Reginald Balfour: The Seraphic Keepsake. Burns & Oates, 1905.

Fr. Francisci Bartholi, O.F.M.: Tractatus de Indulgentia S. Mariae de Portiuncula. Ed. Sabatier, Paris, 1900.

Fr. Bartholomaeus Pisanus, O.F.M.: De Conformitate Vitae B. Francisci ad vitam D. N. Jesu Christi. Milan, 1510. [*2]

[p. 190]

Fr. Bernardus de Bessa, O.F.M.: Liber de Laudibus B. Francisci. In Anal. Franc., t. III.

Fr. Bernardo da Fivizzano, O.M.Cap.: Oposcoli di S. Francesco. Florence, 1880.

Bibliotheca Hagiographica Latina antiquae et mediae aetatis. Ed. Socii Bollandiani. Brussels.

Prof. H. Boehmer: Analekten zur Geschichte des Franciscus von Assisi. Tubingen and Leipzig (Mohr), 1904.

Bullettino Critico di Cose Francescane. Florence.

S. Bonaventura: Legendae duae de Vita S. Francisci. Quaracchi, 1898. (English translation by Miss Lockhart. Washbourne, 1898.)

Bullarium Franciscanum. Ed. F. F. Hyacinth Sbaralea and Conrad Eubel, O.M.Conv. 1759 and 1898.

Montgomery Carmichael: La Benedizione di San Francesco. Livorno, 1900. "The Origin of the Rule of St. Francis," in Dublin Review, Vol. CXXXIV, 1904, pp. 357-385. "The Writings of St. Francis," in the Month, January, 1904, t. CIII, pp. 156-164. See also under Sacrum Commercium.

Fr. Thomas de Celano, O.F.M.: Vita Prima S. Francisci. Ed. Suyskens, S.J., in Acta S.S., Oct., II.

Vita Secunda S. Francisci. Ed. Amoni. Rome, 1880.

Tractatus de Miraculis. Ed. Van Ortroy, S.J., in Anal. Boll., t. XVIII, 1899.

[p. 191]

Vita S. Clarae. Ed. Sedulius, O.F.M. Antwerp, 1613.

Fr. Leopold de Cherance: S. Francois d'Assise. Paris, 1892. (English translation by R. F. O'Connor: Burns & Oates, 1901.)

Fr. Bernard Christen, O.M.Cap.: Leben des hl. Franciscus von Assisi. Innsbruck, 1899.

Chronica XXIV Generalium in Anal. Francis., t. III.

Fr. Cuthbert, O.S.F.C. See under Eccleston.

G. Cozza-Luzi: Chiara di Assisi ed Innocenzo IV. Rome, 1887.

Lina Duff Gordon: The Story of Assisi. Dent, 1901.

Fr. Thomas Eccleston, O.F.M.: De Adventu Fratrum Minorum in Angliam in Anal. Franc.; t. I; see Monumenta Franc. Ed. Brewer. Rolls series. (English translation by Fr. Cuthbert, O.S.F.C.: The Friars and how they came to England. Sands, 1903.)

Fr. Edouard d'Alencon, O.M.Cap.: [*1] Epistola S. Francisci ad Ministrum Generalem in sua forma authentica. Rome, 1899. La Benediction de S. Francois. Paris, 1896. See also Sacrum Commercium.

Fr. Ehrle, S.J.: "Die Historischen Handschriften von S. Francesco in Assisi" in the Archiv fur 

[p. 192]

[paragraph continues] Litteratur und Kirchengeschichte des Mittelalters, t. I, pp. 484 seq. "Controversen uber die Anfange des Minoritenordens" in Zeitschrift fur Katholische Theologie, t. XI, pp. 725 seq.

Mgr. Faloci-Pulignani: "Tre Autografi di S. Francesco" in Misc. Francescana, t. VI, pp. 33 seq., and "La Calligrafia di S. Francesco," l.c., t. VII, pp. 67 seq.

Floretum S. Francisci Assisiensis. Ed. Sabatier. Paris, 1902. A satisfactory Italian version of the Fioretti is that of Barbere, Florence, 1902. An excellent English translation, The Little Flowers of St. Francis, is published by Kegan Paul, 1905.

Etudes Franciscaines. Namur.

Joseph Gorres: Der hl. Franciscus von Assisi, ein Troubadour. Ratisbon, 1879.

Prof. Walter Goetz: Die Quellen zur Geschichte des hl. Franz von Assisi. Gotha, 1904.

Prof. John Herkless: Francis and Dominic and the Mendicant Orders. Scribner, 1901.

Fr. Jordani a Jano, O.F.M.: Chronica, in Anal. Franc., t. I.

Leon de Kerval: Sancti Antonii de Padua Vitae duae. Paris, 1904.

Fr. Leonard Lemmens, O.F.M.: "Die Anfange des Clarissenordens " in Romische Quartalschrift, t. XVI, pp. 93 seq. Scripta Fratris Leonis, Quaracchi, 1901. See also under Speculum Perfectionis.

Abbe Leon Le Monnier: Histoire de S. Francois 

[p. 193]

d'Assise. (English translation by a Franciscan Tertiary. Kegan Paul, 1894.)

Prof. A. G. Little: Description de MS. Can. Misc. 525, de la Bibliotheque Bodleienne. Paris, 1903.

Canon Knox Little: St. Francis of Assisi: His Times, Life, and Work. Isbister, 1904.

Anne Macdonnell: The Words of St. Francis. Dent, 1905.

Fr. P. Mandonnet, O.P.: Les Origines de l'Ordo de Poenitentia (Freiburg, 1898). Les Regles et le Gouvernement de l'Ordo de Poenitentia au XIIIe Siecle (Paris, 1902).

Miscellanea Francescana di Storia di Lettere, di Arti. Foligno.

Monumenta Germaniae Historica. Berlin.

Prof. Karl Muller: Anfange des Minoritenordens und der . Freiburg, 1885.

A. F. Ozanam: Les Poetes Franciscains en Italie au Treizieme Siecle. Paris, 1882, 6th ed.

Opuscula S. P. Francisci Assisiensis. Edita a PP. Collegii S. Bonaventurae, Quaracchi, 1904.

Fr. Panfilo da Magliano, O.F.M.: Storia Compendiosa di San Francesco. Rome, 1874-1876.

Paul Sabatier: Vie de S. Francois d'Assise. Paris, 1894. (English translation by L. S. Houghton.) Regula antiqua Fratrum et Sororum de Poenitentia. Paris. (English translation in Adderley and Marsons' Third Orders. Mowbray, 1902.) Description du MS. Franciscain de Liegnitz. Paris, 1901. Examen de quelques 

[p. 194]

[paragraph continues] Travaux resents sur les Opuscules de Saint Francois. Paris, 1904. See also under Actus, Bartholi, and Speculum.

Fr. Hyacinth. Sbaralea, O.M.Conv.: Supplementum et Castigatio ad Scriptores Trium Ordinum S. Francisci. Rome, 1806.

Sacrum Commercium Beati Francisci cum Domina Paupertate. Ed. Fr. Ed. d'Alencon, O.M.Cap. Rome, 1900. (English translation by Montgomery Carmichael, The Lady Poverty; Murray, 1901.)

Emma Gurney Salter: Franciscan Legends in Italian Art. Dent, 1905.

Seraphicae Legislationis Textus Originales. Quaracchi, 1897.

Speculum Perfectionis. Ed. Lemmens: Quaracchi, 1901.

Speculum Perfectionis. Ed. Sabatier. Paris, 1898. (English translation of the text only, by the Countess de la Warr: The Mirror of Perfection. Burns & Oates, 1902.)

Luigi Suttina: Appunti Bibliografici di Studi Francescani. Padua, 1904.

H. Thode: Franz von Assisi und die Anfange der Kunst der Renaissance in Italien. Berlin, 1885 and 1904.

Trium Sociorum, Legenda S. Francisci Assis. Ed. Faloci. Foligno, 1898. (English translation by E. Gurney Salter: The Legend of the Three Companions. Dent, 1902.)

Fr. Ubald d'Alencon, O.M.Cap.: Les Opuscules de S. Francois d'Assise. Paris, 1905.

[p. 195]

Fr. Van Ortroy, S.J. For his article on the Opuscula of St. Francis, see Analecta Bollandiana, t. xxiv, fasc. iii (1905), p. 411 seq.

Fr. Luke Wadding, O.F.M.: Annales Minorum. [*1] B. P. Francisci Assisiatis Opuscula. Antwerp, 1623. Scriptores Ordinis Minorum. Rome, 1650.

Footnotes

^189:1 The space devoted by Fr. Van Ortroy, S.J., to Franciscan history in this periodical assumes larger proportions each year.

^189:2 A critical edition of this work will form Vol. IV of the Anal. Franc.

^191:1 When this volume is almost through the press, I learn of the publication of Fr. Edouard's long-promised edition of Celano's works--S. Francisci Assisiensis vita et miracula additis opusculis liturgicis auctore Fr. Thoma de Celano. Hanc editionem novam ad fidem mss. recensuit P. Eduardus Alenconiensis, Rome. Desclee, 1905.

^195:1 Wadding's Annales appeared at Lyons in 8 vols. in fol. 1625-54. Fr. Jos. Man. Fonseca published a new edition and a continuation of the Annales in 19 vols. at Rome, 1731-45. The official Annalists of the Friars Minor have since added 6 vols. (tom. 20-25), which were issued at Naples, Ancona, and Quaracchi. The last vol. (t. 25) edited by Fr. Eusebius Fernandzin (+ 1899) extends to the year 2622. The Quaracchi Friars are now engaged on the 26th volume.

    The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi, tr. by Paschal Robinson, [1905], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 196] [p. 197]

  

INDEX.

Abruzzi <page 182>, <page 184>

Acta Ordinis Minorum <page 125>

Acta Sanctorum <page 26>, <page 115>, <page 154>, <page 180>

Actus B. Francisci et Sociorum eius <page 93>

Admonitions of the Friars <page 55>

Admonitions of St. Francis:

    codices containing them <page 3>, <page 22>

    their authenticity and number <page 3>

Aegidius. See Giles.

Agnes of Bohemia. Blessed <page 75>

Albert of Pisa, Minister General <page 111>

Alexander IV. Pope-- <page 154>

Alms. On seeking-- <page 42>, <page 68>

Altar. St. Francis on Cleanliness of-- <page 22>

Amor de Caritade, Poem <page 183>

Analekten. See Boehmer.

Analecta Bollandiana <page 3>, <page 27>, <page 29>, <page 78>, <page 94>, <page 182>

Analecta Franciscana <page 25>, <page 180>

Angelis gaudium, Bull <page 75>

Angelo Clareno. See Clareno.

Annales Minorum <page 25>, <page 75>, <page 76>, <page 81>, <page 96>

Anselm. St.-- <page 40>

Antony. Letter of St. Francis to St.-- <page 93>, <page 180>, <page 181>

Antony's MS. St.-- <page 4>, <page 22>, <page 31>, <page 81>, <page 110>, <page 138>

Aquila <page 183>

Arbor Vitae <page 109>, <page 110>, <page 145>, <page 185>

Archiv fur Litteratur, etc. <page 27>, <page 179>

Arnold, Matthew-- <page 150>

Assisi MS. 338 <page 3>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 81>, <page 89>, <page 98>, <page 109>, <page 137>, <page 138>, <page 143>, <page 151>, <page 154>, <page 186>

Assisi MS. 344 <page 148>

Augsburg Confession <page 115>

Autographs of St. Francis <page 130>, <page 146>

Aymon of Faversham, Minister General <page 111>

 

[p. 198]

Bad example. St. Francis on-- <page 13>

Balfour. Reginald-- <page 147>

Bartholi, Tractatus <page 97>, <page 121>

Bartholomew of Pisa <page 5>, <page 20>, <page 32>, <page 89>, <page 98>, <page 109>

Benedict of Prato <page 80>

Berlin MS <page 3>, <page 20>, <page 81>, <page 98>, <page 154>

Bernardine of Siena. St.-- <page 145>, <page 183>

Bernardo da Fivizzano. Fr.-- <page 131>

Bernard of Besse <page 181>

Blessed Virgin. Salutation of the-- <page 143>

Blessing given by St. Francis to Brother Leo <page 149>

Blessing of St. Francis on those who receive his writings kindly <page 188>

Boehmer. H.-- . <page 26>, <page 121>, <page 137>, <page 143>, <page 144>, <page 151>, <page 155>, <page 181>, <page 182>

Bollandists  <page 25>, <page 115>

Bonaventure. St.-- . <page 16>, <page 19>, <page 25>, <page 26>, <page 79>, <page 81>, <page 82>, <page 83>, <page 84>, <page 87>, <page 146>, <page 147>, <page 185>, <page 186>

     "          "    See Leg. Major.

Breviary. Seraphic-- <page 25>

Brothers. Letter of St. Francis to all the--:

     its scope and date <page 109>

     text of -- <page 111>

Brothers Minor. See Friars.

Brothers of Penance <page 25>

Bullarium Franciscanum <page 34>, <page 75>, <page 76>, <page 79>

 

Caesar of Spires <page 27>, <page 28>

Canticle of the Sun <page 183>

     authenticity <page 151>

     its composition <page 150>

     original Italian text of <page 151>

     text of <page 152>

Capistran MS. XXII <page 110>, <page 182>, <page 186>

Carceri. The-- <page 88>

Carmichael. Montgomery-- <page 87>, <page 120>, <page 131>, <page 147>, <page 181>, <page 185>, <page 186>

Catana. Peter of-- <page 121>

Celano. Thomas de-- quoted <page 20>, <page 25>, <page 28>, <page 29>, <page 45>, <page 78>, <page 79>, <page 81>, <page 82>, <page 83>, <page 85>, <page 88>, <page 89>, <page 93>, <page 131>, <page 146>, <page 147>, <page 150>, <page 154>, <page 180>, <page 184>, <page 185>

[p. 199]

Celle. The-- <page 79>, <page 88>

Cherance. Leopold de-- <page 150>

Chiara. Monastery of Santa-- <page 77>

Civilta Cattolica <page 146>

Clare. Fragments, written by St. Francis, from the Rule of St.-- <page 75>, <page 94>

     Canonization <page 154>

     consulted by St. Francis <page 87>

     her testimony as to the Office of the Passion composed by St. Francis <page 154>

     Legend of-- by Celano <page 154>

     writes a new Rule <page 76>

Clareno. Angelo-- <page 27>, <page 29>, <page 31>, <page 32>

Cleanliness of the Altar. St. Francis on-- <page 22>

Cleanness of Heart. St. Francis on-- <page 25>

Clerics. St. Francis on honor due to-- <page 18>

Codices containing Admonitions <page 3>

   "        "        Instruction on the Lord's Body <page 22>

   "        "        Letter to all the Faithful <page 98>

   "        "             "   "   "  "   Friars <page 109>

   "        "             "   "  a Minister <page 120>

   "        "        Praises and Paraphrase of the Pater noster <page 137>

   "        "        Regulation for Hermitages <page 89>

   "        "        Salutation of the Virtues <page 20>

   "        "              "      "  "   Blessed Virgin, <page 143>

   "        "        Testament <page 81>

Collationes attributed to St. Francis by Wadding <page 184>

Commercium. The Sacrum-- <page 87>, <page 185>, <page 186>

Companions. The Three-- <page 79>

      "          "     "   Legend. See Leg. III Soc.

Compassion. St. Francis on-- <page 15>

Confession of the Friars <page 53>

Conformitatum. Liber-- <page 5>, <page 20>, <page 32>, <page 89>, <page 98>, <page 109>, <page 120>, <page 122>, <page 139>, <page 143>, <page 151>, <page 152>, <page 180>

Contemplative Life. St. Francis' predilection for the-- <page 87>

Correction. St. Francis on True-- <page 17>

[p. 200]

Correction of the Friars. St. Francis on-- <page 37>

Cortona <page 79>, <page 88>

Cozza-Luzi. G.-- <page 77>

Creatures. Praises of-- See Canticle.

Cross of the Lord. St. Francis on-- <page 10>

Cross. Office of the-- See Office.

Cum omnis vera, Bull <page 75>

Cum secundum, Bull <page 34>

Custodes. Letter of St. Francis to-- <page 95>, <page 127>

Cuthbert, O.S.F.C. Fr.-- <page 132>, <page 180>

 

Damian's. St.-- <page 75>, <page 76>, <page 150>, <page 152>, <page 180>

Dante <page 97>, <page 150>, <page 183>

Dead. St. Francis on Prayers for-- <page 35>

De la Warr. Countess-- <page 138>

Digne. Hugo de-- See Hugo.

Divine Love. St. Francis' prayer to obtain-- <page 145>

   "    Office. St. Francis on-- <page 35>, <page 66>, <page 81>, <page 109>

                 See his letters passim.

Documenta Antiqua Franciscana <page 3>, <page 13>, <page 16>, <page 80>, <page 84>

Doubtful Writings of St. Francis <page 179>

Dusseldorf MS. <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 98>, <page 109>

 

Eccleston. Fr. Thomas-- quoted <page 132>, <page 180>

Edouard d'Alencon. Fr.-- <page 121>, <page 147>, <page 181>, <page 185>

Ehrle, S.J. Fr.-- <page 27>, <page 31>

Elias. Fr.--:

     Blessing given to-- <page 85>

     Letter to-- <page 93>, <page 116>, <page 121>

     writes letters to Friars near Valenciennes <page 30>

Envy. St. Francis on-- <page 12>

 

Fac secundum exemplar <page 88>, <page 137>

Faithful. St. Francis' Letter to-- <page 94>

     its authenticity, date of composition, and characteristics <page 96>

     text of <page 98>

[p. 201]

Faloci. Mgr.-- <page 5>, <page 22>, <page 110>, <page 130>, <page 132>, <page 14>

Fasting. St. Francis on-- <page 35>, <page 36>, <page 66>

Fioretti. The-- <page 87>, <page 93>

Firmamenta Ordinis Minorum <page 4>, <page 27>, <page 32>, <page 81>, <page 82>, <page 83>, <page 85>, <page 110>, <page 138>

Floretum S. Francisci <page 87>

Floriano MS. St.-- <page 4>, <page 81>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 120>

Foligno MS. <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 88>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 137>

Forma vivendi given by St. Francis to St. Clare . <page 77>

Francis. Sayings of St.-- <page 16>, <page 19>

     composes Canticle of the Sun <page 150>

     composes Office of the Passion <page 154>

     dictates Testament <page 79>

     gives a sheet with Blessing and Lauds to Brother Leo <page 146>

     his paraphrase of the Pater noster <page 139>

     his Salutation of the Blessed Virgin <page 143>

     Letters of-- See Letters.

     poems by-- <page 183>

     Praises composed by <page 137>, <page 148>

     Prayers of-- <page 136>, <page 180>, <page 185>

     Prayer to obtain Divine Love <page 145>

     Rule of Third Order written by-- <page 182>

     sermons erroneously attributed to-- <page 184>

     writes First Rule for the Friars <page 25>.

        "   second one <page 26>

        "   Formula Vitae for St. Clare <page 75>

        "   "last wish" for St. Clare <page 78>, <page 94>

Freiburg MS. no

Friars. St. Francis' Letter to all-- See Brothers.

 

Gaspary <page 150>

General Chapter. St. Francis' Letter to-- . <page 94>, <page 109>

Giacoma di Settisoli <page 93>

Giano. Jordan of-- See Jordan.

Giles. Blessed-- His Dicta <page 137>, <page 187>

Goetz. Walter-- quoted <page 3>, <page 79>, <page 119>, <page 125>, <page 151>, <page 181>, <page 184>

Gonzaga, Minister General. Ven. Francis-- <page 125>

[p. 202]

Good, lest it be lost. St. Francis on hiding-- <page 19>

Good Works. St. Francis on the need of-- <page 11>

Greccio <page 88>

Gregory IX. (See also Ugolino.) <page 75>, <page 79>

Gregory the Great. St.-- <page 89>

Guarnacci. See Volterra.

 

Hague MS. <page 81>

Herkless. Prof. John-- <page 180>

Hermitages. Regulation for-- See Regulation.

Honorius III <page 26>, <page 28>, <page 30>, <page 31>, <page 34>, <page 64>, <page 75>, <page 119>

Hugo de Digne <page 27>, <page 29>, <page 30>, <page 32>, <page 45>

Humility. St. Francis on True-- <page 17>

 

Idleness. St. Francis on-- <page 40>

Imitation of Christ <page 16>

Imitation of the Lord. St. Francis on-- <page 11>

Innocent III approves Rule viva voce <page 25>, <page 26>, <page 27>, <page 30>, <page 31>, <page 32>, <page 179>

Innocent IV <page 75>, <page 76>

Instruction on Reverence for the Lord's Body <page 22>, <page 94>

its authenticity <page 22>

Isidore's MS. 1/25. St.-- <page 4>, <page 88>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 120>, <page 121>

    "     "    1/73  "      <page 4>, <page 22>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 137>

    "     "    1/92.  "      <page 27>, <page 31>

 

Jacoba. See Giacoma.

Jacopone da Todi <page 183>

Jacques de Vitry <page 28>

Jerome. St.-- <page 40>

Jordan of Giano <page 27>, <page 28>

Julian of Spires <page 25>

 

Ladies. Poor-- <page 25>

Last wish written by St. Francis to St. Clare <page 78>

Laurentian MS. <page 3>, <page 4>

[p. 203]

Legenda Major <page 16>, <page 19>, <page 25>, <page 26>, <page 79>, <page 81>, <page 82>, <page 84>, <page 87>, <page 146>, <page 147>, <page 185>

Legenda Trium Sociorum <page 27>, <page 41>, <page 79>, <page 81>, <page 83>, <page 88>, <page 180>

Legislation. The Seraphic-- <page 25>

Liegnitz MS. <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 81>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 137>, <page 154>, <page 181>

Lemberg MS. <page 4>, <page 98>, <page 137>

Lemmens <page 4>, <page 76>, <page 80>

See also Spec. Perf. ed. Lemm. and Doc Ant. Franc.

Le Monnier. Leon-- <page 30>, <page 96>, <page 97>

Lempp. Dr. E.-- <page 76>, <page 120>, <page 121>, <page 181>

Leo. Brother-- <page 80>, <page 94>, <page 95>, <page 118>

     Blessing given by St. Francis to-- <page 146>, <page 149>

     difficulties of construction in <page 130>

     history of the autograph <page 130>

     Letter of St. Francis to-- <page 130>

     text of <page 132>

Lepers. St. Francis' mercy toward-- <page 81>

Letters of St. Francis:

     their number and classification <page 93>, <page 94>, <page 180>

     to all the Faithful <page 96>

     to all the Friars <page 109>

     to a Minister <page 119>

     to the Rulers <page 125>

     to the Custodes <page 127>

     to Brother Leo <page 130>

Little. A. G.-- <page 4>, <page 155>

Little. W. J. Knox-- <page 28>, <page 96>, <page 151>

Lord's Body. St. Francis on reverence for-- . <page 5>, <page 23>, <page 109>

Lord's Prayer. St. Francis' Paraphrase of the-- <page 137>

Lord's Body. St. Francis' Instruction on reception of the-- <page 20>, <page 94>

     reverence for-- <page 22>

Lo Speco <page 88>

Lost Writings of St. Francis <page 179>

Love. Prayer of St. Francis to obtain Divine-- <page 145>

  "    St. Francis on-- II

  "    St. Francis on True-- <page 18>

Luttich MS. <page 4>, <page 98>

[p. 204]

 

Mandonnet, O.P. <page 182>, <page 184>

Marianus of Florence <page 22>

Mary Magdalene. St.-- <page 82>

Mary. The Blessed Virgin-- See Blessed Virgin.

Martha. St.-- <page 89>

Mazarin MS. 989 <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 81>, <page 98>, <page 110>

    "      "   1743 <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 98>, <page 110>

Melanchthon. Philip-- <page 115>

Minister General. Election of-- <page 70>

Minister. Letter of St. Francis to a-- <page 94>, <page 95>, <page 118>

     its scope <page 119>

     uncertainty as to whom it was addressed <page 119>

Minorum Annales. See Annales.

Miscellanea Francescana <page 5>, <page 22>, <page 81>, <page 110>, <page 130>, <page 183>

Money prohibited to the Friars <page 41>, <page 68>

Monumenta Germaniae Historica <page 30>, <page 132>

Monumenta Ordinis Minorum <page 5>, <page 27>, <page 32>, <page 81>, <page 85>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 138>, <page 187>

Mortification. St. Francis on-- <page 13>

Munich MS. 11354 <page 4>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 187>

    "     "    23648 <page 27>

Muller. Karl-- <page 26>

 

Names. St. Francis on the holy-- <page 22>, <page 82>

See also his Letters passim.

Naples MS. XII F 4, <page 20>, <page 120>, <page 121>, <page 184>

   "      "   F 32 <page 98>

 

Obedience. St. Francis on Perfect and Imperfect-- <page 8>

Office of the Passion composed by St. Francis <page 154>

     its division <page 155>

     St. Clare refers to it <page 154>

Ognissanti MS. <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 32>, <page 81>, <page 88>, <page 89>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 120>, <page 121>, <page 122>, <page 137>, <page 143>

Opuscula. Wadding's edition of the-- <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 66>, <page 77>, <page 87>, <page 89>, <page 93>, <page 125>, <page 184>, <page 185>

Opuscules de Critique Historique <page 4>, <page 138>, <page 143>, <page 144>, <page 155>

[p. 205]

Opuscules de S. Francois <page 22>, <page 98>, <page 118>, <page 181>, <page 182>, <page 183>

Oriente Serafico <page 25>

Ostia. Lord of-- <page 85>

Oxford MS. <page 4>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 154>

Ozanam. A. F.-- quoted <page 150>, <page 183>

 

Pacifico. Fra-- <page 150>, <page 183>

Palaeographers' testimony on autograph of St. Francis <page 147>

Panfilo da Magliano. Fr.-- <page 151>

Papini <page 146>, <page 183>

Paraphrase of Lord's Prayer by St. Francis <page 137>, <page 139>

Parenti. John-- <page 125>

Paris Nat. Lib. MS. 18327 <page 81>, <page 110>

Paris MS. Prot. Theol. Fac <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 98>, <page 110>

  "    "   See also Mazarin.

Passion. Office of the-- See Office.

     St. Francis' devotion to-- <page 154>

Patience. St. Francis on-- <page 14>

Patrem. Leo-- <page 25>

Peacemakers. St. Francis on-- <page 14>

Pecorello. See Leo.

Penance to be imposed on Friars. The -- <page 69>, <page 120>

Penance. Brothers and Sisters of-- <page 25>, <page 181>

Pentecost Chapter. See Whitsun.

Poems of St. Francis <page 183>

Poor Ladies <page 25>, <page 75>, <page 179>

Portiuncula <page 29>, <page 52>, <page 79>, <page 80>, <page 119>, <page 138>, <page 152>

      "      Indulgence of-- <page 146>

Poverello. See Francis.

Poverty. The Lady-- <page 87>, <page 185>

Poverty of Spirit. St. Francis on-- <page 14>, <page 185>

Praises composed by St. Francis <page 137>, <page 139>, <page 148>

Prague MS. <page 4>, <page 81>

Prayers of St. Francis <page 136>, <page 142>, <page 145>, <page 154>, <page 185>

Preaching. St. Francis on-- <page 50>, <page 71>

Priests. St. Francis' Reverence for-- <page 82>

Psalms arranged by St. Francis <page 155>

[p. 206]

 

Quaracchi edition of Opuscula  <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 31>, <page 93>, <page 95>, <page 96>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 119>, <page 121>, <page 122>, <page 125>, <page 127>, <page 131>, <page 137>, <page 143>, <page 145>, <page 148>, <page 151>, <page 181>, <page 182>, <page 184>, <page 186>

Quellen, etc. See Goetz.

Quo elongati, Bull <page 79>

 

Raphael. St.-- <page 61>

Rebolledo <page 93>, <page 184>

Reception of the Lord's Body <page 53>

Regulation for Hermitages <page 87>

     date and authenticity <page 88>

     its origin and scope <page 87>

Religious. St. Francis on the good and the humble,

     the happy and the vain, frivolous and talkative-- <page 16>

Renan. Ernest-- <page 79>, <page 151>

Reverence for the Lord's Body. Instruction on-- <page 22>

Richer. Brother-- <page 133>

Rodolfo di Tossignano. Fr.-- <page 97>

Rosetti. D. G.-- <page 183>

Rulers. Letter of St. Francis to all the-- <page 94>, <page 95>, <page 109>, <page 110>, <page 120>

Rules of the Friars Minor <page 25>, <page 179>, <page 181>, <page 182>, <page 186>

     approved by Innocent III <page 25>

     no third redaction of it <page 27>

     St. Francis wrote it twice <page 25>

     text of First <page 31>

     text of Second <page 64>

Rule. St. Francis on observance of-- <page 109>

Rule of St. Clare written by Gregory IX <page 75>

 

Sabatier. Paul-- <page 4>, <page 16>, <page 22>, <page 25>, <page 26>, <page 28>, <page 29>, <page 79>, <page 80>, <page 81>, <page 87>, <page 93>, <page 94>, <page 97>, <page 98>, <page 120>, <page 121>, <page 127>, <page 131>, <page 137>, <page 138>, <page 143>, <page 151>, <page 180>, <page 182>

     See also Spec. Perf., ed. Sab.

Sacro Convento at Assisi <page 64>, <page 146>, <page 148>

Sacrum Commercium <page 87>, <page 185>, <page 186>

Salutation of the Blessed Virgin by St. Francis <page 143>

Salutation of the Virtues: its authenticity, etc. <page 20>

Saracens <page 48>, <page 73>

[p. 207]

Saturnino da Caprese. Fr.-- <page 147>

Sbaralea. Hyacinth-- <page 27>, <page 186>

Self-will. St. Francis on the evil of-- <page 8>

Seraph. Brother Leo's reference to the-- <page 148>

Seraphic Breviary. The-- <page 25>

Seraphic Legislation: its intricacy <page 25>

Seraphicae Legislationis textus originales <page 30>, <page 75>, <page 76>, <page 77>, <page 182>

 

Servant. St. Francis on the humble, the happy, and the unhappy-- <page 15>

Servants of God should honor Clerics <page 18>

Sick Friars. St. Francis on the care of-- <page 44>, <page 68>

Siena. St. Bernardine of-- <page 145>

Signature of St. Francis <page 147>

Sisters of Penance <page 25>

Sociorum. See Leg. III Soc.

Solet annuere, Bull <page 76>

Spanish text of St. Francis' Letters <page 93>

Speculum Minorum <page 32>, <page 60>, <page 81>, <page 121>, <page 137>, <page 144>

Speculum Perfectionis, ed. Sabatier . <page 16>, <page 22>, <page 26>, <page 28>, <page 31>, <page 45>, <page 80>, <page 81>, <page 87>, <page 94>, <page 138>, <page 151>, <page 155>, <page 180>

     "        "           ed. Lemmens <page 3>, <page 13>, <page 16>, <page 80>

Speculum Vitae <page 20>, <page 29>, <page 143>

Spires. Caesar of-- See Caesar.

Spires. Julian of-- See Julian.

Spirit of God. St. Francis on-- <page 13>

Spiritual Friars. The-- <page 31>

Spoelberch. See Speculum Vitae.

Spoleto. Autograph of St. Francis at-- <page 130>

Stigmata of St. Francis <page 148>

Subiaco MS. <page 110>

Superiorship. St. Francis on seeking-- <page 9>

Suttina. Luigi-- <page 150>

Suyskens, S.J. Fr.-- <page 26>

Sylvester. Brother-- <page 87>

 

Tancredi. Angelo-- <page 79>

Testament of St. Francis <page 79>

[p. 208]

Testament of St. Francis. Codices containing-- <page 81>

     its authenticity <page 79>

     place of composition <page 79>

     text of <page 81>

Thau. St. Francis' use of the letter-- <page 147>

Thomas of Celano. See Celano.

    "     " Farignano, Minister General <page 111>

Three Companions. Legend of-- See Leg. III Soc.

Toledo MS. <page 4>

Trium Sociorum. See Leg. III Soc.

 

Ubald d'Alencon. Fr.-- <page 22>, <page 132>, <page 183>

Ubertino da Casale. Fr.-- <page 109>, <page 145>, <page 179>, <page 185>, <page 186>

Ugolino. Card.-- (See also Gregory IX) <page 76>, <page 84>, <page 180>, <page 182>

Ugolino di Monte Giorgio <page 93>

 

Van Ortroy, S.J. Fr.-- <page 3>, <page 27>, <page 29>, <page 78>

Vatican Library <page 64>

Vatican MS. 7650 <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 81>, <page 88>, <page 98>, <page 120>, <page 121>

    "     "    B 82 <page 110>

    "     "    4354 <page 4>, <page 20>, <page 80>, <page 81>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 137>, <page 143>, <page 181>

    "     "    Ottob. 522 and 666 <page 27>

Verna. La-- <page 109>, <page 145>, <page 146>, <page 152>

Virgin. The Blessed-- <page 61>

   "     See Salutation.

Virtues putting Vices to flight. St. Francis on-- <page 19>

Virtues. Salutation of-- See Salutation.

Vita S. Clarae, by Thomas de Celano. See Celano.

Vita S. Francisci, by Julian of Spires <page 25>

  "  "      "       " St. Bonaventure. See Leg. Maj.

  "  "      "       " Thomas de Celano. See Celano.

Volterra MS. <page 4>, <page 98>, <page 110>, <page 127>

 

Wadding <page 5>, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 25>, <page 32>, <page 66>, <page 76>, <page 77>, <page 78>, <page 82>, <page 83>, <page 85>, <page 87>, <page 89>, <page 93>, <page 94>, <page 95>, <page 96>, <page 97>, <page 109>, <page 110>, <page 118>, <page 120>, <page 121>, <page 122>, <page 125>, <page 127>, <page 130>, <page 131>, <page 132>, <page 143>, <page 144>, <page 145>, <page 154>, <page 155>, <page 183>, <page 184>, <page 185>

Whitsun Chapter <page 37>, <page 70>

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: wott.txt =====


    
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE WISDOM OF THE TALMUD

  

A Thousand Years of Jewish Thought

  

By

  

Rabbi BEN ZION BOKSER

  

New York: Philosophical Library

  

[1951]

Click to enlarge
First page of the tractate Berakot, from the first Talmud ever published, printed by Joshua Soncino, Dec. 19, 1483, through the courtesy of the Library of the Jewish Theological Seminary.

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted at sacred-texts.com, by John Bruno Hare, December 2008-January 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion at the US Copyright Office as required by law at the time.

To
 Miriam Ruth and Baruch Micah

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS

          INTRODUCTION

        

     
       

        

     
      THE TALMUD AS LITERATURE

       <page 1>

     
      The Bible Requires Supplementation;   The Sanctions for Biblical Supplementation; The Method of Midrash Halakah; The   Method of Midrash Haggadah; The Midrash as Literature; The Mishnah; The   Tosefta; The Gemara; The Oral Torah and the Talmud.

        

     
       

        

     
      THE FORERUNNERS OF THE TALMUD

       <page 29>

     
      The Sopherim; The Pharisees and the Sadducees;   The Jews and the Romans; The National Disaster and the Emergence of the Rabbi.

        

     
       

        

     
      THE TALMUD IN ITS HISTORICAL SETTING

       <page 53>

     
      The Aftermath of War; Reconstruction   at Jabneh; Rebellion Renewed; The Rabbis at the Helm; A New Dawn in Babylonia.

        

     
       

        

     
      THE THEOLOGICAL ELEMENTS IN THE TALMUD

       <page 85>

     
      The Existence of God; Miracles; The   Purpose of Human Existence; God as the Source of Morality; The Tools of Human   Perfection; The Torah and the Commandments; Freedom and Its Consequences; The   Messianic Hope.

        

     
       

        

     
      SOCIAL ETHICS IN THE TALMUD

       <page 103>

     
      The Unity of Mankind; The Uniqueness   and Sanctity of Human Life; Consent and the Majesty of the Law; Social   Welfare and Personal Freedom; Democracy and Family Life; Education and the   Common Man; The Nation and the World Community; The  of Responsibility.

        

     
      [p. x]

        

     
      PERSONAL MORALITY IN THE TALMUD

       <page 121>

     
      Confidence in Life; Envy, Jealousy   and Pride; The Meaning of Good Will; The Imitation of God; The Meaning of Benevolence;   Truth is the Seal of God; The Plea for Moderation; Cleanliness and Health.

        

     
       

        

     
      THE JURISPRUDENCE OF THE TALMUD

       <page 135>

     
      Law, Theology and Ritual; Law and a Just   Society; Moral Pressures on the Law; The Basis of Legal Controversy; Talmudic   Law and the State; Law and Inwardness; The Law in Messianic Times.

        

     
       

        

     
      HUMAN WISDOM IN THE TALMUD

       <page 151>

     
      Dreams and the Subconscious; The Heart   is Sovereign; Habit and Character; A Man Wears Many Masks; On the Psychology   of Women; Education and Human Nature; Aids to Memory; Parables and Proverbs.

        

     
      NOTES

       <page 169>

     
      INDEX

       <page 177>

     
   
     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

Introduction

THE LITERATURE of the Talmud represents approximately a thousand years of Jewish thought. Its foundations were laid by the work of Ezra during the middle of the fourth century B.C.E., in the community of the returned exiles from Babylonia, who inaugurated the second Jewish commonwealth in Palestine. Its period of greatest productivity came in the centuries that followed the disastrous Jewish war against Rome in 70 C.E. The Talmud is not an independent literature however. It proceeds instead as a supplement to the Bible. The Bible remained the fundamental source of belief and practice in Judaism, but the Talmud was its authoritative exposition and implementation.

The position of the Talmud in Jewish life has been paramount. It was studied zealously by young and old alike, who found in it the authoritative word concerning the true meaning of Scripture. The lighter side of the Talmud, its parables, its ethical aphorisms, its legendary tales, delighted the common people. The more serious side, the subtle discussions of law, were a welcome outlet for the intellectual interests of the learned.

The Talmud itself became a subject for new commentaries and super-commentaries. Its study commenced in the elementary grades of the Jewish school, and it continued, in ever more subtle techniques of analysis, into the highest grades of the rabbinical academies. The love for the Talmud among the Jewish masses finally created an institution of popular adult education--the voluntary study group that met on Sabbath and holiday afternoons, and weekday evenings, to enable the busy layman to continue his interest in Talmudic literature.

[p. x]

The most crucial element in the discussions of the Talmud is centered in law. For law figured prominently in the Bible, and the Talmud mirrors faithfully the text on which it is based. But the Talmud is not a code. It records varying opinions on law as on life, without always offering decisions as to which was to be deemed authoritative for posterity. The legal discussions of the Talmud are, however, an invaluable source book on Jewish law, for they preserve all the varying trends in the interpretation of Biblical legislation. They likewise preserve a record of new developments in the law by which the Jewish community ordered its life.

The codification of Jewish law was to be a labor of later generations. Utilizing Talmudic discussions as their authority, a group of distinguished scholars, most of them active during the Middle Ages, endeavored to codify the rabbinic law. The most widely used of these works is the Shulhan Aruk by Joseph Karo (1488-1575). This code above all gained popular acceptance, especially in Central and Eastern Europe. But such distinguished teachers of Judaism as R. Moses Iserles, Solomon Luria, Mordecai Jaffe, Samuel Edels and Yom Tob Lippman Heller, did not hesitate to dispute the authority of the Shulhan Aruk. Even as late as the eighteenth century Rabbi Elijah ben Solomon, the Gaon of Wilno, though he had written a valuable commentary on the Shulhan Aruk, did not hesitate on occasion to ignore it and to decide cases on the basis of an original weighing of precedents and circumstances, in the light of the original discussions in the Talmud.

The rise of the Talmud to its dominant role in Jewish life was not without challenge. Its authority was rejected by a group of Babylonian Jews, led by a certain Anan ben David, in the middle of the eighth century. They organized a sect known as the Karaites (from Kara, the study of Scripture), which sought to center Judaism on the sole authority of the Bible. Fierce polemics developed between the Karaites and the Rabbinites, as the defenders of Talmudic authority were

[p. xi]

called. The Karaites have persisted as a small sect, and several thousand of them still exist in scattered communities in various parts of the world. A Karaite settlement of some five hundred souls has recently been started in the State of Israel, all of them immigrants from Cairo, Egypt. They have been included in Israel's current effort to "ingather the exiles", and they have been recognized as an independent community, free to order life in accordance with its own distinctive interpretations of Judaism.

The non-Jewish world has given the Talmud a mixed reaction. In the Middle Ages, when religious disputations were popular, the Talmud became a frequent subject of controversy. The Talmud was subjected to a variety of criticisms. Because the Talmud had permitted itself to adapt old institutions that they might be more relevant to the needs of a later age, it was charged with the falsification of the Bible. Because the Talmud often speaks in parables, it was disparaged as absurd, as abounding in fairy tales. Because the Talmud reflects a healthy respect for bodily life and speaks with frankness about sex, contrary to the asceticism of the Middle Ages, it was denounced as sensuous and unspiritual.

Perhaps the most serious charge against the Talmud was that it is irreverent toward the beliefs and practices of the Church. The Talmud arose during the epoch when Christianity began its secession from Judaism, and when the Christians were looked upon as dissident Jews. Against that background there must have been extensive controversy between the adherents of traditional Judaism and the advocates of the new doctrine. The Talmud generally avoids polemics; but some echoes of that controversy survived in the Talmud, principally a prayer against sectarianism, the prayer Velamalshinim, as it is known in the present Jewish liturgy. This now became a cause of serious charges against Judaism, above all against its revered classic, the Talmud.

The animosity toward the Talmud was often instigated by renegades from Judaism who exhibited the convert's customary

[p. xii]

zeal by a vilification of the faith they had deserted. The apostate Nicholas Donin laid before Pope Gregory IX the charge that the Talmud was a pernicious and blasphemous work. The Pope responded with an order to seize all copies of the Talmud for an inquiry into their content. In consequence of this agitation twenty-four cartloads of Hebrew books and manuscripts were publicly burned in Paris on June 17, 1242. In the sixteenth century there were six burnings of Talmudic books, in 1553, 1555, 1559, 1566, 1592 and 1599. A Christian censorship of Hebrew books was instituted in 1562. Most editions of the Talmud now extant still carry the censor's assurance that these volumes are free of "offensive" material.

There were voices in the Jewish community that spoke out in defense of the Talmud. Some defended the particular passages of the Talmud which had been attacked. Others addressed themselves to the larger issue involved--they spoke out boldly for religious freedom. One of the most courageous pleas for freedom came from Rabbi Judah Loew of Prague (1512-1609). After analyzing the usual charges against the Talmud in detail and refuting them, he adds: "One ought not reject the words of an opponent. It is preferable to seek them out and study them. Thus shall a person arrive at the ... full truth. Such words should not be suppressed. For every man of valor who wants to wrestle with another and to show his strength is eager that his opponent shall have every opportunity to demonstrate his real powers. But what strength does he show when he forbids his opponent to defend himself and to fight against him? Therefore it is wrong to suppress anyone who wants to speak against religion and to say to him: 'Do not speak thus'. The very converse is true. This itself weakens religion. Suppose the Talmudists did speak against Christian doctrine, expressing publicly what was in their hearts. Is this an evil thing? Not at all. It is possible to reply to them ... The conclusion of the matter is

[p. xiii]

that it would be most unworthy to suppress books in order to silence teachers ..."[r_00_1][*1] 

The rise of modern anti-Semitism gave fresh impetus to the attacks against the Talmud. The father of the modern calumnies upon the Talmud was the German polemicist, John Andreas Eisenmenger (1654-1704). Eisenmenger offered to suppress his work, Entdecktes Judentum (Jewry Unmasked), for a consideration of 30,000 florins, but the Jews refused to be blackmailed into paying this sum. The book has been described as "a collection of scandals" by the Allgemeine Deutsche Bibliographie, an official encyclopaedia of German bibliography published by the German Imperial Academy of Science in 1876. "Some passages," the appraisal continues, "are misinterpreted; some distorted; others are insinuations based on one-sided inferences."[r_00_2][*2] 

The most spectacular campaign against the Talmud was led by August Rohling (1839-1931), a professor of Hebrew Antiquities at the University of Prague. His Der Talmudjude (The Talmud Jew) went through 17 editions, reaching a circulation of 200,000 copies in Austria alone. Rohling repeatedly prefaced his slanderous material with the offer of 1,000 Taler "if Judah managed to get a verdict from the German Association of Orientalists that the quotations were fictitious and untrue." The challenge was taken up by Joseph S. Bloch, Rabbi at Florisdorf and later a member of the Austrian Parliament, who offered 3,000 Taler if Rohling could prove that he was able to read a single page of the Talmud chosen at random by Rohling himself. Accusing Rohling of ignorance and perjury, Bloch dared him to bring a libel suit. Because of his professional standing, Rohling could not evade the issue and finally charged Bloch with libel before a Vienna magistrate.

The court was anxious to make a thorough study of the subject and requested the Rector of the University of Vienna, Hofrat Zscholk, and the German Association of Orientalists, to appoint two experts. It conceded to Rohling's request that

[p. xiv]

both these experts be "full-blooded" Christians. Professor Theodor Noeldeke of the University of Strassburg and Professor August Wuensche of Dresden, were selected. From time to time additional experts were called in. After two and a half years, the report was ready. The trial was to start November 18, 1885, but before the hearings began, Rohling, afraid of an open exposure, withdrew all his charges. The court sentenced him to pay the cost of the trial and, disgraced, he was retired from his university post. The entire story of this dramatic encounter is told by Rabbi Bloch in his Israel and the Nations.

Another such Talmud "authority" was Aaron Briman, alias Dr. Justus. He was born a Jew and had aspirations for a career as a Jewish scholar. But when he lost face with the Jewish community for deserting his wife and children, he became a Protestant. Subsequently, he became a Catholic and then a Protestant again, and finally tried to return to Judaism. Toward the end of his career he once again joined the Catholic Church. His principal work, published anonymously, was Der Judenspiegel (The Mirror of the Jew), a compilation of a hundred laws taken from the Shulhan Aruk and purporting to show the Jewish animosity toward Christians. In a book about the Cabbala, which Briman subsequently wrote under his true name, he said that the whole anti-Semitic literature, including the Judenspiegel (his own work!) had been written by stupid and ignorant men. In 1885 he was sentenced by a Vienna court to a long term in prison and expulsion from Austria for forgery of documents. Professor Franz Delitzsch, the famous Protestant theologian, pronounced the Judenspiegel "a concoction of damnable lies". Following his expulsion Briman took up medical studies in Paris. These same forgeries of Justus-Briman were later published by another adventurer, Jacob Ecker, who offered them as his own work under the title The Hundred Laws of the Jewish Catechism.

[p. xv]

Czarist Russia made its contribution to this gallery of literary swindlers in the person of the notorious Justin Pranaitis, a Catholic clergyman. His monograph, The Christian in the Jewish Talmud, was based on the works of Eisenmenger and Rohling. To create the impression of authenticity he cites many passages in the original Hebrew and Aramaic, but they are all lifted from Eisenmenger, errors and misprints included. By identifying as references to Christians and Christianity such epithets in the Talmud as am ha-aretz (literally, a peasant, but more generally, an illiterate person), akum (pagan or idol worshipper), apikoros (epicurean but applied to heretics generally) and kuthim (the Samaritans), he "proves" widespread prejudice on the part of the Talmud toward Christianity.

In spite of his office as a Catholic clergyman, Pranaitis became involved in the course of a checkered career in a series of financial scandals. A picture in a frame which he wanted gilded at the workshop of a certain Avanzo in Petersburg was accidentally damaged; whereupon he tried to extort 3,000 rubles from the owner of the shop on the alleged ground that the picture had been painted by the 17th century artist, Murillo, and that it was part of the collection of Cardinal Gintovt. Both allegations were later proved false. On another occasion he was charged by the board of a local Catholic welfare society in his home parish at Tashkent with misappropriating the sum of 1,500 rubles.

It was in 1912 during the trial of Beiliss on the ritual murder libel that Pranaitis drew world notoriety upon himself by offering his services as an expert for the prosecution. When confronted by the bulls of Popes Innocent IV and Clement XIV which denounced ritual murder charges against Jews as libels and slander and which called upon Christians to desist from the staging of ritual murder trials, Pranaitis denied the genuineness of the documents. Cardinal Merry del Val, the Papal Secretary of State, examined the originals at the Vatican and certified that they were genuine. Beiliss

[p. xvi]

was, of course, acquitted, but the prosecution remunerated the star "expert" with 500 rubles.

Pranaitis died on January 29, 1917. It took more than a month for the Czarist government to issue the permit for the removal of his body from Petersburg to Tashkent. Objections had to be overcome of local officials in Tashkent who were anxious to avoid a public demonstration at his funeral and urged an inconspicuous burial in Petersburg.[r_00_3][*3] 

Nazi Germany produced a flood of new material vilifying the Talmud. With the pretense of scholarly objectivity which characterized the technique of all Hitler's professors, they produced impressive volumes, but all serving the cause of their master's big lie. Walter Forstat, one of the Nazi "experts" on the Talmud, unblushingly admits in the introduction to his Die Grundlagen des Talmud (The Basic Principles of the Talmud, Breslau, 1935), that in writing his book he had really forged a political weapon. "In issuing this work," he writes, "our purpose is purely political ... As a political tract it is necessarily one-sided. It therefore deals with Talmudic law only where it may prove helpful in illuminating the attitude of Germany to Jewry."

These diatribes against Talmudic literature produced a reaction, and some of the noblest works in appreciation of the Talmud were written by non-Jews. Johann von Reuchlin and his circle of Christian Hebraists carried on a staunch campaign in the sixteenth century in defense of Hebrew books. The libels of August Rohling were answered by the famous Protestant theologian, Franz Delitzsch, in his work Was D. Aug. Rohling beschworen hat and beschwoeren will (What D. Aug. Rohling Has Sworn to and Is Prepared to Swear to, Leipzig, 1883). Among the more recent statements in vindication of the Talmud is the very lucid study by Rev. A. H. Dirksen, "The Talmud and Anti-Semitism", in the January 1939 issue of the Ecclesiastical Review, a publication of the Catholic University of America, and the pamphlet, A Fact About the Jews, written by the famous Catholic

[p. xvii]

scholar, Joseph N. Moody, and distributed by the Paulist Fathers. A more elaborate study of the Talmud was written by the Polish Catholic scholar, Thadeus Zaderecki. He began his researches in the Talmud under the inspiration of anti-Semitic libels, but what he learned made him into an admirer of this great literature. His work The Talmud in the Crucible of the Centuries is a brilliant appreciation of the moral values of Talmudic literature and a refutation of the libels against it, especially those of Rohling and Pranaitis.[r_00_4][*4] 

Talmudic literature went through a long and varied development. The earliest layer of the Talmud is the Mishnah, a product of Palestinian scholarship and written in a clear, lucid Hebrew. The later expository supplement, known as the Gemara, which elucidates the Mishnahic text, was developed during the third, fourth and fifth centuries, when the center of Jewish population was shifting from Palestine to Babylonia. Paralleling the Palestinian Gemara there also arose a Babylonian Gemara, produced by the newer academies of Babylonia. Both Gemaras were written in the Aramaic vernaculars then current in Babylonia and Palestine.

The Talmud has survived in both traditions, the Babylonian and the Palestinian. In their essential procedures and in their underlying doctrines the two Talmuds are similar. But there are some significant differences between them, reflecting in many instances the differing conditions under which the two communities carried on their work. Thus the Palestinians felt themselves in their own country and they regarded the Roman authorities as exercising their power without moral sanction. They therefore ruled the publicans who, as tax collectors, had collaborated with the enemy, as reprobates, and they refused to extend any credence to their testimony in a court of law. The Babylonians, on the other hand, demanded scrupulous adherence to the law of the land, and the tax collector was for them only a civil servant performing his duty, who was as honorable as any other man.

It was in its Babylonian version that the Talmud became

[p. xviii]

so influential a force in Jewish life. The Palestinian Talmud. on the other hand, made but a slight impression on the Jewish world. The circumstances that led to a preference for the Babylonian Talmud have been variously defined. The Babylonian academies functioned under conditions of greater stability and peace and the discussions which emanated from them reveal a greater measure of lucidity and order. What was perhaps more decisive, however, was the fact that the Babylonian Jewish community had overshadowed the Jewish community of Palestine as a center of culture and world influence. As Dr. Louis Ginzberg puts it: "The Babylonians were more successful in establishing the authority of their Talmud in European countries. This success was largely due to the fact that Babylonia, under the rule of the Abbasids, became the center of Arabic culture, and consequently of Jewish culture, since the majority of Jews then lived in Islamic countries."[r_00_5][*5] 

There is a splendid English translation of the Mishnah, published in 1933, by Reverend Herbert Danby, Canon of Christ Church and Regius Professor of Hebrew at the University of Oxford, England. There is a German translation of the Babylonian Talmud by Lazarus Goldschmidt. The Palestinian Talmud is available in a French translation by M. Schwab. The Soncino Press in London has recently published a new translation of the Babylonian Talmud in English under the very competent editorship of Dr. I. Epstein.

Among the well-known studies of Talmudic literature in English is the Introduction to the Talmud and Midrash by Hermann Strack, prominent Protestant theologian and professor at the University of Berlin, and Talmud and Apocrypha by the well-known British scholar, the Reverend I. Travers Herford, and also the short but popularly written essay by Arsene Darmesteter, The Talmud. An accurate and exhaustive survey of the world outlook of Talmudic Judaism is available in the monumental work, Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era, by the eminent Protestant

[p. xix]

scholar and Professor of Religion at Harvard University, the late George Foot Moore. A brief digest of the contents of the Talmud, with copious quotations, is available in A. Cohen's Everyman's Talmud. A short history of Talmudic times is available in the essay by Judah Goldin, The Period of the Talmud, in Volume I of The Jews, edited by Dr. Louis Finkelstein.

A splendid study of the Palestinian Talmud is offered us in Dr. Louis Ginzberg's recent work, Pirushim ve-Hidushim b'Yirushalmi (A Commentary on the Palestinian Talmud, N. Y. 1941). Its three volumes cover the first four chapters of the tractate Berakot, but its extended notes, and an introductory essay in Hebrew and English, offer invaluable insight into the general nature of the Palestinian Talmud and its relationship to the parallel literature which emanated from the Babylonian academies.

The present work attempts to clarify the relationship between the Bible and the Talmud and to trace the forces that continued to inspire the growth of the new literature and that gave it its remarkable popularity in the history of Judaism. It also endeavors to portray the culture of the Talmud through the citation of representative passages. The literature of the Talmud is vast, and the rabbis who composed it often differed in their thoughts. Our characterization of Talmudic culture cannot therefore be exhaustive, but it is hoped that the spirit of the larger work is nevertheless conveyed through these citations.

The material in this work is addressed to the general reader and not primarily to the scholar. The footnotes have therefore been reduced to a minimum. Crucial discussions are documented, but no attempt was made to subject the sources to textual criticism. Historical material which appears in standard works on the subject is drawn on freely, without the citation of the specific sources.

I am grateful to Dr. Louis Finkelstein, President of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, who has been a

[p. xx]

constant source of inspiration and encouragement in my studies. Dr. Louis Ginzberg, with whom I studied the Talmud at the Seminary, remained a friend and guide throughout the years, and I am grateful to him for invaluable help. I am indebted also to Rabbis Max Arzt, Michael Higger, Gershon Cohen and a number of other friends who were helpful in the solution of many individual problems in this study. I am also thankful to Mesdames Estelle Horowitt, Sara Jerome, and Bessie Katzman for typing the manuscript, and to Mr. Jesse Fuchs for help in proofreading. Finally I express my indebtedness to my wife for her suggestions, advice and criticism.

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

The Talmud as Literature

IN THE LIBRARY of the world's literary classics, a place of special distinction belongs to the approximately forty volumes which are designated collectively by the name "Talmud". Formidable in size, written in a difficult Aramaic, elusive in many of its discussions, the Talmud has long been an enigma to many. Can the average reader get some idea of what this vast literature is all about, of the men who produced it, of the ideas which inspired them? Can we open a window to permit the modern reader to behold the world of the Talmud, its culture, its way of life?

The authors of the Talmud did not look upon their teaching as an esoteric doctrine, suited only for the few. They sought to reach all men. They sought to reach the common people no less than the professional scholars. The traditional system of Jewish education began the study of the Talmud in the middle grades of the elementary school, and continued it, on ever deeper levels of analysis, to the academies of highest learning. And one of the objectives of that educational system was to cultivate in the student a taste for the Talmud that was to make of its study his avocation throughout life. Its very name--Talmud derives from the Hebrew lomed which means study--suggests that it was meant to be a rich and fruitful field of knowledge and research. The prize of the knowledge of the Talmud can be found, but it requires toil; it requires disciplined study. Those who are ready to pursue it with the necessary diligence will find awaiting them a treasury of rare wisdom to reward their labors.

The Talmud came into being as a supplement to Biblical Judaism. It was intended to bridge the gap between the Bible and life. It was a new creation of the Jewish people

[p. 2]

in response to the facts of a changing world that could no longer be guided by the simple word as enunciated in the Biblical text.

  

THE BIBLE REQUIRES SUPPLEMENTATION

The Bible continues to command the reverent loyalty of Jews, and of countless others who have learnt to look upon it as the embodiment of their basic religious beliefs and moral ideals. But the very effort to make Biblical religion the basis of human living exposes its insufficiency--at least for those who live in another milieu than the one in which the Bible took form.

The Biblical text often needs clarification. The Bible, for instance, allows the termination of marriage through divorce, without, however, defining the grounds for divorce, the procedure by which it was carried out, or the fate that was to befall the children of the dissolved family. The Bible similarly prohibits work on the seventh day of the week, but it does not define what is meant by work. Are we to infer that writing a letter, marketing or preparing food is to be construed as work? Must the country's armed services go off duty on the Sabbath? Was the priest to halt his Temple duties, and must the rabbi suspend teaching and preaching? Was healing the sick work, and must it be discontinued on the Sabbath? The answers to these questions must have been common knowledge at the time Biblical law was formulated, but in the course of the centuries that body of unrecorded knowledge was forgotten, and those provisions of the Bible were, therefore, in need of clarification.

The Bible, moreover, could not have anticipated the specific solutions to the many varied problems created by the altered circumstances of a changing Jewish society. The Bible forbids idolatry as a major sin. When the Jews were drawn into the Roman Empire, they were confronted with the civic duty enforced among all Roman subjects of worshipping

[p. 3]

the emperor. Were they to yield, or incur the consequences of disobedience to Rome? The ritual for initiating a proselyte into Judaism included the offering of a sacrifice at the Temple of Jerusalem, but how was that to be carried out after 70 C.E. when the Temple was destroyed? That was no academic problem, for in the first century, large numbers of pagans continued to join the synagogue throughout the Roman world. Indeed, how was Jewish religious life generally to be conducted after the fall of the Temple, when so much of traditional Jewish piety had centered in the sacrificial cult and the various ceremonies surrounding it?

The changes in Jewish society which necessitated the supplementation of the Bible were not only political; they were also cultural and social. The law that decreed "an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth" (Ex. 21:23), as a principle in the punishment of crime, represented justice at the time of its enactment, but it seemed morally reprehensible to sensitive men of a later generation. The prohibition of lending money on interest implies a primitive agricultural economy, where money is generally borrowed for the purchase of necessary tools or consumer goods. It is however, incompatible with the complex requirements of a commercio-industrial economy which depends on investments and banking. Similarly, reflecting the rural society to which it originally addressed itself, the Bible has no explicit provision for a legal instrument validating a commercial transaction. In the absence of a specifically formulated law, local custom or minhag, as it was called, often developed to take its place. It is clear, however, that the law could not abdicate to popular improvisation. If the law was to discipline life, it had to be enriched and supplemented with new provisions, to keep pace with a changing world.

Biblical narratives, too, present various theological, historical and linguistic problems that had to be coped with, if people were to master Biblical study, and continue to find in Scripture a source for guidance and authority in their

[p. 4]

religious life. How, for example, was the Biblical appraisal of the world as "very good" (Genesis 1:31), to be reconciled with the experiences of evil and death, and the repeated disasters to men championing good causes? With whom did God consult when He was quoted as saying, "Let us make man in our image" (Genesis 1:26)? Does that mean that there are several divine powers, or that God is corporeal and endowed with a concrete image? If Moses was responsible for the writing of the Biblical text, how explain the last eight verses of Deuteronomy, which describe his death and extol the quality of his leadership?

The Bible, finally, had not exhausted the creative genius of the Jewish people. The same creative powers which produced those literary masterpieces of the Bible remained alive in the Jewish community and continued to stir men to see new visions and to incarnate them in new creations of culture.

The Bible never became obsolete. Elements of abiding truth shine through all its pronouncements, even when they bear upon them some of the limitations of the people who labored to give the Bible literary form, and of the age in which it arose. But the Bible needed a commentary to close the gap formed by the passing of generations. People who have revered the Bible as the revealed will of God, and have sought to live by its mandate, have therefore generally felt the need of writing commentaries on it. The most imposing of these commentaries is the vast literature of the Talmud.

The characterization of the Talmud as a commentary on the Bible describes the circumstances of its origin, as well as its essential quality. But we must understand the term "commentary" in its broadest sense. It is more than a new exposition of an old document. It is also an original new creation, a means by which the voices of a new age speak out in their discoveries of new truth. That they are willing to speak through a commentary to an older work dramatizes their sense of unbroken continuity with their own past and their acceptance of the Bible as the all-sufficient work for

[p. 5]

human guidance in the world. The Talmud is thus of value both as literature of Biblical clarification, and as the depository of the newer cultural achievements within the Jewish people during the years in which it took form.

The Talmud is primarily concerned with law, because the Jews looked upon the legislation in the Bible as its most important element. But the Talmud is also rich in many copious discussions in the field of religion, ethics, social institutions, history, folk-lore and science. Thus we define the Talmud as an encyclopedia of Jewish culture; in form, a supplement to the Bible, and in its contents, a summation of a thousand years of intellectual, religious and social achievements of the Jewish people.

  

THE SANCTIONS FOR BIBLICAL SUPPLEMENTATION

The supplementation of the Bible, in its rich flowering in the literature of the Talmud, was a daring process. It was conceived as a means of fulfilling the law, but it often proceeded in bold new channels. It was in a sense a confession that God's "word" is in some sense not final, and that man must step in to adapt it to the world. Adaptation is akin to change. Dare man "adapt" the word of God? Is it not presumptuous for man to supplement a work through which the Lord hath spoken? The Bible itself seems explicitly to warn against it. Deuteronomy 4:2 speaks out against any tampering with the word of God: "Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, nor shall ye take aught from it."

The seeming presumption in supplementing the word of God was destined to be an issue on which conservative and progressive schools of thought debated in Judaism. But the spokesmen for supplementation found ample justification for their labor in the hallowed texts of the Bible itself. For the Bible apparently sensed the need of supplementation, and even projected an institution to accomplish it.

An elaborate system of higher and lower courts was established

[p. 6]

by Moses, while the Israelites were still in the desert, upon the recommendation of his father-in-law, Jethro; and a supreme court was projected as well, to resolve all legal problems which the lower courts could not pass upon. As Deut. 17:8-12 phrases it: "If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment ... then shalt thou arise and come unto the priests and the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days; and thou shalt inquire and they shall declare unto thee the sentence of judgment. According to the law which they shall teach thee ... thou shalt do ..." Every branch of doctrine and law, in other words, seemed to be included in the sphere of authority granted to judicial bodies for clarification and adjustment.

The teachers who supplemented the Bible did not limit themselves to interpretations. At times they promulgated new enactments. But even here they did not inaugurate a revolutionary movement in Judaism. A careful analysis of the historical books of the Bible indicated that Jewish authorities in the past had, under certain circumstances, suspended the procedures of Biblical law. Thus the Bible (Deut. 17:6) requires two witnesses to  the fact of culpable crime; no one was to be found guilty of crime on the basis of his own confession, without corroborating evidence. But Joshua (Joshua 7:24, 25) executed a soldier by the name of Achan when he confessed violating the orders of the commanding general not to loot the city of Jericho after its capture by the Jews. What can explain the conduct of Joshua, except that it was a time of war and martial law superseded the normal judicial procedure? The prophet Elijah, too, seems to have allowed himself to modify traditional law. He offered sacrifices on Mt. Carmel (I Kings 18), when, according to Biblical legislation, all sacrifices were confined to the central sanctuary in Jerusalem. Apparently the opportunity of discrediting the priesthood of Baal seemed to him sufficient reason to modify the traditional procedure of worship. And did not King Solomon suspend the fast on a Day of Atonement

[p. 7]

in order to hold the dedication of the Temple which he had built in Jerusalem?[r_01_1][*1]

It is thus clear that in an emergency traditional law could be suspended for specified or unspecified periods of time. What was justified in the past constituted precedent for the future--if not to abrogate the law, at least to suspend it pending periods of emergency. Even Deut. 4:2, "Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, nor shall ye take aught from it", was transmuted, through interpretation, into a sanction for the adjustment of tradition. The word which I command you was not taken as a reference to the Bible, but to the final formulation of tradition by later authorities. Contemporary authorities in every age, acting in their best judgment, whether to reaffirm or to revise traditional law, represent the ultimate source of guidance in life; and the general public was not to "add" or "take aught" from their decisions.

All these considerations crystallized into the realization that the ultimate authority to guide life cannot be a written text, but the living interpreters of those texts, the custodians of religious leadership in every generation. In the words of the famous Talmudist Rabbi Jannai: "If the Torah had been given in fixed and immutable formulations, it could not have endured. Thus, Moses pleaded with the Lord, 'Master of the Universe, reveal unto me the final truth in each problem of doctrine and law.' To which the Lord replied, 'There are no pre-existent final truths in doctrine or law; the truth is the considered judgment of the majority of authoritative interpreters in every generation.' ..."[r_01_2][*2]

The legal powers of a generation's duly authorized interpreters of tradition were looked upon as a function of their office, regardless of their individual merits in piety or scholarship. As a well-known Talmudic homily expounded it: "When the most insignificant person is appointed leader over the community, he is to be treated as the most eminent of persons. It is said, 'Thou shalt come unto the priests, the

[p. 8]

[paragraph continues] Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days' (Deut. 17:9). Could it possibly enter your mind that a person would go to a judge who was not in his days! The meaning is that you are to be guided by a contemporary authority, whoever he be. As Scripture puts it (Eccles. 7:10), 'Say not, How was it that the former days were better than these.'"[r_01_3][*3]

There is a beautiful rabbinic parable which dramatizes man's complete sovereignty in the development of what we may call the supplementary Torah. On one occasion a fierce debate ensued between Rabbi Eliezer and his colleagues on a complicated problem of law. Rabbi Eliezer continued to cite a variety of arguments but his colleagues remained unconvinced. Finally he invoked divine intervention to corroborate his opinion. "'If the law is in accordance with my view,' he exclaimed, 'may this carob tree offer testimony' (by a divine miracle). The carob tree moved a hundred (or, as others related, 400) cubits from its place. They replied to him: 'No proof can be cited from a carob tree.' Thereupon he exclaimed, 'If the law is in accordance with my views, may this stream of water offer testimony.' The stream moved backward from its normal course. They replied to him: 'No proof can be cited from water-channels.' Then he exclaimed, 'If the law is in accordance with my views, may the walls of this Academy offer testimony.' The walls of the Academy began caving in and were already on the point of collapsing when Rabbi Joshua rebuked them, 'If the students of the Torah contend with one another what concern is it of yours?' Out of respect for Rabbi Joshua they did not collapse, but out of respect for Rabbi Eliezer they remained aslope. Finally Rabbi Eliezer pleaded, 'If the law is in accordance with my views, may testimony be offered from the heavens above.' Whereupon a heavenly voice announced, 'What have you against Rabbi Eliezer? The law is in accord with his views.' Rabbi Joshua at once rose to his feet and announced, 'It is not in heaven' (Deut. 30:12). What did he mean by this? Said R. Jeremiah: That the Torah had already been

[p. 9]

given at Mt. Sinai; we pay no attention to heavenly voices, because Thou hast long since written at Sinai, 'After the majority must one incline' (Ex. 23:2). R. Nathan met Elijah and asked him: What did the Holy one blessed be He do in that hour? He laughed with joy, he replied, saying, 'My sons have defeated me, my sons have defeated me.'" The Torah was given to men and human minds interpreting the Torah in accordance with their best judgments alone define what is or what is not law.[r_01_4][*4]

  

THE METHOD OF MIDRASH HALAKAH

For Judaism the most important portion of the Bible is law and one branch of the supplement to the Bible likewise deals with law. It is in part an attempt to clarify Biblical prescriptions and, through analysis, to deduce general legal principles that would be applicable in new situations. Such Bible analysis was designated by the Hebrew name midrash, which may be translated as probing. It was a probing for explanations, provisions and meanings that did not appear on the surface reading of a text but which might be there implicitly, to be discovered through diligent study and research. The midrashic probing of law is technically known as midrash halakah, the term halakah possibly being derived from a root which means to walk, and therefore, appropriately designating law which charts a way of life.

Frequently this midrash defines more precisely the mandate of the Biblical law. Thus the rabbis asked, "What is the meaning of the text, 'The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers'? (Deut. 24:16) If its intention is to teach that fathers should not be put to death for a sin committed by children, and vice versa, behold it is explicitly stated, 'Every man shall be put to death for his own sin!' (ibid) The meaning must therefore be: 'Fathers shall not be put to death by the evidence of children', and vice versa."[r_01_5][*5]

[p. 10]

The midrash halakah was, however, equally concerned with discovering in these Biblical provisions, the generalizations that would offer guidance in new situations. This may well be illustrated by the interpretations of Deut. 24:6 and Exodus 21:26, 27. Deuteronomy 24:6 specifies "No man shall take the mill or the upper millstone as pledge; for he taketh a man's life to pledge." This law is specific in its application, but it was clearly designed to protect the poor debtor in his possession of domestic utensils, indispensable in the preparation of food. It was, therefore, generalized to apply to "all tools used in the preparation of food." Similarly the law in Exodus 21:26, 27 provides: "If a man smite the eye of his servant and destroy it, he shall let him go free for his eye's sake. And if he smite out his servant's tooth, he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake." The specifications, eye and tooth, are seen in their common general aspects as vital irreplaceable bodily organs; and the same law is therefore applied to the mutilation of any organ in a slave's body, which is enough to send him to liberty.[r_01_6][*6]

There were times when the midrash could not discover Biblical precedents and it became necessary to legislate, to add to or abrogate traditional laws. The post-Biblical festival of Hanukkah, as well as the organization of the synagogue and the ritual of worship surrounding it, are examples of adjustment in traditional law through the process of legislation. So is the decree suspending all religious observances during the Hadrianic persecutions of Judaism (135 C.E.), except the laws forbidding idolatry, murder and adultery. There were many legislative decrees in the field of civil law, too: the extension of poor relief to poor pagans, the provision that only the least desirable parcels of real estate be taken from orphans in payment of debts, and the institution of universal elementary education in the first century before the common era.

The legislative adjustment of law was described as a takanna, an enactment, or gezera, a decree. These decrees

[p. 11]

and enactments were promulgated by individuals or corporate bodies that exercised authority at the particular time. Such legislation has been attributed to Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Ezra, as well as to the various subsequent heads of the Sanhedrin, which combined both the supreme judicial as well as legislative powers of the Jewish people.

This legislation did not have the status of Biblical amendments. Conceived as a divinely revealed document, the Torah could not be altered by the hands of men. But this legislation was harmonized with the Torah through a similar technique of midrashic probing which discovered in the Torah itself the sanctions for change.

Occasionally the old law was merely circumvented so that, in a technical sense, its mandate remained intact. This is illustrated by Hillel's reform which did away with the cancellation of debts every seventh year, as provided for in Deut. 15:1-3. This law proved a serious barrier to the development of Jewish trade and commerce. People refused to extend credits and loans for fear that their debts would not be repaid before the general cancellation time. Hillel's remedy, called prosbul, was the execution of a document which designated the court as the collection agent, and stipulated that the usual law of debt cancellation on the Sabbatical year shall not apply to this particular loan. The court was not included in the provisions of the Biblical law and was, therefore, technically free to carry on collections until the complete liquidation of the debt.[r_01_7][*7]

It was similarly through the circumvention that the rabbis reformed the Biblical code of criminal law. There had developed among the rabbis a strong abhorrence of capital punishment. The Bible, of course, recognized a wide variety of crimes for which the death penalty was to be inflicted. Instead of abrogating the Biblical law, the rabbis circumvented it. They limited capital punishment to circumstances which made it practically inoperative. They ruled out all circumstantial evidence, no matter how convincing. They

[p. 12]

went beyond the Biblical requirement of two eye-witnesses to the crime. The two witnesses were expected to have warned the culprit of the criminality and legal consequences of his projected act; and the criminal was expected to have defied the warning with the assertion that he refuses to be deterred by them![r_01_8][*8]

But the midrash, through an ingenious technique of reinterpretation, discovered sanctions for the formal abrogation of old laws as well. Thus the law which decrees that a criminal be punished "an eye for an eye" (Ex. 21:24) was shown to be but an application of the general principle that the punishment must be proportionate to the crime. For, as one rabbi explained, suppose a blind man injured the eye of another person, how shall the law be applied? Clearly there was only one way--compensation; the Biblical injunction is carried out by making the compensation commensurate with the injury. The new legislation universalized this rule of compensation. The Biblical application of the principle was taken as contingent and therefore dispensable, but the principle itself lived on in the new law.

Similarly the institution of the Sabbath was appraised as a means of enhancing human life. Where, therefore, the observance of the Sabbath endangered an individual's existence, it was obviously to be disregarded, for in the words of Rabbi Jonathan ben Joseph, "The Sabbath is delivered in your hand and not you in its hand." The Babylonian teacher Samuel grounded this ruling on the verse: "And he shall live by them" (Lev. 18:5). The commandments of the Torah were to be the means of enhancing life, not for destroying it. This reinterpretation has been traced to the time of the Maccabean revolution against the Syrian-Greeks. The prevailing observance of the Sabbath had endangered the national cause; the enemy simply delayed military operations until the Sabbath when the Jews would not resist. The modification of the law superseded temporarily the accustomed

[p. 13]

[paragraph continues] Sabbath observance, but its essential purpose was vindicated in the national and religious liberation that followed.

This interpretation is of course applicable to all law, for it is the purpose not only of the Sabbath, but of all law, to enhance human life; and all law must therefore be superseded where the broader interests of life demand it. As one rabbi, ingeniously rendering the ambiguous verse in Psalm 119:126 expressed it: "When it is time to do for the sake of the Lord, they voided Thy Torah."[r_01_9][*9]

  

THE METHOD OF MIDRASH HAGGADAH

The supplementary Torah also deals with the non-legal aspects of tradition, with the doctrines and values which are equally an integral part of Judaism. It seeks to clarify various historical, theological, and ethical assertions of the Torah, to rationalize them in the light of current knowledge and prevailing moral ideals, and to derive from them the generalizations that can inspire, guide, and edify life, in the existing conditions under which men lived. The non-legal branch of the supplementary Torah is called haggadah, meaning utterances; and the interpretive analysis of the haggadah has been designated as midrash haggadah.

The following citations will illustrate the nature and function of the midrash haggadah. Genesis 12:5 declares: "And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they gathered, and the souls that they had made in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan." Rabbi Elazar bar Zimra offered the following comment on this: "If all people in the world should attempt to create a single insect they would be unable to breathe the breath of life into it, and here it is said and the souls that they had made in Haran. What Scripture really refers to is the proselytes they won to their way of life. And why does Scripture use the term made for the winning of proselytes? It is to teach us that whoever draws a pagan

[p. 14]

close to himself and influences him to become a proselyte, it is as though he had begotten him. And why does not Scripture use the singular he had made, instead of the plural, they had made? R. Huna suggested that it refers to both Abraham and Sarai. He made proselytes among the men, and she among the women."

The rabbis speculated as to why the Book of Nehemiah was denied an independent place in the Holy Scriptures, but was incorporated into the Book of Ezra (this was the arrangement in the Biblical canon which was accepted at that time). The answer they offered is "Because he thought of his own welfare; as it is said 'Think upon me my God for good' (Neh. 5:19). Another reason is that he spoke disparagingly about his predecessors; as it is said, 'But the former governors that had been before me were chargeable unto the people and had taken of their bread and wine, beside forty shekels of silver.'" The discussion of the authorship of the different books of the Bible also led to the question who composed the last eight verses in Deuteronomy, which describe the death of Moses, and they were ascribed by some to the disciple of Moses, Joshua.[r_01_10][*10]

Midrash haggadah is frequently a defense of traditional doctrines against the challenge of contemporary skepticism. On one occasion Rabban Gamaliel was challenged: "You rabbis declare that wherever ten people assemble to worship, the Divine Presence abides amongst them. How many presences of God are there?" Gamaliel called his interrogator's servant and struck him. "Why didst thou allow the sun to enter and heat the home of your master?" "But the sun shines all over the world," the servant protested. Rabban Gamaliel drew the point of the analogy. "If the sun which is only one of the million myriads of God's servants, can be in every part of the world, how much more so can the Divine Presence radiate throughout the universe?"

On another occasion Gamaliel was taunted, "Your God is a thief, because it is written, 'The Lord caused a deep

[p. 15]

sleep to fall upon Adam and he slept; and He took one of his ribs'" (Gen. 2:21). In this instance Gamaliel's daughter volunteered the answer. "Thieves," she related, "broke into our house during the night and stole our silver goblet but left a golden one behind." "Would that such a thief visited me every day," the skeptic exclaimed. "Was it not a splendid thing then for the first man when a single rib was taken from him and a mate was supplied to him in its stead?" she retorted.

Midrashic probing was similarly utilized in the new formulations of doctrine. This is well illustrated in the famous homily on the theme of human equality. Probing into all the implications of the verse "Ye shall therefore keep My statutes and Mine ordinances, which if a man do he shall live by them" (Lev. 18:5), one teacher asked: "Whence may it be demonstrated that a pagan, when he conforms to the moral law of the Torah, becomes the equal of a High priest in Israel? From the words, 'which if a man do he shall live by them', the term man being universal and referring equally to Jew and pagan. Similarly it is said 'This is the law of mankind, Lord God' (2 Samuel 7:19, a possible rendition of the original Hebrew)--it is not stated, 'This is the law of priests, Levites and Israelites, but the more inclusive term the law of mankind.' In similar manner, too, Scripture does not say, 'Open the gates, that priests, Levites, and Israelites may enter,' but, 'Open the gates that a righteous goy keeping faithfulness may enter' (Is. 26:2)--goy means a people or nation generally, Jewish or pagan. And again, it does not say, 'This is the gate of the Lord, Priests, Levites and Israelites shall enter into it', but 'the righteous shall enter it', which is more universal (Ps. 118:20). Likewise, it does not say, 'Rejoice in the Lord, O ye priests, Levites and Israelites', but, 'Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous' (Ps. 33:1). And finally it does not say, 'Do good, O Lord, to the priests, Levites and Israelites,' but 'unto the good' (Ps. 125:4), which clearly refers to good men among all nations. It is

[p. 16]

thus abundantly demonstrated that even a pagan, provided he adheres to the moral discipline of the Torah is the equal of the highest ranking priest in Israel."[r_01_11][*11]

  

THE MIDRASH AS LITERATURE

The earliest literary form we have of the supplementary Torah is the Midrash, which proceeds through a deduction of law or opinion through Biblical interpretation, and it is organized as a running commentary on the books of the Bible. It includes halakah and haggadah in accordance with the varying contents of the respective books in the Bible. A number of these early Midrashim have been preserved to our day. The best known are the Midrash on Exodus, Mekilta, the Aramaic for measure, rule or norm; the Midrash on Leviticus, Sifra, abbreviated from Sifra de-be Rab, the Book of the School; and the Midrash on Numbers and Deuteronomy, Sifre, similarly abbreviated from Sifre de-be Rab, the Books of the Schools. All these books were composed in the early part of the second century, by teachers who for the most part remained anonymous but who functioned in the great academy of Torah studies which was established in Jabneh after Jerusalem's fall in 70 C.E.

The following citations illustrate the method of the Midrash and the results in halakah and haggadah achieved by it. When the Israelites on their way out of Egypt found themselves in the difficult position between the pursuing hosts of Pharaoh and the menacing waters of the Red Sea, Moses turned to God in impassioned prayer. But the Lord responded with a sharp rebuke: "Wherefore criest thou unto me? Speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward" (Exodus 14:15). Rabbi Eliezer elaborates on this: "Thus did God speak unto Moses: 'Moses, my children are in great distress; they are hemmed in by the sea on one side and the pursuing enemy on the other. And yet you stand and indulge in prolonged prayer. Wherefore criest thou unto me? There

[p. 17]

are occasions when it is proper to prolong and there are occasions necessitating action when prayer is to be abbreviated.'"

Another revealing example is offered us in the comment on Exodus 18:12. This Biblical verse reports: "And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took a burnt offering and sacrificed for God; and Aaron came and all the elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God." The rabbis wondered why Moses was not mentioned in the episode, and they inferred: "He must have stood by to wait on them and serve them. In doing this he followed the precedent of father Abraham who personally waited on the three angels who came to him in the disguise of itinerant strangers. Similarly, when Rabban Gamaliel arranged a banquet in honor of his fellow scholars, he stood by personally to wait on them and serve them. Some felt reticent, regarding it as improper that they be waited on by the head of the Sanhedrin. But Rabbi Joshua reassured them, 'Let him serve. There is the precedent of a greater man than he who served the three angels who came to him posing as pagan Arabs.'"

Another illustration of the midrashic method may be found in the rabbinic discussion of Exodus 20:18. "'And the people stood afar off; but Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.' What was responsible for this unique distinction accorded Moses? His humility, as it is written (Nu. 12:3) 'and the man Moses was very humble'. The general inference suggested by this verse is that whoever is of a humble spirit will in the end experience the presence of God, as Isaiah (57-16) also suggests, 'I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit ...' But he that is proud and arrogant renders the land unclean and causes the withdrawal of God's presence, as it is written, 'Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord' (Proverbs 16:5), the very phrase used in Deuteronomy 7:26 to describe idolatry."

[p. 18]

The following citation is a good example of the midrashic analysis of the Bible for the derivation of law, "'And if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from Mine altar, that he may die' (Exodus 21:14). The verse obviously excluded from the prescribed punishment those who cannot be said to have acted with presumption, such as one who is deaf and dumb, an imbecile or a moron ... the physician accidently causing death while working for the patient's recovery or the executioner inflicting death under the order of the court."

The following selection from the Sifre shows the same methodology as the above. "'And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto My commandments ... to love the Lord your God' (Deut. 11:13). One may be tempted to say, 'I will study the Torah so that I become rich, that I may be called master, that I may receive rewards in the world to come'. It is for this reason that the verse emphasizes, to love the Lord your God; whatever you do, let it be only with the motivation of true love."[r_01_12][*12]

The Midrash was particularly suited for preaching purposes. In following the continuous text of the Bible it enabled the preacher to draw his lesson each week from the Scriptural lesson designated for that particular Sabbath. For the scholar it was also an advantage to see in each instance how a particular law or moral utterance is traced to its Biblical source. From the standpoint of those interested in law, however, the Midrash is an awkward literary form. Relevant legal material is scattered throughout the Biblical books. The presentations are long and involved. The formulation of law is constantly interrupted by haggadah, by historical, theological or homiletical discussions. Nor was the Midrash a convenient depository for enactments and ordinances promulgated without specific reference to Scriptural derivations. There was obviously a need for a work of literary reorganization that would separate halakah from haggadah, that would reduce the law to simple succinct statements,

[p. 19]

systematically organized along thematic lines, and that would include, also, independent legal traditions which the Talmudic supplementers inherited from the past.

  

THE MISHNAH

The next product in this process of literary creativity is the Mishnah, a term derived from shanah, which means to repeat or study. This Mishnah in the form that we have it today is a product of the scholarly editorship of Rabbi Judah the Prince, and his Palestinian disciples who were active in the 3rd century. But there were other Mishnah collections which paved the way for their labors, going in some instances back to the 1st century. In this final product the language is a clear and lucid Hebrew; the statements are succinct and the principle of organization is subject matter. There are six main sections to the Mishnah which are in turn subdivided into an aggregate of 63 tractates. The tractate is subdivided into chapters and the chapter into individual paragraphs or Mishniot.

The six main sections to the Mishnah are called Sedarim, orders, derived from the fact that each section represents an orderly arrangement of the laws on its particular subject. The six Sedarim are Zeraim, Moed, Nashim, Nezikin, Kodashim, Toharot. Zeraim, or seeds, deals with agriculture; appended to it is the all important tractate Berakot which deals with prayer. Moed, festivals, deals with the Sabbath, holidays, fasts and feasts of the Jewish calendar. Nashim, which means women, discusses marriage, divorce and other phases of family life. Nezikin, injuries, deals with civil and criminal law. Kodashim, Holy Things, discusses the sacrificial cult and other details of the Temple service. The last section, Taharot, cleanliness, deals with all questions of ritual purity.

The stylistic and methodological character of the Mishnah is well illustrated by the following selections: Mishnah Gittin 9:3, 4

[p. 20]

discusses inadequately executed documents of divorce: "Three kinds of bills of divorce are invalid, yet if she married again the offspring is legitimate; one that a man wrote with his own hand but there were no witnesses to it; one to which there were witnesses but which bore no date; and one which bore the date but had one witness only. Lo, these three bills of divorce are invalid, yet if she married again the offspring is legitimate. Rabbi Eliezer says: Even though it was not signed by witnesses yet was delivered before witnesses, it is valid, and she may exact her Ketubah from mortgaged property; for the witnesses sign only as a precaution for the general good."

Mishnah Baba Batra 5:1 discusses the transfer of property: "If a man sold a ship, he has sold also the mast, the sail, the anchor, and all the means for steering it; but he has not sold the slaves, the packing-bags, or lading. But if he had said, 'It and all that is in it', all these are sold also. If a man sold a wagon he has not sold the mules; if he sold the mules he has not sold the wagon. If he sold the yoke he has not sold the oxen, and if he sold the oxen he has not sold the yoke. Rabbi Judah says: The price makes it manifest: thus if one said to him, 'Sell me thy yoke for 200 zuz', it is manifest that no yoke costs 200 zuz. But the sages say: The price is no proof."

The procedure in courts of law is described in Mishniot Sanhedrin 1:1 and 3:7. It reads thus: "Cases concerning theft or personal injury are judged by three (judges); claims for full damages or half-damages, two-fold restitution, or fourfold or five-fold restitution, and (claims against) the violator, the seducer and him that hath brought an evil name (must be judged) by three, so says Rabbi Meir. But the other sages say that the latter should be judged by twenty-three, for there may arise therefrom a capital case ...

"When the judges reached their decision they brought in the suitors. The chief among the judges says, 'Thou, such-a-one, art not guilty', or 'Thou, such-a-one, art guilty'. And

[p. 21]

whence do we know that after one of the judges has gone forth he may not say, 'I declare him not guilty and my fellows declare him guilty; but what may I do, for my fellows outvoted me?' Of such a one it is written, Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people (Lev. 19:16); and it also says, He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets, but he that is a faithful spirit concealeth the matter" (Proverbs 11:13).

Mishnah Abot 5:7 offers a precious insight into the kind of character prized by the rabbis: "There are seven marks of the clod and seven of the wise man. The wise man does not speak before one that is greater than he is in wisdom; and he does not break in upon the words of his fellow; and he is not hasty in making answer; he asks what is relevant and makes answer according to the halakah, and he speaks on the first point first and on the last point last, and of what he has heard no tradition he says, 'I have not heard'; and he admits the truth, and the opposite of these are the marks of the clod."

  

THE TOSEFTA

The Mishnah as finally compiled was a milestone in the history of tradition. It was the summation, the climax of centuries of intellectual labors. It was welcomed particularly by the Jewish community in Babylonia since it offered them religious guidance without necessary recourse to the academies of Palestine. But the process of judicial creativity did not cease with the creation of the Mishnah. Because of its very brevity, the statements in the Mishnah required constant amplification and interpretation. Moreover a great deal of material was omitted altogether, whether because the editors of the Mishnah did not consider it important or because they felt they had already covered it in another form. Such material was technically known as "Baraita", outside, that is, relevant data left outside the Mishnah text.

[p. 22]

[paragraph continues] For a scholarly grasp of the full range of tradition it was, however, invaluable.

The shortcomings of the Mishnah must have been recognized in the very generation that produced it; the Tosefta, meaning supplement, compiled apparently during the same period that saw the reaction of the Mishnah, frequently offers essential amplifications to the Mishnaic text, as well as, of course, certain independent material. The Tosefta's function as a supplement to the Mishnah is well illustrated by a comparison of Mishnah Shekalim 1:1, and Tosefta Shekalim 1:1. Thus the Mishnah: "On the first day of the month of Adar announcements are made concerning the payment of the annual half-shekel due to the Temple Treasury (Exodus 30: 13 ff). ... And on the fifteenth day of that month the roads are repaired ..." Apparently presupposing the Mishnah, the Tosefta merely amplifies: "On the fifteenth day of that month emissaries of the court attend to the repairing of the roads, which have become damaged in the rainy season." Without the Mishnah we should indeed remain in the dark as to what the Tosefta meant by on the 15th day of that month. It is only by drawing on the information of the Mishnah that we may identify on the 15th day of that month as referring to the month of Adar.

  

THE GEMARA

The most important supplement to the Mishnah is the Gemara, created after the completion of the Mishnah in the third century. Derived from the Aramaic gemar and meaning study or teaching, the Gemara exists in two versions, both in the Aramaic vernaculars current respectively among the Jews of Palestine and Babylonia. For in post-Mishnaic times, the Jewish community in Babylonia had overtaken Palestine as a center of Jewish learning, and the Babylonian schools developed a parallel supplement to the Mishnah,

[p. 23]

which indeed proved even more influential than the Palestinian supplement. Frequently the same teachers are represented in both Gemaras, for there was a constant interchange of visits among the Palestinian and Babylonian rabbis and the academies in each country were fully informed on the work being done by their sister academies in the other country. Not all tractates of the Mishnah are supplemented by the Gemara--only those that were of interest to the teachers that created the Gemara. The Palestinian Gemara, frequently called Yerushalmi or Jerusalem Gemara, supplements thirty-nine tractates; the Babylonian only thirty-six and a half. In scope, however, the latter is three times as large as the former, the Babylonian Gemara being more elaborate and more copious in its expositions.

In its discussions the Gemara introduces citations from the Tosefta, the various Midrashim, the records of old customs, legislative enactments and ordinances, haggadic discourses and ethical observations. A tendency to digress and interpolate various obiter dicta in halakah and haggadah has, in addition, enriched the Gemara with a vast store of anecdotes, parables and folk lore. The Gemara is thus the most comprehensive of all the texts in the supplementary Torah. The Mishnah and Gemara, as an integrated text, taken together comprise the Talmud.

The following Talmudic selections illustrate the style and method of the Gemara and its supplementary relations to the Mishnah. The Mishnah declares: "Seven days before the Day of Atonement the High Priest was removed from his home and confined to the office of the counsellors ... They delivered to him elders from the elders of the court and they read before him (throughout the seven days) from the ritual of the day. They said to him, Sir High Priest, read yourself with your own mouth, perchance you have forgotten or perchance you have never learnt ..."

To this declaration of the Mishnah there now follows a Gemara supplement: "It is understandable that they assume

[p. 24]

he may have forgotten, but would a High Priest ever be appointed if he had never learnt? Has it not been taught: The Torah describes the High Priest as the priest that is highest among his brethren (Lev. 21:10, 14), which means that he must excel his colleagues in vigor, in personality, in wisdom, and in financial independence ... R. Joseph explained: This is no difficulty. The one characterization refers to the High Priests who functioned in the First Temple. The other refers to the corrupt High Priests who held office in the Second Temple. As is illustrated in the report of Rab Assi: A tarkubful of dinars did Martha, the daughter of Boethus give as a bribe to King Jannai (a general designation in the Talmud for Hasmonean or Herodian rulers) to nominate Joshua b. Gamala as one of the High Priests."

From the same tractate is also drawn the following Mishnah: "A sick person is fed (on the Day of Atonement) at the word of experts, and if no experts are there one feeds at his own wish till he says: 'Enough'". And there follows immediately the vital supplement of the Gemara: "Rabbi Jannai explained: If the patient says, I need food and the physician says that he does not, we hearken to the patient. What is the reason? The heart knoweth its own bitterness (Prov. 14:10). But isn't it self-evident? We might have assumed that the physician's knowledge, being more authentic, ought to carry greater weight. If the physician says that he needs food, while the patient says that he does not, we heed the physician. Why? There is always the fear that the patient may be in stupor."[r_01_13][*13]

Here is another Mishnah: "If debris falls on someone and it is doubtful whether or not he is there or whether he is alive or dead, one should open the heap of debris to rescue him, even on the Sabbath." The Gemara supplement follows: "One must remove debris to save a life on the Sabbath, and the more zealous one is in doing so the more praiseworthy he is; and one need not seek permission from religious authorities. How so? If one saw a child ... fall into a pit,

[p. 25]

he breaks loose one segment (of the entrenchment) and pulls it up--the faster the better; and he need not obtain permission from religious authorities. ... If he saw a door closing upon an infant thereby frightening or endangering the infant, he may break it so as to get the child out--the faster the better; and he need not obtain permission from religious authorities. ... One may extinguish or isolate the flames in the case of a fire--the sooner the better; and he need not obtain permission from the religious authorities.

"Rabbi Ishmael, Rabbi Akiba and Rabbi Eleazar b. Azariah were once on a journey, with Levi ha-Saddar and Rabbi Ishmael, the son of Rabbi Eleazar following them. This question was asked of them: 'Whence do we know that in the event of danger to human life all laws of the Sabbath are superseded?' Rabbi Ishmael answered and said: 'If a thief be found breaking in' (Ex. 22:1), it is permissible to kill him in self-defense, though the shedding of blood pollutes the land and causes the divine spirit to depart from Israel. If the defense of life takes precedence over another life--that of the burglar--it certainly takes precedence over the Sabbath. ... Rabbi Simeon b. Menasya said, 'And the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath' (Ex. 31:16). The Torah obviously implied: 'Suspend for his sake one Sabbath, so that he may keep many Sabbaths.' Rab Judah said in the name of Samuel: 'If I had been there, I should have suggested a more convincing explanation. The Torah appraises its rules of life with He shall live by them (Lev. 18:5), implying clearly that one must not thwart life because of them.' Raba said: 'The other explanations may be refuted but that of Samuel is irrefutable'".[r_01_14][*14]

Our final illustration is taken from the field of civil law. The Mishnah provides: "If a person found something in a shop, it belongs to him; should it have been between the counter and the shopkeeper, it belongs to the latter. If he found it in front of a money-changer, it belongs to him; should it have been between the form (on which the coins

[p. 26]

are displayed) and the money-changer, it belongs to the latter. If a person purchased fruits from his fellow or the latter sent him fruits, and he found coins among them, they belong to him; but should they have been tied in a bundle, he must advertise."

The Mishnah's discussion of found property evoked the following story from the teachers of the Gemara: "Alexander of Macedon visited King Katzya, who displayed to him an abundance of gold and silver. Alexander said to him, 'I have no need of your gold and silver. My only purpose is to see your customs, how you act and administer justice.' While they were engaged in conversation, a man came before the king with a case against his fellow from whom he had bought a field with its scrap-heap and in it discovered a bundle of coins. The purchaser contended, 'I bought the heap but not the treasure hidden in it' and the vendor asserted, 'I sold the heap and all it contained.' While they were arguing together, the king turned to one of them and asked, 'Have you a son?' 'Yes,' he replied. He asked the other, 'Have you a daughter?' and he answered, 'Yes'. 'Let them marry and give them the treasure', was the king's decision. Alexander began to laugh, and Katzya inquired, 'Why do you laugh? Did I not judge well? Suppose such a case happened with you, how would you have dealt with it?' He replied, 'I would have put them both to death and confiscated the treasure.' 'Do you, then, love gold so much?' said Katzya. He made a feast for him at which he was served with golden cutlets and golden poultry. 'I do not eat gold,' he exclaimed; and the king retorted, 'A curse alight upon you! If you do not eat gold, why do you love it so intensely?' He continued to ask, 'Does the sun shine in your country?' 'Certainly,' was the reply. 'Does rain descend in your country?' 'Of course.' 'Are there small animals in your country?' 'Of course'. 'A curse alight upon you! you only live, then, by the merit of those animals!'"[r_01_15][*15]

[p. 27]

  

THE ORAL TORAH AND THE TALMUD

All these literary productions of the academies in Palestine and Babylonia from the close of the Biblical canon to the close of the fifth century comprise the supplementary Torah. This includes the various midrashim; the Tosefta; the Mishnah and the Gemara, or, taken together, the Talmud. It has generally been called the Oral Torah because for centuries it was expounded and transmitted orally. Individual students probably employed notes to aid their memories, but none of these compilations were officially edited until a considerably later date. The Palestinian Talmud came to an end some time in the 5th century as a result of the general decline of the Jewish community in Palestine, marked by the abolition of the office of patriarch, as the head of the Jewish community was called, in 425 C.E. The Babylonian Talmud was concluded toward the end of the same century, for in Babylonia, too, Jewish life was declining, following the persecution of Jews under the Sassanian Kings Yezdegerd II (438-457) and Peroz (459-484). The final edition of the supplementary Torah in the volumes of the Talmud as we have them today, brought to a close one of the most creative epochs in the history of Jewish tradition.

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28] [p. 29]

  

The Forerunners of the Talmud

  

THE SOPHERIM

IN BIBLICAL TIMES the work of supplementing the written Torah was in the hands of priests (Kohanim), Levites and community elders. When the second Jewish commonwealth was founded by the returned Babylonian exiles, that function was taken over by the sopherim. The term sopherim has generally been translated as scribes. As a leader of culture, the sopher was usually the one who possessed the then rare skill of writing, and his derivative function was therefore that of scribe. In its original meaning, however, sopher was primarily a narrator or teacher, an expounder of a body of tradition; and his work was essentially oral. Thus the verb saper which describes the sopher's work designates, in modern as in Biblical Hebrew, the oral activity of narration and instruction.[r_02_1][*1]

The pioneer of the sopheric movement was Ezra who came from Babylonia in 459 B.C.E. with the ideal of directing the reorganized Jewish settlement in Palestine toward the principles and institutions of the Torah. The leaders of the new settlement, struggling with the problems of reconstruction, had done little to safeguard the religious interests of the community. They had rebuilt the Temple, but the study and practice of the Torah was widely ignored. And the Temple itself was in a state of moral and material decline. It was this condition that Ezra sought to remedy. At a public assembly described in Nehemiah 9-10, he moved the people to pledge themselves with an oath to "walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the Lord our God and His

[p. 30]

ordinances, and His statutes." To implement their resolve they also imposed upon themselves certain obligations for which no provision exists in the Pentateuch: a poll tax for the maintenance of the Temple; an arrangement for supplying wood for the altar by the various families in turn during the year; and the institution of priestly supervision over the Levites in their collection of the tithes.

The great task to which the sopherim gave themselves was the popularization of the knowledge and appreciation of the Torah. They instituted the public reading of the Torah not only on Sabbaths and festivals but on those weekdays, Mondays and Thursdays, when villagers gathered in the town markets. They reformed the Hebrew script, introducing the present square type alphabet in place of the old Hebrew alphabet, which is still used by the Samaritans. They enriched the collection of Biblical books by the addition of Ezekiel, Daniel, Esther, the Twelve Minor Prophets, Ezra, Nehemiah and Chronicles. They re-edited the Biblical text bringing it into greater conformity with their developed religious and literary sensibilities. Thus they substituted for the original "but the Lord stood yet before Abraham" the presently accepted reading "but Abraham stood yet before the Lord".[r_02_2][*2] They enriched the liturgy with many new compositions and fixed a ritual for the daily and Sabbath synagogue services.

The teachers who supplemented the Torah did not reach their decisions on individual impulse; in every generation there were corporate bodies that deliberated and acted in concert. Such a corporate body functioned during the time of the sopherim, and was known as the Great Assembly. There are no records extant of the sessions of the Great Assembly and we have no significant information about any of its members, except fragmentary echoes in the writing of a later age, principally in the ethical treatise Abot. One of the Assembly's guiding principles is quoted as: "Be deliberate in the interpretation of the law; raise up many disciples; and

[p. 31]

make a fence about the Torah." One of the last of the men of the Great Assembly, Simon the Just, is quoted as the author of the maxim: "The fabric of civilization depends upon three virtues, the study and practice of the Torah, religious worship, and acts of loving-kindness." Antigonus of Sacho is the only sopher we know of who lived during the early Greek period; and of him only one maxim cited in Abot has been preserved. He advocated serving God without the thought of reward. "Be not like the slaves who serve their masters for the gratuity which they expect. Serve without expecting a gratuity and let reverence for God ever be upon you."[r_02_3][*3]

The sopheric movement flourished throughout the years that Persia was the imperialist master of Palestine (563-332 B.C.E.). For apart from the exaction of the tribute, Persia left her colonial provinces complete freedom in determining their inner destiny. Persia crumbled in 332 B.C.E. at the blows of the youthful conqueror of Macedonia, Alexander the Great. Alexander did not live long enough to enjoy the fruits of his military exploits. He died in 322 B.C.E., leaving his empire without a successor. After some bitter fighting, Alexander's leading generals divided the spoils among themselves. Seleucus took Syria, while Ptolemy became King of Egypt. Palestine was claimed both by Seleucus and Ptolemy. Several bitter wars were fought over the issue and the country changed hands a number of times, until 198 B.C.E., when by a decisive feat of arms the Seleucid king added her to his realms. The political uncertainties and the actual dislocations of war must have reacted disastrously upon the social and economic life of the country. But the cultural life remained free and the Torah loyalists continued to practice and propagate the knowledge of the Torah throughout the land.

The free development of the Torah was interrupted during the reign of Antiochus IV who ascended the Seleucid throne in 175 B.C.E. Antiochus had spent his youth as a hostage in

[p. 32]

[paragraph continues] Rome. His knowledge of Roman imperial ambitions convinced him that Rome would continue encroaching upon his domains and that war was bound to come between the two empires, Syria and Rome. Indeed, the Roman challenge was presented boldly enough in 168 B.C.E. After successfully invading Egypt, Antiochus was forced to leave his rich spoils by a Roman envoy who threatened an immediate declaration of hostilities. To prepare for the challenge, Antiochus sought to consolidate his far-flung territories by fostering everywhere a common Hellenistic culture.

The Greek "culture" which Antiochus sought to foster was not the Hellenic achievements in philosophy, science and the arts, but the uncritical manners, customs, and superstitions of the Greek populace. He built gymnasia for Greek sports and lavish shrines for the various popular deities. The emperor himself, as the embodiment of the state, was proclaimed as divine, taking on a new title Epiphanes, a god made manifest, to be adored everywhere as a symbol of civic loyalty and imperial unity. In 168 B.C.E. the practices of the Jewish religion were proscribed on the pain of death; and the Temple at Jerusalem was converted into a pagan shrine, the Jews being called upon to offer sacrifices to a golden statue of Jupiter as their new divinity.

Antiochus had little difficulty in enacting this policy throughout his empire, but in Palestine he met with resistance. Sopheric activity had popularized the love of Torah throughout the land; and when Antiochus sought forcibly to uproot Judaism, everywhere there were people who preferred martyrdom to a betrayal of their religious traditions. The opposition of the Jewish masses was finally articulated by a priestly family in Modin, headed by a certain Mattathias, who proclaimed active resistance. Mattathias soon died, but the struggle was continued by his five sons, around whom rallied bands of Torah loyalists, waging an active campaign of open as well as guerilla warfare against the successive armies sent by the Syrians. The war was prolonged and bitter,

[p. 33]

but in 165 B.C.E. the Temple was occupied by the loyalist forces and reconsecrated as a sanctuary of the faith of Israel. Complete independence was not achieved, however, till 142 B.C.E.

A variety of factors cooperated to make for the success of this rebellion. There was the brilliant leadership of the Maccabees, as the sons of Mattathias were called, after their oldest brother, Judas Maccabeus. Dynastic rivalries in Syria kept the empire in a state of turmoil and did not permit the king uninterruptedly to pursue the suppression of the Jewish revolt. And, moreover, the Jews had the assistance of Rome, ever anxious to break rival empires so as to be able more easily to swallow the smaller fragments. The interlude of Jewish independence lasted from 142 B.C.E. to 63 B.C.E., when the country was ruled by Maccabean princes who combined the functions of king and high priest. In 63 B.C.E., taking advantage of dissension in the country over the succession to the Judean throne, the Romans under Pompey marched into Jerusalem and proclaimed Palestine a province of imperial Rome.

  

THE PHARISEES AND SADDUCEES

The successors of the sopherim who carried on the interpretation and development of the Torah during the Maccabean times, were called Perushim or Pharisees. The primary meaning of the root parosh from which Pharisees is a derivative is "separate," and some historians have rendered Pharisees as "separatists", men who, because of their excessive piety, tended to separate themselves from the common people. But historically, the Pharisees were the popular spokesmen of the people, and therefore could not have kept themselves aloof from them. Perushim may also be related to a secondary meaning of parosh, interpret, as it is used in Leviticus 24:12.[r_02_4][*4] Perushim may thus be rendered as expounders or interpreters. Like the sopherim, they derived

[p. 34]

their name from their function, the interpretation of the written Torah.

The Pharisees supplemented the written Torah with new clarifications, with new religious and ethical concepts and new legal formulations. They taught the beliefs in retribution in a life hereafter, the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead, and an extensive angelology. They elaborated the Temple ritual with new ceremonials, like the impressive water libation before the altar on the Succot festival. They ordained that the daily Tamid sacrifice in the Temple be purchased not from the funds donated by the wealthy few, but from the shekel collections which were contributed by all Israelites. To counteract a popular superstition that God's physical presence resided in the inner shrine of the Temple, they insisted that the High Priest, in his annual entrance to enact the solemn Day of Atonement ritual, omit the incense whose smoke was to screen him from gazing upon God; he was to prepare that incense after his entry into the shrine. Their conception of God was so exalted that they proscribed the pronunciation of His proper name. They moderated the code of Jewish criminal law. All these and various other measures adopted by them were grounded in the recognition that the written Torah must be supplemented by a continuing new tradition which can apply the written Torah's ultimate purposes to the changing facts of life.

The Great Assembly, as a corporate body, perished with the decline of the sopheric movement, but it was reincarnated during Pharisaic times, in the Sanhedrin, a Greek term meaning a court, council or senate. There were various Sanhedrins throughout the country, charged with different aspects of the interpretation and administration of law. The supreme Sanhedrin, consisting of 71 members and originally holding its sessions in the Hall of Hewn Stone in Jerusalem, exercised judicial, legislative and executive functions. It

[p. 35]

was headed by co-leaders, a president and chief justice, though the head of the state as High Priest could always preside at any court, including the supreme Sanhedrin.

Records have been preserved describing some of the procedure in this august tribunal. The members of the court were seated in a semicircle so that they could see each other and follow the deliberations more closely, with the president in the center and the others to his right and left in the order of seniority. Secretaries recorded the divergent views that developed in these discussions. All court deliberations were public. To enable them to profit by the proceedings, admittance was granted to advanced students who were seated in three rows, also in the order of seniority, and to general students of the law who were placed behind them. The first students in the order of seniority in the first row generally filled each vacancy as it occurred on the bench, with a general promotion following all along the line. A quorum for the transaction of any business was twenty-three judges; and decisions were reached by a majority vote.

Mishnah Abot 1:1 lists the first five co-leaders of the Sanhedrin as Jose ben Joezer of Zereda and Jose ben Johanan of Jerusalem; Joshua ben Perahya and Nittai the Arbellite; Judah ben Tabbai and Simeon ben Shetah; Shemaya and Abtalyon; and Hillel and Shammai. The same Mishnah cites a number of ethical maxims in the names of each of these teachers but otherwise little is known about them. Jose ben Joezer of Zereda taught: "Make your home a gathering place for the wise. Cling to them steadfastly, and avidly imbibe their words of wisdom." Joshua ben Perahya is the author of the maxim: "Provide yourself with a teacher and acquire for yourself a companion; and judge every person sympathetically." Nittai the Arbellite had as his maxim: "Keep away from a bad neighbor; do not associate with the wicked, and do not despair of retribution when it is slow in coming."[r_02_5][*5]

[p. 36]

The official opponents of the Pharisees were the Sadducees, who represented the Jewish upper classes, the lay and priestly aristocracy. The Sadducees fought Pharisaism because of an inherent dislike for Pharisaic ideas. As aristocrats to whom the world had not been unkind, they could not appreciate the drive behind Pharisaic insistence on a future retribution in a world to come. They objected to the introduction of popular ceremonials in the Temple cult or the democratization of the daily Temple sacrifice by purchasing it from a common people's fund rather than from the contributions of individual donors, because they had the aristocrats' natural disdain for the common people. They ascribed to the slave status of an animal because they were no doubt the class of slaveholders. They advocated severity in civil and criminal law, because, unreservedly identified with the status quo, they could not treat any one who challenged it, with sympathetic consideration.

Their formal rationale was, however, grounded in a strict adherence to the written Torah. While the Pharisees, sensitive to mass needs and mass problems, advocated a flexible interpretation of tradition, whether of the written Torah or the oral traditions promulgated by past authorities, the Sadducees advocated a strict construction of tradition. In their own way, they too had supplemented the written Torah, as is indicated by their reported possession of a special code of criminal law.[r_02_6][*6] Pharisaic supplementation was, however, much more radical--a more fundamental departure from the past. The Pharisees, of course, rationalized their departure by integrating them, through midrashic links, with Scriptural precedents or by otherwise finding for them Scriptural sanctions. For the Sadducees, however, the midrash was a spurious invention, unauthorized by precedent and a device for undermining the Torah.

As the contemporary historian Josephus relates it, "The Pharisees have delivered to the people a great many observances

[p. 37]

by tradition from their fathers, which are not written in the law of Moses; and for that reason the Sadducees reject them, saying that only those observances are obligatory which are in the written word, but that those which are derived from the tradition of our forefathers need not be observed. And concerning these things it is that great disputes and differences have arisen among them; the Sadducees are able to persuade none but the rich, and have no following among the populace, but the Pharisees have the multitude on their side."[r_02_7][*7]

Their strict adherence to the written Torah also explains the origin of the name Sadducees. The widely held theory that the name Sadducee goes back to the high priest Zadok mentioned in the Bible (I Kings 1:32) does not seem plausible. Zadok was High Priest in the reign of King Solomon, and why would a party go that far back for a name by which to identify itself? Why, moreover, would a party dominated by members of the Maccabean dynasty choose the name of the traditional High Priestly family, thereby reflecting on their own legitimacy? Sadducee, the Hebrew Zduki, may be taken as a derivative of the Hebrew Zaddic which means righteous, a construction following the parallel form Shmuti, which means a follower of the principles of the Teacher Shammai. The Sadducees called themselves by that name because of their conviction that their platform alone represented loyalty to the Torah, that Pharisaism was unconstitutional, a wicked distortion of the true ideals of Jewish religious and social life. The name Sadducees is used in the Talmud interchangeably with the name Boethusians because the contemporary leaders of the Sadducees were the priests of the famous Boethus family.

The early Maccabees who came to power on the wave of a popular uprising against the Syrian-Greek challenge to the Torah were naturally sensitive to Pharisaic principles. In the course of time, however, the Maccabean state gradually

[p. 38]

changed into a petty dictatorship waging endless warfare with its neighbors, with all the military, civil, and ecclesiastical power concentrated in the hands of the head of the state. Then an ever widening rift ensued between the government and the Pharisees.

This rift is the theme of a number of stories in Josephus and in the Talmud. According to one story, John Hyrcanus (King from 135-104 B.C.E.) invited the leading Pharisees to a banquet in the course of which he asked them for a frank appraisal of his reign. One of the Pharisees told him that he ought to content himself with civil power and resign the office of High Priest. Challenged, this Pharisee produced a technicality because of which he regarded John as disqualified from the high priestly office; his mother, according to rumor, had been a captive of war before his birth which made his legitimacy doubtful. The rumor was proven false and the king demanded that the Pharisees avenge his insult, but they pronounced upon their bold colleague a light sentence. Infuriated, the king broke with the Pharisees and joined their Sadducean rivals. With minor variations the same story is related in the Talmud, but its moving figure is not John Hyrcanus but Alexander Jannai (King from 103-76 B.C.E.).

According to another story a slave of King Alexander Jannai had committed murder. The Pharisaic Chief Justice, Simeon ben Shetah, ordered the King to appear for a trial, at the same time warning his colleagues on the bench to interpret the law with impartiality and not to be intimidated by the royal defendant. The King appeared, but he defied the usual courtesy due to the court and remained seated during the proceedings. As the witnesses prepared to testify, Simeon ordered the King to stand, in accordance with the prevailing court procedure. But the King replied that he would stand only if the other judges concurred in the request. The other

[p. 39]

judges were, however, intimidated and remained silent, their cowardice provoking a sharp rebuke from the chief justice.[r_02_8][*8]

The Pharisees were the party in opposition throughout the greater part of King Jannai's reign. Those most conspicuous among them were hunted down and persecuted. Many were forced to flee the country. With the collaboration of the Sadducean nobility, the government pursued the expediencies of state without being hampered by too meticulous a consideration for the idealistic principles of Pharisaism. The Pharisaic Sanhedrin carried little official authority except insofar as the people, recognizing the Pharisees as their spokesmen, voluntarily abided by their interpretations of the law, and frequently forced those interpretations upon the reluctant government officialdom. Thus when Alexander Jannai, in exercising his high priestly functions, once performed the Succot ritual in defiance of Pharisaic teachings, the populace demonstrated, pelting him with the citrons which they had brought with them in celebration of the holiday.

At the end of his reign, Jannai realized the overwhelming popularity of the Pharisees among the masses of the people. Before his death he counselled his queen Salome Alexandra, who was to succeed him, to seek a reconciliation with them. And upon her ascent to the throne, she recalled the Pharisees to power. The Pharisaic leader Simeon ben Shetah, who was also her own brother, became the principal minister of state, and Pharisaic ideals, including a quiescent and peaceful foreign policy, dominated the government.

Upon the death of Alexandra (67 B.C.E.), her elder son Hyrcan II, who had been high priest, ascended the throne, with the consent of the Pharisaic ministers. But the leadership of the army and the nobility rallied around his younger brother, Aristobulus, and plunged the country into civil war. The Pharisees did not want to hold power at the cost of civil war and were prepared to accept Aristobulus. Indeed, some

[p. 40]

of them, disgusted with the degeneration of the Maccabean dynasty, favored the abolition of the monarchy altogether. The struggle was finally resolved through the intervention of the Roman general Pompey who added Palestine to the Roman Empire.

  

THE JEWS AND THE ROMANS

The Romans respected Jewish autonomy in all cultural and religious affairs. Roman coins used in Palestine were minted locally so as to eliminate the emperor's image which was offensive to Jewish religious sensibilities. Roman law guarded the sanctity of the Temple, and pagans, including Roman citizens and soldiers, were barred from its precincts on the pain of death. Even the garrison that was stationed in Jerusalem left its standard in Caesaria in order not to offend the Jewish community with their pagan and idolatrous emblems. Jewish courts retained their autonomy and administered the law in accordance with Jewish procedure.

Outside of Palestine, too, the Roman empire treated the Jewish community with sympathetic understanding and respect. Jews were exempted from the civic duty of emperor worship; the sacrifice offered in the emperor's name at the Temple in Jerusalem was accepted by the Romans as a satisfactory equivalent. Jewish synagogues were protected by Roman law against sacrilege. Augustus Caesar even went so far as to direct Roman courts not to cite Jews to its sessions on the Sabbath; and poor Jews were given the option of taking a cash grant of money instead of the normal free grant of oil, so that they might not violate the prevailing Jewish dietary laws.

The Roman respect for Jewish cultural and religious autonomy produced a revival in the study of Torah. After the stabilization of the new regime, Pharisaic activity was resumed. Among the most important teachers who functioned

[p. 41]

during the period of Roman domination were Shemaya and Abtalyon (60-39 B.C.E.), Hillel and Shammai (20 B.C.E.-20 C.E.), Gamaliel I and his son Simeon, and Johanan ben Zaccai.

Hillel was the most influential of the titular heads of the Sanhedrin. A Babylonian by birth, he was attracted to the schools of Shemaya and Abtalyon and made his way to Palestine. He remained to become the recognized Pharisaic leader of his day. His own school drew students from far and wide; among them was Johanan ben Zaccai who was destined to play a crucial role in Jewish reconstruction after the war with Rome.

Tradition loves to contrast his humility and broadmindedness with the severity and narrowness of his colleague Shammai. This is perhaps best illustrated in the story of the pagan who sought to embrace Judaism but insisted on learning its contents while standing on one foot. Shammai dismissed him angrily, but Hillel made him a convert to Judaism. His summary was the formula, "That which is hateful unto you, do not impose on others."[r_02_9][*9] This is not, as has generally been explained, a negative formulation of the Golden Rule in Leviticus 19:18. It is a technique for implementing the Golden Rule, by suggesting a more concrete application of it to the problems of human relations.

Mishnah Abot (1:12-14) cites a number of moral maxims in the name of Hillel: "Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace, loving mankind and drawing them nigh to the Torah ... If I am not for myself, who will be for me? But if I am for myself only, what am I? And if not now when?" Among his most important legal reforms was the institution of the prosbul, circumventing the prescribed cancellation of debts at the end of every seven year cycle.[r_02_10][*10] Another of his important achievements was his formulation of seven rules for the midrashic interpretation of Scripture, subsequently expanded to thirteen by a later

[p. 42]

teacher, Ishmael. The presidency of the Sanhedrin became hereditary in Hillel's family until the final abolition of the office in 425 C.E.

  

THE NATIONAL DISASTER AND THE EMERGENCE OF THE RABBI

The Pharisaic period in the development of the Torah came to an end with the Jewish rebellion against Rome in 66 C.E. A variety of factors converged to produce that tragic episode in Jewish history.

There was the enormously heavy taxation, imposed by the Romans, particularly upon the people least able to pay it. Specifically the levies included the annona, a tax from crops and other farm produce, delivered in kind; a poll tax on males from 14 years and females from 12 years to 65 years; a market tax on necessities of life like meat and salt; various tolls such as on crossing a bridge or entering a city; forced labor and compulsory requisitions of the farmer's animals. The greatest burden of this taxation clearly fell upon lower classes, particularly the rural population. Indeed beginning with Caesar, the Roman tax was as high as 25% of the total crops in the country. Some of these taxes were collected directly, under the general supervision of native officials from nearby cities. Other levies were farmed out to the publican whose rapaciousness made him a byword for sin in Jewish society.

The Pharisees called upon their people to keep aloof from their imperialist masters and to spurn their offers of collaboration. Shemaya, who lived shortly after the Romans became masters of Palestine, counselled his people: "Love work; hate mastery over others; and avoid intimacy with the government." The exponents of Torah during this period denounced the Jewish tax farmer as a reprobate and a robber because he collaborated with the Roman system of extortion

[p. 43]

and oppression. Deceiving the Roman tax collector, they put on a par with deceiving a pirate, for Rome had no moral right to the country which she had occupied by force. As the Mishnah put it: "Men may vow to murderers, robbers or tax gatherers that what they have is Heave-offering even though it is not Heave-offering; or that they belong to the King's household even though they do not belong to the King's household. ..."[r_02_11][*11]

Rome opened vast markets for enterprising merchants and her fiscal policies encouraged shipping and industry with the result that individual families became fabulously wealthy. But the masses of people suffered want. Discriminatory taxation forced many farmers to abandon the land. Some became laborers on the big estates or moved to the cities where they joined the urban proletariat. Many others turned to cattle raising. This movement must have been large since Jewish authorities, probably fearful of a collapse in the economy of Palestine, a thickly populated country requiring an intensive cultivation of the soil, legislated against the raising of cattle, a move not unlike that taken by the Roman emperors beginning with Vespasian when they were confronted with a similar phenomenon in Rome.

The fate of the urban working people was equally tragic. Slave labor never flourished in Palestine as it did in other parts of the Empire; and the humanitarian legislation of the Bible tended to raise the living standard of the slave and the laborer alike. But the absence of a united labor front made for extremely low wages throughout the ancient world, and Palestine was no exception. The skilled worker was not entirely helpless. Thus the Garmu and Abtimas families, Temple bakers and chemists respectively, were able to win substantial wage increases by striking. Their highly specialized work could not be duplicated by strike-breakers who had been imported from Alexandria; and the Temple authorities were forced to accede to their demands.[r_02_12][*12] The laborer who did

[p. 44]

not command such specialized skills was entirely at the mercy of his employer, and his earnings could not have been much above the level of mere subsistence.

The laborer, in addition, suffered from the constant threat of unemployment. Josephus records a pathetic attempt to check unemployment through a public works project. To quote Josephus: "... So when the people saw that the workmen were unemployed, who were above 18,000 and that they, receiving no wages, were in want ..., and while they were unwilling to keep them by their treasuries that were there (in the Temple) deposited ... had a mind to expend these treasures upon them; ... so they persuaded him (King Agrippa) to rebuild the eastern cloisters; ... he (Agrippa) denied the petitioners their request in the matter; but he did not obstruct them when they desired the city might be paved with white stone. ..."[r_02_13][*13]

Above all, there was resentment at what the Romans had done to one of the most sacred offices in Jewish religious life, the High Priesthood. For a time, the administration of Palestine was entrusted to native vassal kings, the most important of whom was Herod the Great, who reigned from 37-4 B.C.E. In 6 C.E. the country was placed under the direct administration of Roman governors or procurators. But both the Jewish puppet kings as well as the Roman procurators manipulated the selection of the High Priest so as to have in that influential position a friend and willing collaborator of government policy. Herod made and unmade seven High Priests in the course of his reign. Valerius Gratus, who served as procurator from 15-26 C.E., made and deposed of five High Priests in succession. To emphasize their control over the office of the High Priesthood, the Romans kept the High Priest's vestments in their custody and released them only on important Temple celebrations. The greatest dignitary of Jewish ecclesiastical life was thus reduced to a tool of a foreign imperialism.

[p. 45]

The kind of men who would serve in such capacity were obviously not the spokesmen of a high religious idealism but politicians of low moral character to whom the rewards of power took precedence over their duties to their people and their faith. Many of them did not even know how to perform the Temple ritual and it became customary for a committee of the Sanhedrin to coach the High Priest in the performance of the Day of Atonement service for a full week before each holiday. The Mishnah records that this committee would always depart from its mission in tears.[r_02_14][*14]

The worldliness of these High Priests is well described in a number of Talmudic satires. One popular tale reports that the Temple Court used to cry out at one High Priest, "Depart hence, Issachar of Kefar Barkai, who glorifies himself while desecrating the sacred ritual of divine sacrifices; for he used to wrap his hands with silks and thus perform his sacrificial service." Of another High Priest, Johanan ben Norhai, popular legend relates that "he ate three hundred calves and drank three hundred barrels of wine and ate forty seah of young birds as a dessert for his meal!" For him the Temple Court cried out: "Enter Johanan ben Norhai to gorge himself with the foods of the altar."[r_02_15][*15]

One teacher, Abba Jose ben Hanin, lamented thus about the various high priestly families of his day: "Woe is me for the House of Boethus; woe is me for their clubs. Woe is me for the House of Anvas; woe is me for their scheming ... Woe is me because of the House of Kathros; woe is me because of their pens (with which they write evil decrees). Woe is me because of the House of Ishmael ben Phabi; woe is me because of their fists. For they are the High Priests, their sons the tax collectors, their sons-in-law the Temple officers, and their servants beat the people with their staves."[r_02_16][*16]

The high priests oppressed not only the people at large but also the humbler members of their own caste, robbing them often of their due share in the priestly perquisites. As

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] Josephus describes the high priests of his time, "they had the hardness to send their servants into the threshing floors to take away these tithes that were due to the priests, with the result that the poorer sort of priests died for want."[r_02_17][*17]

Stirred by a host of unbearable evils, a revolutionary sentiment was developing in the country. The pioneer of the revolutionary movement was the Galilean peasant leader Judas, who "prevailed with his countrymen to revolt and said they were cowards if they would endure to pay taxes to Rome and after God submit to mortal men as their lords."[r_02_18][*18] The spearhead of the rebellion was the hard pressed peasantry but they were aided by the masses of the people generally, who suffered with them degradation and exploitation.

It was the behavior of the procurator Florus that started the flames of revolt. He had seized 17 talents from the Temple treasury and when, in derision, people made an alms collection for him, he ordered the armed forces to attack the citizenry. Matters were patched up and the people even agreed to extend the customary greetings to an incoming troop of Roman soldiers. But when at the direction of Florus the greetings were not returned, rebellion broke loose. The actual precipitation of the struggle was the work of the lower order of priests. They deposed the reigning High Priest and by lots designated his successor, the rural priest Phanias ben Samuel of the village Aphta. With the Temple in their control, the insurgent priests proclaimed the defiance of Rome by rejecting the special Temple sacrifice which had always been offered in the name of the emperor.

But no sooner did the revolution break when it began degenerating into a civil war. Practically the first act of the revolutionary mob was to sack the palace where the archives were deposited and "burn the contracts belonging to their creditors and thereby dissolve the obligations for paying their debts." The upper classes on the other hand remained sympathetic to Rome and were opposed to the

[p. 47]

revolution. As Josephus innocently reports it, the "great men ... the high priests and men of power ..." were "desirous of peace because of the possessions they had." Unable to cope with the situation themselves, these men "sent ambassadors to Florus and ... to Agrippa (the neighboring Jewish vassal prince) and they desired of them both that they would come with an army to the city and cut off the sedition before it should be too hard to the subdued."[r_02_19][*19]

When in spite of their efforts, the revolutionary cause continued to make headway, they pretended conversion to the revolution but sabotaged it from within. They opposed the centralization of authority in the revolutionary leadership, agitating for moderation and "democracy", and they conspired directly with the Roman officialdom. This is perhaps best illustrated by the conduct of the commander of the revolutionary armies, Joseph ben Mattathias, aristocratic priest of Maccabean lineage. Chosen to be the sword of the revolution, he described the revolutionists as "bandits," "the slaves, the scum and the spurious and the abortive offspring of our nation," and he frankly confesses that he never expected them to win in the struggle. His assignment was to organize the defenses of Galilee, but in his autobiography, he admits that the real purpose of his command was to sabotage the revolution. When he discovered that the principal men in Tiberias opposed the war, he slipped to them the telling hint that he agreed with them but that they should be cautious. "I was well aware myself of the might of the Romans; but on account of those bandits I kept my knowledge to myself. I advised them to do the same, to bide their time and not to be intolerant of my command."[r_02_20][*20] Josephus actually instigated the escape of a spy sent by the Tiberians to Agrippa, inviting him to come and save their city from the revolution. And at the first opportunity he abandoned all pretense and surrendered to the Romans.

For his treason he was rewarded with high honors: Roman

[p. 48]

citizenship, a pension, and the right to add the name of the imperial family to his own. Joseph ben Mattathias, the Hasmonean priest, became Josephus Flavius, the favorite of the Romans.

The revolutionaries were not without their calculations when they challenged Rome. When the revolt broke, the Roman empire was shaking with inner unrest. The "affairs of the Romans were ... in great disorder ... the affairs in the East were exceedingly tumultuous ... The Gauls also ... were in motion ... and the Celts were not quiet ..."[r_02_21][*21] And the rebels had reason to expect support from the far-flung Jewish communities outside of Palestine. The revolution failed largely because of an old truism in revolutionary history, that no colonial people can hope successfully to wage two revolutions at the same time, a national revolution against its imperialist masters, and a social revolution against its own ruling class. Caught between the cross-fire of the Roman legions without, and the pro-Roman forces of betrayal and counter-revolution within, the doom of the revolution was of course sealed. After a valiant and costly struggle, Palestine was once again a Roman province, with the claws of the imperialist masters more tightly drawn; and the Jewish people resigned themselves to suffer the oppression of an old tyranny and the new ignominy of defeat.

The central fact in the tragic legacy of war and revolution was that the Temple at Jerusalem had been burnt to the ground. For the Temple had functioned as a supreme national shrine in Judaism; its cult of sacrifices was regarded as the principal formula of Jewish worship, and throughout its history it had served as an invaluable symbol of unity and solidarity throughout the Jewish world. The Jews faced a difficult task to reorganize their lives without the resources of the Temple and the hierarchy of institutions that had developed around it.

Jews had once before been called upon to reorganize

[p. 49]

their religious life without the Temple and they had done so with success. In 586 B.C.E. the armies of Babylon had destroyed the independence of Judah and burnt her national shrine, the Jerusalem Temple. The sobering realizations that followed this national disaster placed the leadership of the Babylonian exiles in the hands of prophetic teachers rather than the princes or the priests. And under their inspiration, the reorganized religious life of the community moved in new directions. The study of Torah and the practices of a personal religious life became central. The synagogue with a ritual synthesizing study and worship, began its long and eventful development.

The reorganization after the war against Rome followed a similar course. The policy of rebellion against Rome had failed miserably. The lay and priestly aristocracy were scattered and discredited. They had been the main targets of the revolutionary terror and their most influential members perished in the civil war that accompanied the revolution. And even when the flames of war and revolution ebbed, the bitterness lingered on, sustained by a vivid record of upper class betrayal perpetrated in the darkest hour of the nation. The Torah alone was left as a rallying point of Judaism and as a possible instrument of post-war reconstruction.

The leader in this movement of reconstruction was Johanan ben Zaccai. He was ideally suited for his task. He had studied under Hillel and the venerable master had proclaimed him "the father of wisdom" and "the father of coming generations". He was chief justice of the Sanhedrin before the fall of the Temple and independently conducted a school in Jerusalem. The popularity of his lectures forced him frequently to speak outdoors where larger gatherings could be accommodated. His profound scholarship was complemented by an equally profound love for human beings. He was ever the first to offer greetings to any passerby in street and market place, and his interest extended to Jew and pagan alike. The greatest of all virtues, he taught his students, was a kind

[p. 50]

heart which reaches out with sympathy to fellow-humans. The study of Torah was the summum bonum in life, but the student of Torah was not to keep himself aloof from the common people. "If thou hast learnt much Torah, ascribe no special merit to thyself; for that is the true function of thy being." On one occasion he deliberately embarrassed himself by pretending he had forgotten an important principle of law, so as to demonstrate to his students a lesson in human fallibility. At the same time, he was endowed with a shrewd practicability, acquired no doubt in the first forty years of his life when he pursued a career in commerce. When his students once asked him for a blessing he offered the prayer: "May ye revere the Lord as ye revere men." "Is that all?" they wondered. "Would that ye revered Him at least in that measure" was his reply, "for see how a person, proceeding to commit an immoral deed, will always say to himself, 'but no man must see me'." Johanan fought hard for Pharisaic control of the Temple, but the cult of sacrifices was not indispensable for his conception of Jewish religious life. In the synagogue and the ritual of personal observance, he found adequate resources for the cultivation of the religious life. For, quoting Hosea (6:6), he explained, the Lord "desired loving-kindness and not sacrifices."[r_02_22][*22]

When the challenge of rebellion was ultimately presented, Johanan and his followers counselled submission. They realized that rebellion against Rome would lead to a sanguinary war with untold devastation and tragedy. They believed, moreover, that they could achieve an even more fundamental liberation through other methods. For in the ethical implications of their monotheism, they saw the organic wholeness of the human race.

They consequently hoped not for a national revolution purposing to liberate their people from a foreign government but for a moral revolution to liberate all mankind from superstition, idolatry and falsehood. The ideals of this moral revolution were for them embodied in the Torah and they

[p. 51]

consequently sought to teach the Torah to natives and pagans alike. Many pagans, from the highest as well as the lowest strata of Roman society, responded to the propaganda on behalf of Judaism and joined the synagogue. Many more, while not officially embracing Judaism, renounced idolatry and became the fellow-travellers of the synagogue, ordering their lives by the Torah's ideals of personal and social morality. It was a slow process but, as Johanan and his followers saw it, it was the only fundamental way of dealing with the problem. And as long as Rome did not interfere with their missionizing propaganda, they were confident that before long the truth would prove mightier than the mightiest legion of Rome.

Johanan left Jerusalem before it was taken by the Romans. He was smuggled out of the city in a coffin by his two most trusted disciples, after feigning illness and death. Thereupon he made his way to the Roman commander and surrendered. Recognizing his influential position in Jewish society, the Romans granted him his freedom and permitted him to reestablish his academy in Jabneh.

With his loyal disciples by his side, he waited breathlessly for the outcome of the struggle around Jerusalem. When the news reached him that the Temple had fallen, he proceeded to act. He proclaimed Jabneh as the new center of Judaism and, with his own disciples and others who joined him subsequently, he recreated his academy and reorganized the Sanhedrin. Study, prayer, the Sabbath and holidays, the cultivation of the spiritual and ethical life, were declared more than adequate substitutions for the cult of Temple sacrifice. And Jewish law, to be promulgated and interpreted at the new Sanhedrin, was to continue to give direction and unity to Jewish life throughout the world.

Until another scion of the Hillel family, Gamaliel II, became available for the office, Johanan bore the title rabban by which the titular head of the Sanhedrin was designated since the elder Gamaliel (20-50 C.E.). But to invest his disciples

[p. 52]

with the new authority of their office he ordained them with the new title, rabbi, master. The rabban was recognized by the Roman government as the official head of the Jewish community; and in cooperation with the rabbis he directed the study, adaptation and application of the Torah to the new needs of life.[r_02_23][*23] All the literature of the supplementary Torah, in the form in which it has come down to our own day, including the copious literature of the Talmud, is the work of the rabbis, who became the undisputed leaders in post-war Judaism.

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

The Talmud In Its Historical Setting

  

THE AFTERMATH OF WAR

THE FALL of the Temple had left a void in Jewish religious life. Gladly, the Jews would have labored at its reconstruction, but that was banned by the Romans. Jerusalem which was a symbol of all that was glorious in Jewish history was an armed camp, where Jews were forbidden to enter. They could come as tolerated pilgrims to visit ruined shrines and shed tears over their departed national glory, but they could no longer make their homes there. The half shekel which the Jews had always contributed to the upkeep of the Temple was now collected by the Romans as the fiscus judaicus, a special tax upon the vanquished people to be devoted to the maintenance of Roman pagan shrines. There were large scale confiscations of Jewish property, particularly land, which Jews could now occupy only as tenant farmers; and Rome added humiliations to injury by erecting an arch of triumph to Titus and issuing special coins to commemorate the Jewish disaster. "Judaea capta", "Judaea devicta", "captured, vanquished Judea", these coins proclaimed, and they carried, as an illustration of the slogan, the image of a decrepit, broken woman, bowing before her proud conqueror.

These conditions distilled a great spiritual depression in Jewry. Asceticism became widespread. There were those who shunned the use of meat and wine because these had at one time been offered on the sacrificial altar which was now in ruins. Large numbers refused to raise families and beget children, apprehensive of life's uncertainties in a cruel world. And the seemingly unchallenged march of brute power undermined

[p. 54]

for many the faith in their people's way of life, their beliefs in divine providence, the election of Israel and the supreme worth of the Torah. "If there is a God Who cares for justice, why does He allow all this wrong to go unchallenged in the world?" came the constant cry of questioning multitudes.

  

RECONSTRUCTION AT JABNEH

The basis of Jewish rehabilitation in this all pervasive crisis had been laid by Johanan ben Zaccai. He shifted the center of Judaism from Jerusalem to Jabneh and launched the new Sanhedrin and the rabbinic movement, rescuing the most important element in the life of a people, centralized direction and authoritative leadership. The nominal head of the Jewish community had been the High Priest whose office perished with the Temple, but he was not indispensable; and the Nasi, the head of the Sanhedrin, stepped forth to replace him. The nasi's office lacked the glamour of the High Priesthood, but he more than made up for it by his piety and scholarship and by his devotion to Pharisaic principles. And he had one more important virtue to recommend him: he was a direct descendant of the famous sage Hillel, and, on his mother's side, of Judah's royal family, going back to King David. Johanan remained the acting head of the Sanhedrin until arrangements could be made for its legitimate occupant to succeed him. Gamaliel II, the legitimate heir of the nasi, finally received the recognition of the Roman officials in Syria, and, with the collaboration of a grimly determined but hopeful group of rabbis, including Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, Joshua ben Hananiah and Akiba ben Joseph, he inaugurated a new and colorful chapter in the history of Judaism.

The new nasi was well suited for his position. He was a man of independent means, having inherited his family estates in land and slaves, which enabled him to devote himself

[p. 55]

freely to scholarship and communal work. He was educated in the traditional culture of his people as well as in the worldly knowledge of his day. He was a fine mathematician and astronomer and he had a good command of the Greek language. The Talmud records many anecdotes illustrating his kind and sympathetic character. The joy of having his colleagues as guests in his home was unbounded; and he insisted on taking the place of his servants in waiting on them. He was touchingly devoted to his slave Tebi. Members of his household were trained to call the slave "father" and the slave's wife, "mother". And when Tebi died Gamaliel sat in mourning as for a departed member of the family. "Tebi was not like other slaves," he explained; "he was a worthy man." "Let this be a token unto thee," he once exclaimed, "so long as thou art compassionate, God will show thee mercy; but if thou hast no compassion, God will show thee no mercy."[r_03_1][*1]

We do not know the date of his death. Before his passing he left a will which was to convert even his burial into an important lesson for his people. It had been customary to bury the dead in lavish outfits and funeral costs weighted heavily on poor families. Gamaliel therefore ordained that he be buried in simple linen shrouds in the hope that his example would be imitated by others. Thus began a tradition which has endured in Jewry to this very day.

The achievements of the rabbis at Jabneh were varied and far-reaching. To give expression to the universal gloom over the national disaster, they ordained formal rites of grief and remembrance. People were to leave patches of unpainted wall space in their homes; they were to omit some dish from their customary meals; women were to reduce their use of cosmetics and jewelry. This was to remind them that without the Temple their lives were incomplete and that they must ever strive for its restoration.

But there was to be no despair. The rabbis denounced the growing asceticism as inconsistent with the national interest.

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] To abstain from procreating, Rabbi Eliezer ruled comparable to the shedding of human blood. Rabbi Joshua argued with those who were avoiding meat and wine in mourning for the destruction of the altar, by explaining that to be consistent they would have to renounce fruit, bread, and water as well, since they were also used upon the altar.[r_03_2][*2]

The destruction of the Temple was a tragic blow to Judaism, but it was not to interfere with an active religious life. Pending the Temple's rebirth, the rabbis proceeded to displace the sacrificial cult with new disciplines for communing with God. They promulgated the famous Eighteen Benedictions as the nucleus of a formalized prayer service which was to be recited thrice daily in private as well as congregational devotions. Some of these benedictions were old and had been recited in the Temple as well as in many synagogues that flourished side by side with it. But they were now re-edited so as to include references to the hoped for resurgence of Jewish freedom and the restoration of the Temple. These prayers, moreover, were now to be recited by every individual worshipper and not alone by the public reader who led in the service. The initiation of a proselyte into Judaism was reorganized, omitting the customary sacrificial offering. The Haggadah, a ritual of narration and dramatic re-enactment of the Exodus, was developed to take the place of the solemn Passover rites in the Temple at Jerusalem.

The rabbis were equally active in counteracting schismatic and heretical tendencies which were making their appeal among the people. They induced Aquila, the Greek proselyte from Pontus, to undertake a new and more literal translation of the Bible which would bring the Greek text into closer harmony with Jewish tradition. The current Greek translation, known as the Septuagint, was too free and inaccurate, making it frequently an easy weapon for Christian and other sectarian propaganda. And they introduced into the religious service a special prayer in denunciation of

[p. 57]

heresy and heretics. Prayers of denunciation were repugnant to the rabbis who taught the virtues of universal love. To make sure that this prayer would not be inspired by hate or bitterness toward other men, that it would be directed against error rather than against the erring, they entrusted its composition to the saintliest and humblest of their members, Samuel the Modest.

By fearless and searching self-criticism they met the challenge of those who had lost faith in the moral order. The disaster was not an indication of a morally lawless universe, but on the contrary, of the workings of a moral law which cannot be evaded with impunity. Like the prophets of old, they blamed their people's tragedies upon their own mistakes and failures. Jerusalem was destroyed because men hated one another, because her people were not united in the national crisis, because they permitted grave injustices to prevail in their midst.[r_03_3][*3] Rome, like Assyria and Babylonia of old, was only the rod of God's indignation, smiting and healing a sinful people. And the disaster itself pointed to the way of redemption. It was for them to repent. to purge themselves of their imperfections, to rebuild their lives on more wholesome foundations, and, in due time, they would be restored to freedom.

Perhaps the most important achievement of the rabbis was the creation of an authoritative Jewish law. The supplementation of the Torah had proceeded ever since the days of the sopherim and a variety of men had contributed to it. The inevitable differences in social and ideological orientation prevailing among men had naturally led to differences in Torah supplementation. But now how was the Torah to guide life if its official interpreters could not agree?

The Pharisees had solved this problem by developing a fine tolerance. All views that developed in the course of their deliberations were regarded as equally sincere attempts to understand and apply the ideals of the Torah to the necessities of life. Men were therefore advised to exercise their

[p. 58]

own discretion and follow the particular school of thought that best expressed their own conception of right and wrong. "Although," the Mishnah relates[r_03_4][*4], "one group permitted marriages which the other prohibited, and declared pure what the other considered impure, they freely intermarried and did not scruple to use each other's food." To signalize this tolerance, the leadership of the Sanhedrin was divided between the representatives of the majority and minority. The spokesman of the majority became the nasi, President, while the leader of the minority group became the ab bet din, the chief justice.

After the destruction of the Temple when the Torah was the only surviving institution that could unify Jewish life, the old arrangement was changed. The new Sanhedrin at Jabneh repudiated the old formula of tolerance, except in the field of doctrine. On questions of theology and ethics, individuals remained essentially free to formulate their own doctrines in accordance with the dictates of their own conscience. In the field of action, however, the minority was now to give way to the majority whose views alone were to be promulgated as authoritative law.

The new formula was first applied to the disputes between the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel. By a majority vote, the rabbis, deliberating at the new Sanhedrin in Jabneh, repudiated the Shammaites and declared the views of the Hillelites alone authoritative.

These reforms were not achieved without struggle. One such struggle developed between Rabbi Eliezer and his colleagues. Rabbi Eliezer was one of the pioneers in post-war reconstruction. Together with his colleague Joshua ben Hananiah, he had helped smuggle Johanan ben Zaccai out of the besieged city of Jerusalem and had participated in the organization of the new Sanhedrin. But as the deliberations at Jabneh proceeded, a serious cleavage developed between him and his colleagues. In the general unfolding of his ideology, Rabbi Eliezer followed consistently the general

[p. 59]

point of view of the Shammaite system of Torah interpretation which had been rejected by a decisive vote of the great majority of rabbis.

The hostility which had been gathering for some time finally culminated in an open break during a discussion about the so-called "Akhnai" stove. According to Biblical law (Lev. 11:33), earthenware, pots and ovens, which had become unclean, for example, through contact with a dead body, were to be broken. The "Akhnai" stove had become exposed to uncleanliness, but the owner cut it into tiles which were separated from each other by sand and externally plastered over with a layer of cement. This was a loose arrangement, but it could still be used as a stove. At the same time, as a "broken" vessel, it would no longer be susceptible to uncleanliness. Rabbi Eliezer's colleagues objected to the arrangement. What was important to them was not so much the objective fact that the stove was "broken", as the manifest intention of the owner who continued to use it. The owner's intention made it again into a "whole" vessel, and its impurity, therefore, persisted. Rabbi Eliezer, who, like the Shammaites, was generally more concerned with objective facts rather than with the intentions behind them, regarded the stove as actually broken, and, therefore, no longer subject to laws dealing with whole vessels. The controversy that raged over this question was prolonged and bitter. Finally the matter was put to a vote, and Rabbi Eliezer was dramatically defeated by a great majority. But Rabbi Eliezer refused to yield. He counselled his followers to defy the majority, and in his judicial decisions continued to formulate the law in accordance with his own views. Behind this impasse stood not only a difference in attitude toward the Akhnai stove, but a challenge to the concept of a disciplined Jewish life.

To break the impasse, the rabbis finally responded with excommunication. In demonstration, they held a public burning of certain types of food which they had pronounced

[p. 60]

impure, but which he, in defiance of their opinions, persisted in considering pure. Rabbi Akiba, his own disciple, carried the news of the decision to him. Seated in mourning dress, at some distance from him, Akiba spoke: "My master, it appears to me that thy colleagues keep aloof from thee." Rabbi Eliezer understood the message, but remained unyielding to the end.[r_03_5][*5]

Rabbi Eliezer felt his isolation most keenly. The terms of his excommunication apparently left him free to continue teaching in his school at Lydda, but he realized that the centre of Jewish learning and authority was at Jabneh. From his pupils, who occasionally attended the sessions at Jabneh, he sought to learn what went on there, but such conversations would only pain him, reminding him that he was an outcast. Once, when he was told that the council at Jabneh had deliberated on a question concerning which he felt himself qualified to speak authoritatively, he actually shed tears, and although the decision of the scholars was in accordance with his own opinion, he dispatched to Jabneh a message of acquiescence. Moved, no doubt, by his own experience, he warned his disciples: "Be as careful about the respect due to your colleagues as about the respect due to yourselves--and do not permit yourselves to become easily provoked to anger"; "Warm yourselves before the hearths of scholars, but see that you are not burnt, for when they bite, it is the bite of a fox, and when they sting, it is the sting of a scorpion."[r_03_6][*6]

Rabbi Eliezer was not reconciled with his colleagues until his dying moments. Rabbi Joshua, Rabbi Akiba, and a number of other scholars, hearing of his illness, had come to pay him a visit. They could not draw close--he was still under the ban--and they, therefore, stood at some distance. But he recognized them. "Why have you come?" he demanded summarily. "To study Torah," they replied. "And why have you not come until now?" he continued. Embarrassed, they apologized that they had been busy. Rabbi Eliezer recalled

[p. 61]

the days when he was still the great teacher in Israel, and looked back upon the time when Rabbi Akiba was still his devoted disciple. To erase the pain induced by these recollections, the visiting scholars drew him into legal discussion. In the midst of it he expired. Forgotten now were all the dissensions; only Rabbi Eliezer's great sincerity, his profound learning and his piety remained. Overwhelmed with grief, Rabbi Joshua arose and formally dissolved the sentence of excommunication that had been between them. Rabbi Akiba applied the verse spoken by Elisha at the passing of Elijah (II Kings 2:12): "My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof." A great but turbulent personality had passed from Israel.[r_03_7][*7]

There were similar rifts between Rabbi Joshua and the patriarch Rabban Gamaliel II. Exercising his prerogatives as nasi to arrange the calendar, Rabban Gamaliel announced the date of the New Year Day. A number of scholars, including Rabbi Joshua who was chief justice of the court, made calculations of their own which led them to different conclusions and they recommended that the date be changed. Rabban Gamaliel, however, refused, regarding the matter as closed. Whereupon Rabbi Joshua proceeded to plan celebrating the Holidays not on the date officially designated, but on the date supported by his own calculations.

Rabban Gamaliel saw the threat of a schism and, to maintain the authority of the court, he ordered his associate "to appear before me with thy cane and thy purse, on the day which is the Day of Atonement according to thy reckoning." Rabbi Joshua was in a dilemma and he came to consult some of his colleagues and friends. Rabbi Akiba advised him to obey, for the authority of the court must be upheld even if its decision was based on technically inadequate testimony. He cited the text describing the jurisdiction of the court in the determination of the calendar. "These are the appointed seasons of the Lord, even holy convocations which ye shall proclaim in their appointed seasons" (Lev. 23:4); their holiness

[p. 62]

is not inherent, but derived from the proclamation of the court. Another colleague, Rabbi Dosa, likewise recommended compliance. "If we are to review the decisions made by Rabban Gamaliel's court," he explained, "we might as well reconsider every decision which was promulgated from the days of Moses to our own." With a heavy heart Rabbi Joshua finally obeyed. The patriarch was overjoyed at this recognition of his authority, and exultantly greeted him: "Peace on thee, my master and my disciple; my master in learning, and my disciple in acknowledging the authority of my office."[r_03_8][*8]

On another occasion, Rabbi Joshua and the patriarch clashed over a question of ritual procedure. Rabban Gamaliel ruled religious worship in the evening obligatory. It was an innovation in tradition, but he apparently judged it necessary because the Temple had been destroyed and formalized prayer was to replace the cult of sacrifice as an organized and authoritative expression of Jewish piety. Rabbi Joshua wanted more spontaneity in religious life, and to a student who had consulted him, he expressed himself that the evening service ought to remain voluntary. The patriarch heard of this, and he decided to make another demonstration of his authority. When the Sanhedrin gathered for a formal session, Gamaliel had the question submitted for formal consideration, and then he repeated his ruling that the evening service is obligatory, asking whether there were any dissenting opinions. Rabbi Joshua, who was chief justice, announced that there were none. Whereupon Rabban Gamaliel ordered, "Joshua, stand up and a witness will testify that you dissented." Rabbi Joshua confessed his guilt, but the patriarch, as a mark of displeasure, left him standing throughout the day's proceedings.

There was shock among the rabbis at the overbearing and dictatorial manner of the patriarch. When the memorable session broke up and Rabban Gamaliel departed. the members of the Sanhedrin reassembled. After gravely considering

[p. 63]

the difficult situation that had developed, a motion was made and carried impeaching the patriarch from his office as head of the academy. He remained patriarch but he was shorn of the academic prerogatives which had gone with the office. A younger member of the court, Rabbi Eleazar ben Azaryah was elected head of the Academy. Rabban Gamaliel accepted the verdict calmly and took his place as a lay member of the court, bearing no grudge and carrying no vindictiveness. Duly humbled, moreover, he apologized to Rabbi Joshua for having treated him with discourtesy. A reconciliation followed and Rabban Gamaliel was finally reinstated, but since Rabbi Eleazar had held the high office, he was to share some of the prerogatives of the office with Rabban Gamaliel. Thus he was to deliver the public lecture on the Sabbath every third week.[r_03_9][*9]

  

REBELLION RENEWED

The program of reconstruction as inaugurated at Jabneh was interrupted by a new uprising against Rome. Scattered remnants of the old army of zealots who had challenged Rome in 70 C.E. fled Palestine to settle in various other centers of Jewish population within the empire, including Egypt, North Africa and Cyprus. There they had sown the spirit of discontent and rebellion. And in 116 when Trajan launched a campaign of new conquest in the East, the Jews renewed the old struggle. Palestine played a minor role in the uprising. Jabneh exerted an influence of moderation. the rabbis seeking to dissuade their people from resuming the struggle on the military level. But the rebellion was pursued with unprecedented bitterness and determination in the Jewish diaspora. Fierce battles raged in such cities as Alexandria, Cyrene and in Cyprus, with casualties running in the hundreds of thousands. But it was not a clear-cut struggle between the Jews and the Romans. For many of the natives in each of these conquered provinces bore willingly the yoke of Roman imperialism. And when the crisis

[p. 64]

was precipitated the native collaborators of the Romans struck out against their Jewish populations who alone battled for freedom. The civil wars which thus ensued doomed the rebellion to failure. There were new executions, new persecutions, and new despair. Most of the Jewish communities in the diaspora were destroyed. But an embassy of rabbis under the leadership of Rabban Gamaliel hurried to Rome and succeeded in warding off a series of retaliatory measures which had also been projected against Palestine.

A new storm broke after Hadrian came to power (117-138). Content to mark time within the old frontiers and temporarily not to encroach upon the domains of the sturdy Parthians, who maintained a free and flourishing kingdom in what is present-day Iraq, Hadrian became a reformer, devoting his energy to the inner needs of his vast empire in preparation for the next Roman bid for world conquest. One of the most vital of these needs, as he saw it, was the strengthening of imperial unity which he tried to achieve through the cultivation of a common culture. What culture other than Hellenism enjoyed the prestige qualifying it to become the imperial culture? The experiment of Antiochus IV, King of the Syrians, was to be tried again, though on a minor scale. The heterogeneous territories of Rome were to be molded into a national state, linked together by the culture of old Hellas. His program included the restoration of Jerusalem, but as a pagan city, its crowning edifice to be a Greek Temple dedicated to Jupiter.

There was consternation among the Jews when this program was announced. For it held out its threat not merely to Jewish social and political institutions, but to the Jewish way of life, to the Jewish religion. With the Torah in jeopardy, the rabbis now joined the camp of open rebellion. The youthful but brilliant Talmudist, Rabbi Akiba ben Joseph, a leader of the Jabneh Sanhedrin, gave his blessings to a new anti-Roman rebellion which was proclaimed by Bar Kokba.

[p. 65]

The new insurrection broke out in 132, and it registered some initial success. For 2 1/2 years the Jews held the recaptured city of Jerusalem. They even made attempts to restore the sacrificial cult at an improvised altar. Coins were struck proudly marked in honor of the First, Second and Third Year after the Liberation of Jerusalem. The Romans, however, soon reasserted their power. Jerusalem was retaken. The Jews entrenched themselves in the fort of Bethar, southwest of Jerusalem, but were forced to surrender in 135. Half a million Jews are said to have perished in the struggle. Judea was practically turned into a desert; its cities and villages were in ruins.

The Romans had paid dearly for their victories. So huge were the Roman losses that the emperor omitted the usual reassuring formula from his report to the Senate: "I and my army are well." But they could at last proceed with their plans. Jerusalem was plowed up to dramatize the new foundations of the city, to be called Aelia Capitolina. Temples were built to Bacchus, Serapis, Venus and Jupiter. No Jew could set foot into the new city. The practices of Judaism were forbidden on the pain of death. There was to be no observance of the Sabbath, no performance of the rite of circumcision, no study of Torah, and, to break the continuity of an authoritative religious leadership, they outlawed the ordination of new rabbis. Stricken at the source of its vitality, this dissident people was at last to give way and the totalitarian empire was to pursue unchallenged its ambitions of building a new world state.

In the contest of arms, Rome had once more emerged victorious. But brute power, no matter how overwhelming, has generally proven impotent in the face of a people that was actuated by a profound will to live, and was prepared to pay the cost of survival in suffering. There were Jews. in all layers of society who no longer had the strength to suffer and whose morale was waning. Elisha ben Abuyah, a famous figure in the rabbinical academies, some of whose

[p. 66]

moral maxims have been preserved in the ethical treatise Abot, turned renegade and offered himself as a willing collaborator to the Roman officialdom. He helped the Roman police in ferreting out leaders of Jewish resistance and in closing schools where the old way of life was being taught. Rabbi Jose ben Kisma who had once claimed, "If all the precious metals in the world were offered me, I would not live but in an atmosphere of Torah," saw in the repeated successes of Rome the evidence of divine favor. Rome was apparently invincible and it was folly to resist the sweep of the future.[r_03_10][*10]

But there were others, of sterner stuff, who did not lose themselves in the crisis. Rabbis Akiba, Tarfon, and Jose the Galilean held a secret conclave and issued a joint statement to their people, urging them generally to comply with Roman edicts but to resist unto death any orders involving the commission of idolatry, murder, or unchastity.[r_03_11][*11] And a company of distinguished teachers openly defied the Roman police by continuing to meet with their students for the study of Torah. Their attitude was best summarized in Akiba's famous parable of the fishes and the fox. Warned that his open defiance of Roman law would lead to imprisonment, he replied with the story of the fox who invited the fishes to seek safety from the fishermen on dry land. But the fishes replied, "If the water which is our normal habitat hold out no safety, what will happen to us on the dry land which is not our habitat?" "So, too," expounded Akiba, "if our existence is precarious when we persist in the study of Torah, how shall we survive if we abandon it?"[r_03_12][*12]

The forebodings came true soon enough. The Romans unleashed a reign of terror against the obdurate Jews; many were imprisoned, banished or sold into slavery. There were numerous executions. Intimidated by the terror, many fled Palestine to neighboring countries, particularly Babylonia, where a more tolerant government offered these political refugees a ready welcome.

[p. 67]

The records of some of those who perished in the terror have been preserved and they recount a memorable story of steadfast faith and heroic struggle. The Midrash Eleh Ezkerah is the vivid description of a mass execution of ten renowned rabbis. It has been rendered into verse and included in the liturgy of the Day of Atonement.

Among those arrested by the Romans was Rabbi Akiba. From his prison cell, he continued to defy his captors, dispatching secret messages to his followers. A hurried trial was held and the Romans condemned him to death. According to tradition, they executed him by tearing the flesh from his living body. Rabbi Akiba remained steadfast to the very last, expiring with a resolute confession of his outlawed faith: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One."[r_03_13][*13]

Akiba's work was immediately taken up by Rabbi Judah ben Baba. Gathering Akiba's five most gifted disciples, Meir, Judah ben Ilai, Simeon ben Johai, Jose ben Halafta and Eleazar ben Shammua, he officially conferred upon them rabbinical ordination and charged them with the task of continuing the tradition of a courageous and devoted leadership amidst confusion and terror. The meeting was raided by the Romans before its conclusion. The five younger men were able to escape, but Rabbi Judah ben Baba was stabbed to death.[r_03_14][*14]

  

THE RABBIS AT THE HELM

Hadrian's experiment in totalitarianism came to an end with his death in 140, when he was succeeded by Antoninus Pius. The Sanhedrin was at once reorganized, but it now abandoned Jabneh for Usha in Galilee. As one Midrash relates it, "At the termination of the persecutions, our teachers met in Usha. They were Rabbis Judah ben Ilai, Nehemiah, Meir, Jose, Simeon ben Johai, Eliezer (the son of Rabbi Jose the Galilean), and Eleazar ben Jacob. They sent to the elders in Galilee saying, 'Those who have already

[p. 68]

learnt, come and teach; those who have not yet learnt, come and be taught.' They met and arranged everything that was necessary."[r_03_15][*15]

One of the things which they finally arranged was the selection of another scion of the Hillel family as their leader, Simeon, the son of Gamaliel II. Simeon, the new nasi, had been in Bethar, the last Jewish stronghold, during the Bar Kokba rebellion, and had witnessed its fall to the Romans. A narrow escape saved him from the massacre that followed in the city.

Having experienced the horrors of war, Simeon extolled the virtues of peace. "The fabric of civilization rests on three moral foundations--truth, justice and peace." "Great is peace, for Aaron the High Priest acquired fame only because he promoted peace." He is also the author of the famous maxim: "It is unnecessary to erect monuments to the righteous; their deeds are their monuments." Rabban Simeon advocated equal justice to Jews and pagans. In one instance he declared it obligatory to ransom pagan slaves who had been kidnapped. And he was lavish in his admiration for those semi-Jews, the Samaritans, for loyally observing those elements in the Torah which they recognized. He was so highly esteemed by the Sanhedrin that in all but three instances his opinion was accepted as authoritative law.

The achievement of the rabbis at Usha extended over a varied field and continued the precedents established at Jabneh. They defended the supremacy of Palestine as the center of Judaism against the claims of the rising Jewish community in Babylonia. An attempt had been made to found a Sanhedrin in Babylonia during the Hadrianic persecutions of Judaism in Palestine. It threatened to start a schism in Israel. When the Usha Sanhedrin was reorganized, a delegation of two rabbis was sent to Babylonia and they succeeded, after a struggle with the local authorities, in inducing the Babylonians to continue to heed Palestinian leadership.

[p. 69]

They reorganized the procedure of the Sanhedrin to invest its sessions with new pomp and dignity. In addition to the nasi and chief justice, a new office was created, the hakam, literally a "wise" or learned man. The new functionary seems to have been in charge of the academic functions of the Sanhedrin.

They continued the process of literary reorganization in traditional law as well as the application of that law to new situations; and they enacted a number of reforms dealing with various aspects of religious, domestic, and social life. They ordained that parents were to maintain their children throughout their minority, and that where parents deeded their property to their children, they must be supported from the estate; a person was to contribute a fifth of his income to charity; a father must be patient in teaching his children till the age of twelve, but thereafter he may take severe measures with them.[r_03_16][*16] Perhaps the most important reform was the declaration of immunity for members of the Sanhedrin who could not be excommunicated for their views, regardless of circumstances.

Judah I, who succeeded his father Simeon to the patriarchate, was born about 135. He received his education at Usha under his father and from intimate contact with the various members of the Sanhedrin. It is uncertain when he assumed the office of his father or when the seat of the Sanhedrin was transferred from Usha to Bet Shearim, also in Galilee. He was not of very good health and for the last seventeen years of his life he lived in Sepphoris, a section of the country renowned for its high altitude and pure air. He died in 217.

Judah was a man of very great wealth and was held in high esteem by Jews as well as by Romans. His universal recognition as a master of tradition and leader in Israel is well attested by his popular designation "Rabbi," without his name, the master par excellence, or Rabbenu ha-Kadosh, "our holy master." The Sanhedrin over which Judah presided

[p. 70]

had no chief justice or hakam; he himself fulfilled the varied functions for which the other two offices had been created.

A number of his aphorisms have been preserved in the Talmud. "I have learned much from my masters, more from my colleagues, but most of all from my pupils." "Do not consider the vessel but its contents; many a new vessel is full of old wine and many an old vessel is without even new wine." To the question, "Which is the right path that a man is to choose in life?" he offered the following answer: "That which will be a source of pride to him, before his own conscience, and which will also bring him honor from mankind." He held that children must revere both parents equally.

Under Judah's leadership the Sanhedrin enacted a number of important social reforms. Those who purchased property twelve months after its seizure by the Roman government were required to compensate the original owners by a fourth of its purchase price, but the transfer of possession was declared valid. Certain frontier districts of Palestine were exempted from tithing their crops or leaving their land fallow on a sabbatical year. The theory on which these exemptions were made was that those had not been part of the country regions originally invaded by the Israelites under Joshua. But their purpose was obviously to alleviate conditions among the Jewish masses upon whom the tithes and the seventh year loss of the harvest had proven a very heavy burden.

Rabbi Judah sought to abolish the fast of the ninth day of Ab, when Jews mourned for the fall of the Temple. There was no point in maintaining the fast, he felt, since the Jews were free of persecution and were living everywhere as a free community within the Roman Empire. Indeed, the continued commemoration of that fast day fostered ill-will between Jews and Romans. But Rabbi Judah's colleagues opposed the move and the fast remained.

The most important achievement of Judah was the completion of the great literary enterprise that had been started

[p. 71]

in Jabneh--the compilation of the Mishnah. Judah synthesized in his work all that had been accomplished before him. He relied particularly on the compilations of Rabbi Akiba and Rabbi Meir. But he ultimately made them all his own and what he produced was a succinct and comprehensive record of Jewish legal tradition from the dawn of Pharisaism until his own times. The opinions that he recognized as authoritative law are generally presented anonymously, but the views of the dissenting masters are given as well. With some minor variations, the product that left the hand of Judah is the classic text of the Mishnah which has been preserved to our own day.

With the passing of Judah I, the old lustre departed from the office of nasi. A number of more or less inconspicuous personalities succeeded him, but they made little mark for themselves as teachers and leaders in Israel. The most important of them was Judah's grandson, Judah II. Judah was a close friend of the Roman Emperor Alexander Severus. To facilitate more cordial relations between Jews and Romans, he sought to abolish some of the restrictions against free relations with pagans. He succeeded in lifting an old ban against the use of oil bought from pagans. This was also an important economic amelioration for the Jewish community which used oil as a staple in the common diet. In his own home, the patriarch allowed himself certain deviations from Jewish custom, yielding to the influence of Roman manners to which he was freely exposed. He was openly criticized for this, but the rabbis rationalized that as representative of Jewry he was obliged to mingle with Roman officials which made such accommodations inevitable.[r_03_17][*17]

The rabbis who functioned after the compilation of the Mishnah were called amoraim, expositors, to distinguish them from their predecessors who were called tannaim, teachers. The Mishnah had greatly simplified their labors, for they now had an authoritative record of tradition on which to base their interpretations and decisions.

[p. 72]

The pioneer of amoraic activity was Rabbi Johanan (199-279), who headed the academy in Tiberias and who has frequently been called the compiler of the Palestine Talmud. Johanan had studied under Judah I and he extolled the value of his Mishnah. "I base all things on the Mishnah," he declared. Johanan established the principle that no amora could contradict a tanna unless he had tannaitic support for his position. "Whatever is written in the Mishnah has been communicated to Moses on Mount Sinai."

Six commandments he extolled with particular emphasis: hospitality to strangers, visiting the sick, careful prayer, rising early to go to the academy, raising children to the knowledge of the Torah, and judging everyone according to his good deeds. Johanan was a great humanitarian. He treated his slave as an equal and served him regularly the same food eaten by the rest of the household. "The slave," he explained, "is the same child of God that I am." He suspended all laws proscribing labor on the sabbath to save a sick person who could then live to observe many sabbaths. He ruled that the injunction to return a straying ox or sheep (Deut. 22:1) applied even if the owner was a Jew who had renounced his Judaism, and he called upon people to give full recognition to whatever truths pagan wise men might discover.

He complained bitterly about the oppressive taxations levied by the Romans. "Such is the way of an evil kingdom when it proposes to seize people's property," he once explained. "It appoints one to be an overseer and another a tax collector. By these devices it takes away the possessions of people." He was hopeful that the Parthians would finally prevail and make good their challenge to Roman supremacy, thereby liberating Jewish Palestine. But, in spite of prevailing persecutions, he sought to discourage the emigration of Jews from Palestine. The national cause demanded that Jews hold on to every position in their native land.

Johanan did not edit the Palestinian Gemara, as has

[p. 73]

sometimes been asserted. Johanan died in 279, and the Palestinian Gemara quotes scholars who lived in the fourth and early fifth centuries. But Johanan's work was the most important contribution to the making of this Palestinian supplement to the Mishnah.[r_03_18][*18]

After the passing of Johanan, there set in a continuous decline in Palestinian scholarship. The conversion of the Roman Empire to Christianity under Constantine (311-337)--another experiment in unifying a heterogeneous empire with a common faith and a common way of life--brought new disabilities upon the Jewish community. In 351, the Jews attempted another uprising against Rome and brutal retaliations followed. The most important centers of Jewish life and learning, including Tiberias and Sepphoris, were destroyed. The Roman Empire itself was weakening, moreover, under the weight of constant warfare with the Parthians and neo-Persians in the East. In the early fifth century, the west was invaded by the Goths and Vandals, and chaotic conditions spread throughout the empire. In Palestine, as in the other provinces, the population was constantly diminishing, through natural decline, as well as through emigration and social and cultural life gradually came to a standstill.

The decline of Palestinian Jewry is perhaps best illustrated by the patriarchs who succeeded Judah II. They were essentially figureheads as far as their functions in Jewish life were concerned. Their knowledge of tradition was mediocre. They were the political representatives of Jewry before the Roman officialdom and assisted the Government in the collection of taxes. The leadership in cultural life passed into the hands of the amoraim, who carried on their work more or less independently, without centralized direction from the patriarchal office.

As nominal heads of the Sanhedrin, the most important function of these patriarchs was the annual promulgation of the calendar. Even this ceased in 359 when the patriarch,

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] Hillel II, formulated a mathematically calculated fixed calendar, doing away with the periodic calendar determination on the basis of the observed position of the new moon. The inertia of a long and colorful past kept the office going for another sixty years, but its usefulness had long since ended. And in 425 when the patriarch Gamaliel VI died childless, the patriarchate was officially abolished.

The abolition of the patriarchate marked the termination of Palestine's role as a center of Judaism. We do not know whose hands put the finishing touches upon the literature of Mishnah supplementation, the Gemara, which had grown up in the various schools. Together with the Mishnah, it proved to be a rich legacy that a fruitful and creative epoch had left to its posterity.

  

A NEW DAWN IN BABYLONIA

Babylonia, the modern Iraq, ranks second only to Palestine as a center of classical Judaism. Situated along the lower reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, the country is rich in alluvial soil, and was one of the most fertile regions of the ancient world.

There had been a Jewish community in Babylonia ever since the Babylonian King Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed the independence of Judah in 586 B.C.E. and deported to Babylonia a large part of the Judean population. including the leaders of political and religious life. The deportees were given their freedom and were allowed to settle on the land or to engage in any other pursuits of their liking. Babylonia's rich soil rewarded their labors with a lavish bounty; and they grew and prospered in the new land.

The political convulsions of the ancient world repeatedly bore their full weight upon Babylonian life. Cyrus, the Persian, conquered the country in 539 B.C.E., and his dynasty maintained its domination for more than two centuries. Persian power was broken by Alexander the Great

[p. 75]

in 331 B.C.E. In the division of empire which followed Alexander's death, Babylonia was joined to Syria as part of the kingdom falling to the general Seleucus.

In one essential respect did the fate of Babylonia differ from the rest of the Near East: she never succumbed to Roman conquest. In 160 B.C.E., a Parthian King, Mithridates I, established himself in the country and the new dynasty, which reigned until 226 C. E., built a powerful military machine that was repeatedly able to hurl back the Roman legions seeking to invade it.

The Jews suffered all the repercussions of the various wars that ravaged the country, but their freedom remained intact. And with the benevolent cooperation of the government, they evolved an ingenious pattern of community life. The Jews were recognized as a national minority, governed by a hereditary prince, called the Resh Galuta, the head of the captivity. This prince who was a descendent of the royal house of David, was the fourth highest ranking noble of the state, representing the Jewish population. As far as the Jewish community was concerned, he was vested with the right to supervise trade and commerce, to appoint judges and to direct the various other tasks of regional government. including the collection of taxes.

The autonomous organization of the Jewish community was made possible by the compact character of the Jewish settlements. Such cities as Nehardea, Nares, Sura, Mehoza, and Pumbedita, had predominantly Jewish populations. The contact between Jews and native Babylonians was free and unrestrained; and the impact of mutual influence was evident on both cultures. The Jews adopted the Aramaic vernacular spoken in Babylonia. Many Babylonians, on the other hand, embraced the Jewish faith and were welcomed into the synagogue. Among the greatest triumphs to Jewish proselytising in Babylonia was the conversion of the royal family of Audiabne, a vassal state in northern Mesopotamia.

Pursuing their own culture, the Jews of Babylonia had

[p. 76]

developed important centers for the study of the Torah. The pioneer of the sopheric movement in Palestine, Ezra, had received his training in Babylonia. The venerable teacher, Hillel, received his preliminary education in the Babylonian schools, before migrating to Palestine. The chief justice of the Palestinian Sanhedrin under Simeon ben Gamaliel III was a Babylonian scholar, Nathan. a member of the family of the Resh Galuta.

But the Jews of Babylonia realized that the central authority in Jewish life must be directed from Palestine. Most of them did not want to leave their new homes to take advantage of the Persian edict allowing them to return to Palestine. But they organized an expedition of pioneers who were willing to return; and they helped the new Palestinian settlement with material and moral support until it could get on its feet to resume once again a normal national life. And when Palestine was prepared to offer leadership, they gladly followed. They sent their annual contributions for the maintenance of the Temple and went on pilgrimages to Jerusalem. They respected the authority of the Sanhedrin and its hierarchy of teachers and leaders who directed Jewish religious and cultural life.

The Roman invasion sent a new wave of immigration from Palestine to Babylonia. This was augmented particularly after the Jewish uprisings of 70 C.E. and 135 C.E. when the Romans devastated Judea and destroyed the Temple. As a Babylonian teacher, after witnessing the tragedy of Palestine, under Rome, remarked: "The Lord, knowing the Jews would not be able to bear the hard decrees of Rome, exiled them to Babylonia."

Among these new Palestinian emigres who came to Babylonia was Hananiah, a nephew of Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah, and also a distinguished scholar. Apprehensive that the Romans would completely uproot Palestinian Jewry, Hananiah attempted to organize a Sanhedrin in Babylonia. He organized a school at Nehar Pekod for advanced study of the

[p. 77]

[paragraph continues] Torah, and, as its head, proclaimed his competence to promulgate the calendar of Jewish festivals, without reference to the Palestinian authorities. He won local Jewish support, and Babylonian Jewry thus seceded from its dependence on Palestine.

Hananiah's attempt was, however, premature. Babylonia's time had not as yet come. For in 140, peace was restored in Palestine and the Sanhedrin reconstituted at Usha. To recover the loyalty of Babylonia, the Usha Sanhedrin sent a delegation of rabbis to Hananiah, who, however, remained obdurate. The delegates finally appealed, over Hananiah's head, to the Jewish laity.

The Talmudic story relates that one of these delegates when called upon to read the Torah at a synagogue service on a festival date fixed by Hananiah's calendar, substituted "These are the holidays of Hananiah" for "These are the holidays of God." Members of the congregation, of course, corrected him, but he replied, "It is we in Palestine who may read, 'These are the holidays of God'; here in Babylonia one must substitute the name of Hananiah since he fixes the holidays as he chooses and not as God commanded." The second delegate then arose to read and he recited the verse, "Out of Zion shall go forth the Torah," as "Out of Babylonia shall go forth the Torah." When corrected, he replied similarly: "In Palestine we may read as written, but judging by your conduct the amended reading appears justified." Public pressure finally forced Hananiah to yield; and Jewish life was once again under a unified centralized leadership, the Palestinian Sanhedrin.[r_03_19][*19]

The Jews in Babylonia continued to heed the Palestinian Jewish leadership until the fifth century when the Sanhedrin was abolished. But as Jewish life in Palestine declined and Babylonian Jewry grew with ever more accretions from Palestine, the active enterprises of Jewish culture were increasingly transferred to Babylonia. By the third century, a series of schools of higher Torah studies sprang up in Babylonia

[p. 78]

which conducted for centuries an active intellectual life, the choicest product of which is the Babylonian Gemara.

The pioneer in this intellectual development was Rabbi Abba Areka, or as he was popularly designated Rab, master par excellence. He had studied in Palestine under Rabbi Judah I, where he distinguished himself in his studies, winning the plaudits of a scholar like Rabbi Johanan who acclaimed him as his own superior. It was at Judah's school that he probably acquired the epithet Areka, tall, to differentiate him from another scholar by the same name, the father of the famous Babylonian amora, Samuel.

In spite of his high standing as a scholar, Rab could not achieve full ordination from Judah or his successor, Gamaliel III. The patriarchs were apparently unwilling to invest Abba with full authority because they did not want to see a self-sufficient religious life established among the Babylonian Jews, with a rival academy under Abba's leadership. The hegemony of Palestine remained unbroken so long as it remained the only Jewish community with a fully ordained religious leadership. Nevertheless he was recognized as an equal in rank to the great teachers who were active before the compilation of the Mishnah and privileged freely to dispute their opinions, a distinction accorded to him alone among all the amoraim, as the rabbis of post-Mishnaic times were called.

Rab returned to Babylonia in 219 with a widely recognized reputation as a great scholar. The Resh Galuta at once appointed him commissioner of markets in Nehardea and he was invited to lecture in the local academy which was then headed by a certain Shila. But neither office proved an adequate outlet for his independent spirit and creative intellect. When Shila died, he was offered the rectorship of the Nehardea academy, but he turned it down, with the recommendation that it be offered to a local scholar, Samuel, who had a greater claim to it.

Rab's final decision was to become a pioneer, to found

[p. 79]

a new academy with new traditions and in a region where there was little knowledge of the Torah and a widespread neglect of Jewish religious life--the city of Sura. As the Talmud puts it, he entered "an open and neglected field and fenced it in." With his own funds he erected a school building, and he offered scholarships to needy students, providing tuition and maintenance, and before long 1200 students had enrolled to study under him.

Rab had brought with him from Palestine the text of the Mishnah, edited by Judah I, and he based all his lectures on it, supplementing it, however, with explanations, illustrations, and various new applications. But he was equally interested in the exposition of moral lessons. The Talmud has preserved a number of his moral maxims and they are among the choicest ethical expressions in all literature: "The rituals of the Torah were given only to discipline men's morals." "Whatever may not properly be done in public is forbidden even in the most secret chamber." "It is well that people occupy themselves with the study of Torah and the performance of charitable deeds even when inspired by ulterior motives; for the habit of right doing will finally ennoble their intentions as well." "Man will be held to account for having deprived himself of the enjoyment of good things which the world has offered him." "When necessary, flay dead carcasses in the street and do not say, I am a priest, I am a great man." "It is better to throw one's self into the fiery furnace than to humiliate one's fellow-man."

Rab did not confine his interests to the classroom alone. He was one of the most active and influential communal leaders in his day. He enriched the Jewish liturgy with a number of beautiful prayers which still offer the most inspiring motifs of the synagogue service. His compositions include the prayers on the occasion of the new month, a good deal of the New Year and Day of Atonement liturgy, and the Adoration, Alenu Leshabeah, with which every Jewish religious service, private or congregational, is concluded.

[p. 80]

He interested himself in elementary education, ordaining that pupils shall not begin their studies before the age of six; that teachers must create discipline through the winning of the interests and affection of children rather than through corporal punishment; and that no children shall be deemed unworthy of instruction because of mental backwardness. He also contributed immeasurably to the reformation of Jewish family life. Thus, he ruled against child marriages and advocated a period of courtship to enable the boy and girl to discover their own preferences and to choose their own mates without parental dictation.

Rab started his school at the age of 64; and he continued as its active head for 28 years. When he died, all the Jews in Babylonia mourned him for a full year, observing all the rites of mourning which are followed at the loss of a member of the family. He had made himself immortal by raising the religious and cultural life of Babylonian Jewry and by establishing a great institution of high learning which was destined to endure, with minor interruptions, for seven centuries.[r_03_20][*20]

The academy at Nehardea which had invited Rab to its leadership after the passing of Shila was presided over by the local scholar, Samuel, or as he was often called, Mar (Master) Samuel. Like Rab, he had studied in Palestine, but he did not receive even partial ordination. In addition to his studies of Jewish tradition, he had an excellent scientific training. He was a practicing physician and a well-known astronomer. It is interesting that he traced many diseases to the unhygienic conditions under which people lived. He was especially famous for his skill in treating the eye. He denounced the then, and, in many circles, still prevalent superstition ascribing diseases to the evil eye. He attributed a great deal of therapeutic value to air and climate.

As head of the Nehardea academy, Samuel distinguished himself particularly in the field of civil law. He was the author of the famous principle of Jewish law that the legal

[p. 81]

system of any country where Jews are residing is binding upon them, even when it is in conflict with their own system of law. And though the Babylonian Jews enjoyed an autonomous court system, he demanded that Jewish judges reckon with the prevailing Babylonian law in reaching their decisions.[r_03_21][*21]

Between Rab and Samuel there was constant intellectual commerce, and the two men frequently disagreed. Samuel's leadership was followed to the full in his specialty, civil law, while Rab remained supreme on questions of ritual law. Samuel survived his colleague by ten years, and during that time Sura was without a successor to Rab. The Nehardea academy was looked upon as the supreme center of Jewish scholarship and religious authority in Babylonian Judaism. The city of Nehardea was sacked in 261 as one of the incidents in the constant warfare between the Babylonians and the Romans. But the famous academy was transferred to a neighboring city, Pumbedita, by a pupil of both Rab and Samuel, Judah ben Ezekiel. This famous academy now remained in Pumbedita throughout the Talmudic period, except for a brief interlude between 339 and 352 when the new rector, Raba, had it transferred to his native city, Mahoza.

The Babylonian academies developed an ingenious educational institution which enabled them to reach large numbers of non-professional students. During the two months, Adar and Elul, when the average farmer is free from his work in the fields, special educational sessions, called Kalla were held in the schools of Sura and Pumbedita. The subject to be taken up at each of these sessions was announced in advance, and laymen were encouraged to spend their hours of leisure in preparation. The lectures of the rector of the academy were supplemented with the discourses of special lectures. The basic text discussed in all these gatherings was the Mishnah; and one tractate was generally covered each month. 12,000 students are reported to have

[p. 82]

been enrolled in one such Kalla session.[r_03_22][*22] This institution brought the academies into close contact with life, and closed the gap between the professional scholar and the layman. And more than anything else, it helped raise the cultural level of Babylonian Jewry.

The two academies continued their parallel development, under various heads, until the end of the fifth century. There were other schools similarly dedicated to the advanced study of the Torah, but Sura and Pumbedita were the supreme centers of intellectual life, where the Mishnaic utterances, so succinctly formulated by Judah I, were enriched with a supplement of new legal discussions and where the doctrines of Jewish theology and ethics were expounded to offer inspiration and guidance to a new community in Israel.

The turning point in this cultural enterprise was the new domestic policy adopted by Kings Yezdegerd II (438-57) and his son Peroz (459-86). Celebrating a respite from the constant warfare with the Romans, these kings entered upon a policy of the intensive nationalization of their realm. Zoroastrianism as the official religion of the country was proclaimed the medium of national integration as well, and all dissident religions were proscribed as treason to the state. The blow of the new nationalism fell with particular severity upon the Jews. The observance of the Sabbath was prohibited. Synagogues were destroyed and schools closed. Jewish children were caught and delivered to the priests of Zoroaster to raise them as devotees of the national religion. Under these severe persecutions, the once proud Jewry of Babylon began to crumble. There began a mass flight of Jews to friendlier shores, to Arabia, India and the Caucasus.

The accumulated cultural achievements of the Babylonian academies were, however, preserved for posterity through the timely labors of principally two men, Rab Ashi (d. 427) and Rabina (d. 500). Ashi headed the Sura academy for

[p. 83]

more than 50 years of peace, and he had begun the organization of the vast literature which had grown up in the different academies, around that unique classic of Jewish tradition, the Mishnah. What Ashi started as a leisurely work of detached scholarship became a pressing necessity after his death when the Jewish community was overwhelmed with a great disaster. And his successors at the Sura academy continued his work, finally completing it and, it seems, also reducing it to writing. The final job of editorial revision was rendered by Rabina, the last of the rectors of the Sura academy in Talmudic times. Babylonian Jewry eventually recovered from these persecutions and the schools were reopened for another five centuries of cultural leadership. But the Gemara which had been completed by the close of the fifth century was the apex of its cultural life and its chief contribution to the Judaism of the future.

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84] [p. 85]

  

The Theological Elements in the Talmud

  

THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

THE TALMUDISTS, like their Biblical predecessors, assert the existence of God, and from the perspective of that assertion interpret all life in the universe. They do not engage in any formal efforts to prove God's existence. Yet there are passages in their writings which show that they could follow the logic of the philosophers and reason from nature to a first cause. Such reasoning is put by the rabbis into the mind of Abraham as they trace the odyssey of his own faith, from idolatry to monotheism. According to one account Abraham inferred the existence of God by contemplating the universe as one may infer the existence of some master when viewing a palace brilliantly illuminated within. "Can it be that the universe and all that exists within it is without a directing mind?" Abraham is quoted as speculating. The universe in itself did not, however, answer Abraham's quest. God met him halfway, and rewarded his groping by revealing Himself to him with the reassuring word of His presence. "The Lord looked upon him and said: 'I am the master of the universe.'"[r_04_1][*1]

The assertion that the universe is the creation of God does not make clear the many varied and intriguing problems that the contemplation of existence presents to alert minds. What, for instance, was before creation? And how did creation itself really transpire to fashion a universe out of nothing? But the Talmudists discouraged the preoccupation with such problems. They held the ultimate mysteries of

[p. 86]

the world beyond human comprehension, and they felt that the concentration upon them, a futile enterprise, in the long run, would only have the immediate effect of distracting men's minds from the more pressing tasks of religious and moral duty.

Their apprehensions were reinforced by the tragic experiences of the famous four teachers who had studied the ultimate mysteries: Akiba, Ben Azzai, Ben Zoma and Elisha ben Abuyah. A cryptic passage tells of their fate: "Ben Azzai gazed and died; Ben Zoma gazed and became demented; Acher (Elisha) cut the plants (turned apostate); R. Akiba departed in peace." The Talmudists therefore warned their people with the well-known citation from Ben Sira: "Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee, and into the things that are too hidden inquire thou not. In what is permitted to thee instruct thyself; thou hast no business with secret things."

The distinction between "what is permitted" and the "secret things" which are not permitted, is set forth in the Talmudic observation as to why Scripture commences with the second letter of the Hebrew alphabet, the Beth, rather than with the first. The explanation is seen in the symbolism which that letter's shape, a square open on the left side, suggests: "As the letter beth is closed on all sides and only open in front, you are to regard as closed to inquiry what was before creation or what is behind; what is open begins from the actual time of creation."[r_04_2][*2]

The rabbis, following the style of the Bible, frequently spoke of God as though He were a person. They ascribe to Him bodily attributes. It is clear however, on the basis of their own declarations, that these "corporeal" references to God were often intended only to make vivid the sense of His existence and activity. All such references are to be taken as figurative expressions. Even the story of God's revelation at Sinai is taken in the Talmud by one teacher in a figurative way. "Moses never ascended to heaven," declared

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] Rabbi Jose and "God never descended on earth." The Biblical narrative is to be taken as a poetic elaboration of the doctrine that God was the inspiration for the truths which Israel pledged itself to uphold at Sinai. It must not be taken literally.

The rabbis insisted repeatedly that God is not a concrete being, with tangible form, occupying a specific magnitude in space. Such a being would be part of the universe, not its master. Indeed, one of the epithets by which God is referred to in the Talmud is "The Place", for God is the "place" or the ground of creation; the universe exists in Him not He in the universe. In the words of the Midrash "The Holy One, blessed be He, is the place of His universe, but His universe is not His place."[r_04_3][*3]

But by a paradox of the divine mystery God, though transcending the universe, is yet ever present, and men can enter into close and intimate communication with Him, wherever they are. This is the significance of the revelation of God perceived by Moses at the burning bush--it is to teach us that there is no place which is devoid of God's presence, not even so humble an object as a thorn bush. Another rabbi declared: "At times the universe and its fulness are insufficient to contain the glory of God's presence; at other times He speaks with man in intimate discourse."[r_04_4][*4]

The assertion that God is invisible made him unreal for people accustomed to identify reality with concreteness. But the rabbis disputed this. Thus it is related in a Talmudic anecdote that the Emperor Hadrian had said to Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah: "I desire to behold your God." Rabbi Joshua explained to him that it was impossible. When the emperor persisted, the rabbi asked him to stand in a fixed gaze at the sun. The emperor found the sun too strong. Thereupon the rabbi exclaimed: "You admit that you are unable to look at the sun, which is only one of the ministering servants of the Holy One, blessed be He; how much more beyond your power of vision is God Himself." Rabban

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] Gamaliel explained the reality of God by analogy to the soul whose specific abode we do not know and of which we have no direct concrete experience. That, however, does not make it unreal.[r_04_5][*5]

God's ultimate essence must elude human comprehension. We may, however, see manifestations of divine activity throughout creation.

The Talmudists saw a manifestation of God in the dynamism of the world. The universe is not a mass of inert matter. It is an enterprise of tremendous dynamic activity. "The universe is filled with the might and power of our God.... He formed you and infused into you the breath of life. He stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth. His voice blows out flames of fire, rends mountains asunder, and shatters rocks. His bow is fire and His arrows flames. His spear is a torch, His shield the clouds, and His sword the lightning. He fashioned mountains and hills and covered them with grass. He makes the rains and dew to descend, and causes the vegetation to sprout. He also forms the embryo in the mother's womb and enables it to issue forth as a living being."[r_04_6][*6]

In this vast panorama of existence, moreover, there is the evidence of a purposeful Intelligence at work. No organism is superfluous. A close scrutiny of the world shows everywhere an all-permeating intelligence and purpose. We see the evidence of that design in the vastness of the planetary system, in the individuality of each rain drop, in the majesty of trees that renew their garb of green in spring, in the mysteries of love which bind men and women in the unity of marriage. "Even such things as you deem superfluous in the world, such as flies and gnats are necessary parts of the cosmic order and were created by the Holy One, blessed be He, for His purpose--yes even serpents and frogs." Indeed, every creature in its own way, by its mere existence, and by the precision with which it functions in the

[p. 89]

world, offers eloquent testimony to the divine source from which it is derived.[r_04_7][*7]

It is in man that the design of creation shows itself most forcefully. The Talmudists admired the marvellous construction of the human body in which every organ seemed so perfectly designed for the well-being of the individual and the furtherance of life. "Come and see how many miracles the Holy One, blessed be He, performed with man, and he is unaware of it. Were he to eat a piece of bread which is hard, it would descend into the intestines and scratch them; but the Holy One, blessed be He, created a fountain in the middle of the throat, which enables the bread to move down safely." "If the bladder is pricked by only a needle, all the air in it comes out; but man is made with numerous orifices, and yet the breath in him does not come out."

How unlike the work of man is the handiwork of God! The best of man's work has the mark of his imperfection, but what the Lord has wrought is beyond criticism. "When a human being builds a palace, people often come and criticize. If the pillars were taller, they say, if the roof were only higher, it would be better! But has man ever come and said, If I had three eyes or three hands or three legs, if I walked on my head or my head were turned backward, I should have preferred it? ... The Holy One ... decided upon every limb which you have and set it in its proper place."[r_04_8][*8]

  

MIRACLES

The conception of the universe as the offspring of a plan, as the perfect embodiment of God's design, implied a certain order in its actions. A universe that behaved capriciously would reflect adversely on the plan by which it was fashioned. Thus the rabbis were moved to affirm uninterrupted regularity as one of the characteristics of life in the universe. This did not rule out miracles for them, however. According to one interpretation miracles were provided for

[p. 90]

at the very time when God brought the universe into being. These events seem deflections from the norm to us, but they are not breaks in the plan which actually made room for them. As the Midrash put it: "At the creation God made a condition with the sea that it should be divided to permit the children of Israel to pass, with the sun and the moon to stand still at the bidding of Joshua, with the ravens to feed Elijah ..."

The age of miracles was not altogether past, however. Some of the leading Talmudists were described as miracle workers. Such stories were associated especially with Rabbi Pinhas ben Yair and Rabbi Haninah ben Dosa. For those who had the sensitivity to see, moreover, there were miracles transpiring daily throughout creation. "Greater is the miracle that occurs when a sick person escapes from perilous disease than that which happened when Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah escaped from the fiery furnace." And the tortuous manner in which a family in distress manages to eke out an existence is as great a miracle as the parting of the Red Sea for the Israelites.[r_04_9][*9]

  

THE PURPOSE OF HUMAN EXISTENCE

What is the purpose of human life? Why did God bring man upon the arena of existence? It is that he might glorify his Maker through the cultivation of virtue and the continued perfection of his life. The Talmud abounds in discussions as to what is meant by the perfection of life. In the fullest elaboration of their thinking we are offered a vast body of ideals and rules of action by which a person would please his Maker and thus justify his own existence. The principal demand is ethical--to act with compassion and loving-kindness towards God's creatures. Thus Rabbi Akiba pointed to the golden rule as the most comprehensive teaching of the Torah. "This is the most fundamental principle enunciated in the Torah," he taught, "'Love thy neighbor as

[p. 91]

thyself'" (Lev. 19:18). Ben Azzai made the Torah's fundamental teaching not the golden rule but the doctrine on which it is ultimately based--that man is made in the divine image: "This is the book of the generations of man ... in the likeness of God made He him" (Gen. 5:1).[r_04_10][*10]

The Talmudists saw, however, that the anchor on which all the elements of the good life rest, is the recognition of God's sovereignty. It is the reverence for God that ultimately inspires the attitudes and the actions that spell ethical living.

This conception of the relationship between belief in God and the moral life is conveyed in a number of Talmudic discussions. There is the well-known homily by Rabbi Simlai: "Six hundred and thirteen commandments were addressed to Moses--three hundred and sixty-five prohibitions corresponding to the days of the solar year, and two hundred and forty-eight positive commandments corresponding to the number of limbs in the human body. David came and reduced them to eleven principles, which are listed in Psalm 15. Isaiah came and reduced them to six as is said, 'He that walketh righteously and speaketh uprightly, he that despiseth the gain of oppression, that shaketh his hands from holding bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from looking upon evil' (Is. 33:15). Micah came and reduced them to three, as it is written, 'What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God' (Micah 6:8). Isaiah subsequently reduced them to two, as it is said, 'Thus saith the Lord, keep ye justice and do righteousness' (Is. 56:1). Lastly came Habakkuk and reduced them to one, as it is said, 'The righteous shall live by his faith'" (Hab. 2:4).[r_04_11][*11]

  

GOD AS THE SOURCE OF MORALITY

Because faith in God is the source of the moral life, the rabbis regarded a morality that is not rooted in piety as

[p. 92]

precariously insecure. And while they placed the love of man at the climax of human virtue, they summoned people to cultivate the love of God as the source from which all other virtues flow.

This is taught by Rabbi Reuben who had been asked to define the most reprehensible act a man may be guilty of. His answer was that it is the denial of God's existence. "For no man violates the commandments, 'Thou shalt not murder', 'Thou shalt not steal', till he has renounced his faith in God."[r_04_12][*12]

The same doctrine is conveyed in the famous homily by Raba. As the Talmud relates it, "Raba said: when a person is brought for judgment on Judgment Day he is asked 'Did you do your business honestly, did you set aside time for the study of Torah, did you raise a family, did you maintain our faith in the Messianic redemption, did you pursue wisdom, did you attain to the level of being able to reason inferentially from one proposition to another?' All this will suffice provided he be a God-fearing man, too, for the fear of God is the treasury in which all else is stored. If he be not a God-fearing man, the other virtues will prove insufficient."[r_04_13][*13]

  

THE TOOLS OF HUMAN PERFECTION

The acquisition of a virtuous character and the attainment of life's perfection do not come easily to a man. He must work for them hard and persistently throughout the years, and his gains, such as they are, will always be partial and relative. But God has given man the tools with which he is to make his quest a profitable enterprise. Into his very nature God has poured certain drives which spur him on and guide him on his way. There is the impulse to look after one's self. This is sometimes called the evil impulse, because when carried beyond its legitimate limits the preoccupation with one's self becomes a destructive force in

[p. 93]

human life. But in its essential character this impulse is no more evil than anything else which the Lord has made. Balancing this impulse, moreover, is the drive to goodness, the yezer tob, which spurs us on to acts of self-denial in furtherance of every noble endeavor. In present circumstances the so-called evil impulse dominates life, but as men mature in their development the good impulse gains ascendency and the proper balance is achieved between those two basic drives of our natures. The Talmudists pronounce their judgment on the two impulses in a comment on Genesis 1:31: "And God saw everything which He had made and behold it was very good." "Very good," say the rabbis, applies to those two impulses. "But," it is asked, "is the evil impulse very good?" And the answer is given that it is. For "were it not for that impulse, a man would not build a house, marry a wife, beget children or conduct business affairs."[r_04_14][*14]

The person in whom the drive for self has been integrated in a sound pattern of character has made of the so-called evil impulse also a tool of goodness. The Talmud makes this clear in the comment on Deut. 6:5: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." "Thy heart" is taken as meaning "with the two impulses--the good and the evil."[r_04_15][*15]

  

THE TORAH AND THE COMMANDMENTS

God moreover did not thrust man into the world to grope entirely on his own for the right course he must pursue in life. He has given man a chart by which he can steer himself. This chart is contained in the Torah and the commandments.

The Talmudists believed firmly that God revealed Himself to man, that having formed human life, He is also concerned with guiding it toward the knowledge of virtue and truth in which man finds his true happiness. Not every person is ready to receive the divine revelation. But there are

[p. 94]

some who are ready, and to them God reveals Himself. Those chosen few are, however, chosen not for their own edification, but that they might become His prophets, the instruments for disseminating the fruits of that revelation among all mankind.

The most important manifestation of prophecy was in Israel, but not exclusively so. The rabbis saw the evidence of prophetic inspiration in the lives of men outside the Jewish people. Thus they declared: "Seven prophets prophesied for the pagans:[r_04_16][*16] Balaam and his father, and Job and his four friends." But prophecy, in its highest expression, appeared in Israel solely.

The most important permanent fruit of prophecy in Israel were the various books that make up the Holy Scriptures, commencing with the Pentateuch which is traced back to the authorship of Moses. In the words of the famous statement of the Talmud: "Who wrote the Scriptures? Moses wrote his own book and the parables of Balaam (Nu. 23, 24) and Job; Joshua wrote the book which bears his name and the last eight verses of the Pentateuch; Samuel wrote the book which bears his name and the Book of Judges and Ruth; David wrote the Book of Psalms ... Jeremiah wrote the book which bears his name, the Book of Kings and Lamentations; Hezekiah and his colleagues wrote Isaiah, Proverbs, the Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes; the men of the Great Assembly wrote Ezekiel, the Twelve minor Prophets, Daniel and the Scroll of Esther. Ezra wrote the book that bears his name and the genealogies of the Book of Chronicles up to his own time ..."

The degree of divine inspiration bestowed on individual prophets varied greatly. Moses was supreme among them, and the quality of his inspiration was surpassed by none. But even among the other prophets there were individual differences. Isaiah, for instance, was held superior to the others. Thus the Midrash suggests: "The Holy Spirit descends

[p. 95]

on the prophets in degrees. Some prophesied to the extent of one book, others of two books. Beeri only prophesied two verses, which, being insufficient for an independent book, were included in Isaiah."[r_04_17][*17]

The Divine plan could not, however, fulfill itself through the individual prophets. It was essential that the prophets be given a particular society which would be most responsive to their call and that would be prepared to dedicate its common life to the implementation of their ideals.

For that special duty God chose Israel. A Talmudic homily relates how God sought out the society that was best prepared to be the custodian of the Torah. "When the All-present revealed Himself to give the Torah to Israel, not to them alone did He manifest Himself, but to all the nations. He first went to the sons of Esau, and said to them, 'Will you accept the Torah?' They asked what was written in it and God told them: 'Thou shalt not murder.' They replied, 'Sovereign of the Universe! The very nature of our ancestors was bloodshed ...' He then went to the sons of Ammon and Moab and said to them, 'Will you accept the Torah?' They asked what was written in it and He replied, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery!' They said to Him, 'Sovereign of the Universe! The very existence of this people is rooted in unchastity.' He went and found the children of Ishmael and said to them, Will you accept the Torah?' They asked what was written in it and He replied: 'Thou shalt not steal.' They said unto Him, 'Sovereign of the Universe! The very life of our ancestors depended upon robbery ...' There was not a single nation to whom He did not go and offer the Torah ..." The selection of Israel, in other words, was not arbitrary. God selected Israel "because all the peoples repudiated the Torah and refused to receive it; but Israel agreed and chose the Holy One, blessed be He, and His Torah." Israel was the chosen people in a double sense. Israel had chosen God even as God had chosen Israel.

[p. 96]

Israel's function in history, then, was to serve as a witness to the truths of the Torah. For the Torah of which Israel was the custodian was ultimately intended for all mankind. It is for this reason that the original promulgation of the Torah took place in the desert, a no-man's land, rather than in the land of Israel. This was to suggest that its treasures were not meant to belong to any particular people exclusively; the Torah was God's message through Israel to all humanity.[r_04_18][*18]

In projecting the goal of sharing the Torah with the rest of mankind, the rabbis did not call for the conversion of the rest of the world to Judaism. They distinguished between a universal element in their faith which all men must adopt and a more particular element which applied to the more specific facts of the Jewish group itself. This universal element of Judaism to which all men were summoned could be integrated with any culture and with whatever formal expression had developed in the religious life of a people. Its provisions are known as the "Seven Noahite laws" and they include the practices of equity in human relations, the prohibition of blaspheming God's name, the prohibition of idolatry, sexual unchastity, bloodshed, robbery, and cruelty to animals, such as tearing a limb from the animal when it is still alive.[r_04_19][*19]

Proselytes were of course accepted in Judaism, when they proved their sincere desire to become part of Israel and to share in its destiny. But that, the rabbis made it clear, was not a prerequisite for earning divine approval. "A pagan," declared Rabbi Meir, "who studies the Torah and practices it is the equal of a high priest in Israel."[r_04_20][*20] Rabbi Meir clearly refers to a pagan who practices the universal principles of religion and morality as embodied in the so-called "Seven Noahite laws". If he practiced the Torah in its entirety he would no longer be a pagan.

The Talmud makes the study of Torah a cardinal virtue

[p. 97]

in Judaism and summons all men to engage in it. "Whoever labors in the Torah for its own sake," declares the Mishnah, "merits many things; and not only so, but all creation is vindicated through him. He may be acclaimed as friend, beloved, a lover of the All-Present, a lover of mankind. It clothes him in meekness and reverence; it enables him to become just, pious, upright, and faithful; it keeps him far from sin, and brings him near to virtue. Through him the world enjoys counsel and sound knowledge, understanding and strength. ... It also gives him sovereignty and dominion and discerning judgment. The secrets of the Torah are revealed to him. He is made like a never-failing fountain, and like a river that flows on with ever sustained vigor. He becomes modest, long-suffering, and forgiving of insults; and it magnifies and exalts him above all things."[r_04_21][*21]

Life's highest goal which is attainable by man must be sought by living according to the teachings of the Torah. The study of Torah must therefore be the great preoccupation of mankind. "The ignorant man cannot be pious," as Hillel puts it, and ignorance here refers clearly to ignorance of Torah. In poverty, in wealth, in youth and old age, a person must ever give himself to the mastery of Torah. It is the only sure compass by which he can guide himself amid the turbulence and uncertainty of life about him.[r_04_22][*22]

The rabbis saw the educational service of the Torah reinforced by the disciplines which are enjoined by it. Some of the commandments enjoined in the Torah are clearly ends in themselves. Thus the many prescriptions in civil and criminal law aim at creating a just order of human relations. Many of those commandments, however, were enjoined for pedagogic reasons--to teach certain truths through the more dramatic affirmation of action. They were meant to teach as reminders of vital truths, like the mezuzah, the receptacle attached to the door post of the house and the phylacteries worn on arm and head during prayer. Both

[p. 98]

contain parchments on which is written the text of the most important injunction of Scripture--to "love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy soul and all thy might" (Deut. 6:5). By the continued exposure to these symbols man was to be reminded vividly of his relationship to God. As the rabbis put it: "Whoever has phylacteries on his head and arm, the fringe on his garment and the mezuzah on his door may be presumed to be safe from committing sin."[r_04_23][*23]

The performance of the commandments was seen as serving man in a deeper sense. It gave him the opportunity to do something concrete in implementation of his love of God, thereby ennobling his own character. As one rabbinic comment expressed it: "The commandments were only given for the purpose of refining human beings; what, for example, does it matter to the Holy One, blessed be He, whether an animal's neck is cut in the front or the rear (as prescribed in the dietary laws)! But the ordinances He gave us have as their purpose the purification of human beings."[r_04_24][*24]

  

FREEDOM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

The conquest of human lives for the truths of the Torah is a painfully slow process. Even Israel, who carries the special responsibility of being the servant of the Lord in the propagation of the Torah, frequently falls so far short of its ideal. And sin, the defiance of God's word, seems to be the all-pervasive failing among human beings. No doubt, God could have made men without the capacity to err. That. however, would have destroyed human freedom. Instead. God has made man a free agent, which involves the uncoerced exercise of the will in any direction, regardless of its moral consequences. As an oft-quoted Talmudic maxim: "All is in the hands of Heaven except the fear of Heaven."[r_04_25][*25] God, in other words, is master of the Universe, but He is not master over man's moral decisions, which he must learn to make himself.

[p. 99]

But man is not left to his own initiative exclusively. God aids him in learning to exercise his freedom in ever wiser decisions. For whenever men defy the truths of the Torah and build patterns of personal and group life in violation of its teachings, God passes judgment upon them; and the discipline of suffering reinforces the native appeal of truth itself in leading man to repentance. It is in this spirit that the Midrash interprets verse in Psalm 23: "Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort me"; rod is applied to suffering while staff is applied to the Torah. Suffering is therefore not an evil to be avoided but an opportunity that points to a better life. "Whoever rejoices in the sufferings that come upon him in this life brings salvation to the world."[r_04_26][*26]

The Talmudists did not advise people to seek suffering. One of them put it quite bluntly: "I desire neither the suffering nor the rewards which it brings in its train." But when suffering comes, we are to see it as the prodding of God who is displeased with us for having committed sin, and who is bestowing upon us the favor of pushing us toward new religious and moral growth. In the words of the Talmud: "Should a man see suffering come upon him, let him scrutinize his actions; as it is said, 'Let us search and try our ways, and return unto the Lord' (Lament. 3:40). If he has scrutinized his actions without discovering the cause, let him attribute them to the neglect of Torah, as it is said, 'Happy is the man whom Thou chastenest, and teachest out of Thy Law' (Ps. 94:12). If he attributed them to neglect of Torah without finding any justification, it is certain that his chastenings are chastenings of love; as it is said, 'For whom the Lord loveth He correcteth'" (Prov. 3:12).[r_04_27][*27]

The so-called suffering inflicted because of "love" is the highest kind of suffering. For it comes not to expiate for some wrong done but to disturb life's stagnation and to initiate a new spiritual advance. It is the irritant that stimulates spiritual progress.

[p. 100]

It was no doubt because he viewed life from this perspective that one rabbi paid tribute to God for the very sufferings He had inflicted on Israel: "Because God loved Israel He multiplied sufferings for him." For through such sufferings Israel would achieve a new vitality in its spiritual life. "As the olive does not give of its precious oil except under pressure, so Israel does not bring forth its highest virtues except through adversity."[r_04_28][*28]

In their trials no less than in their triumphs, therefore, God is guiding mankind toward their destiny. But its fulfillment is a long process toward which men climb slowly in their varied vicissitudes of history. When the theme of history reached its climax, the Talmudists were confident there would be ushered in a state of unusual human perfection. Then men will become completely reconciled with God and surrender unreservedly in loving obedience to His will. Oppression and hatred will then disappear and a new order of righteousness and love will be established in the world. It will involve the full realization of the hopes of the prophets and the fulfillment of Israel's mission in history. And it is to be brought about through a human instrument, the Messianic deliverer.

  

THE MESSIANIC HOPE

There is a wealth of varied details with which different rabbis surrounded the belief in the Messiah. But certain essential features stand out. The term Messiah means anointed, an allusion to the installation ceremony of kings and priests in their respective offices. But the Davidic dynasty carried so many fond associations among the Jewish people and recalled a glorious period in Jewish history, it was generally assumed that "The anointed" would be a scion of the house of David. His arrival will take place after a great suffering will have regenerated the hearts of men; they will have to suffer the pangs that are attendant

[p. 101]

upon every new birth, pangs that are therefore designated the "travail of the Messiah". The human regeneration which is to usher in the Messianic fulfillment, moreover, will not be complete. There will be men who will hold on defiantly to the error of their life and endeavor to impede the dawn of the new day. And those men will have to be vanquished in a bloody contest of arms.[r_04_29][*29]

As for the time when this consummation was to take place, it was generally held to depend on the degree of progress men will have achieved in their development. This is well illustrated in the well-known Talmudic parable. "Rabbi Joshua ben Levi met Elijah standing at the entrance of Rabbi Simeon ben Johai's tomb. ... He then said to him, 'When will the Messiah come?' 'Go and ask him' was the reply. 'Where is he sitting?'--'At the entrance of the city.' ... So he went to him and greeted him, saying, 'Peace be upon thee, Master and Teacher.' 'Peace be upon thee, O son of Levi,' he replied. 'When will thou come, Master?' asked he. 'Today' was his answer." When the Messiah failed to appear that day, a deeply disappointed Joshua returned to Elijah with the complaint: "He spoke falsely to me, stating that he would come today, but has not!" Elijah then enlightened him that the Messiah had really quoted Scripture (Ps. 95:7): "Today, if ye hearken to His voice."[r_04_30][*30]

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102] [p. 103]

  

Social Ethics in the Talmud

  

THE UNITY OF MANKIND

THE TALMUDIC CONCEPTION of mankind is that of a unity, deriving its character from a common origin and a common destiny. The basic elements of this doctrine are already enunciated in the Bible which traces the origins of the human race to a single person who is formed by God in His own image. It is in the Talmud, however, that this doctrine reaches its fullest maturity. "Why did the Creator form all life from a single ancestor?" inquired the Talmud, and the reply is, "that the families of mankind shall not lord one over the other with the claim of being sprung from superior stock ... that all men, saints and sinners alike, may recognize their common kinship in the collective human family."[r_05_1][*1]

Human behavior may be infinitely varied, but human nature which underlies it, is essentially the same. Man is a creature of earth and at the same time a child of God, infused with the divine spirit. Appraised in moral categories, all people are endowed with the tendency to see in their own persons the ultimate ends of their being and the tendency to seek transcendent ends toward which their own persons are but contributing instruments. Out of these two tendencies flow good and evil, which thus reside, in varying measure, to be sure, in every individual as part of his indigenous equipment for life. If you but probe sufficiently, one Talmudic maxim advises, you will discover that "even the greatest of sinners" abound in good deeds as a pomegranate abounds in seeds. On the other hand, the greatest of saints have their share of moral imperfection.[r_05_2][*2] All human beings are, so to say, cut from the same cloth and there are no absolute distinctions between them.

[p. 104]

  

THE UNIQUENESS AND SANCTITY OF HUMAN LIFE

This doctrine of equality does not assert that individuals duplicate one another. "A man," the Talmud explains, "strikes many coins from one die and they are all alike. The Holy One, blessed be He, however, strikes every person from the die of the first man, but no one resembles another." Their uniqueness is mental as well as physical, and they all have a special function to fulfill in the realization of the cosmic purpose. A person thus has a right to feel that "the universe was created for his sake," for he has a unique role to play in it, so that the cosmic scheme will be incomplete without him.

The specific role that one's particular faculties enable him to play is immaterial. Humble or exalted, all roles are equally invaluable to the fulfillments of history. In the words of a Talmudic illustration, "I am a creature of God and my neighbor is also His creature; my work is in the city and his is in the field; I rise early to my work and he rises early to his. As he cannot excel in my work, so I cannot excel in his work. But you may be tempted to say, 'I do great things and he small things!' We have learned that it matters not whether one does much or little, if only he directs his heart to serve the divine purpose."[r_05_3][*3]

Deriving from this conception of man's place in the universe is the sense of the supreme sanctity of all human life. "He who destroys one person has dealt a blow at the entire universe, and similarly, he who makes life livable for one person has sustained the whole world." All law, civil and religious, has as its purpose the promotion of human life, and when it ceases to serve that end it becomes obsolete and is to be superseded. To quote a good Talmudic maxim, "The Sabbath is made for man and not man for the Sabbath"; and what was true for the Sabbath applied likewise to all

[p. 105]

other law. It is greater to serve one's fellow-man, one Talmudist expounded, than to preoccupy oneself with divine communion.[r_05_4][*4]

The sanctity of life was intrinsic to the individual person and was not a derivative of national origin, religious affiliation, or social status. As one Talmudist generalized: "Heaven and earth I call to witness, whether it be an Israelite or pagan, man or woman, slave or maidservant, according to the work of every human being doth the Holy Spirit rest upon him." Non-Jews residing in Jewish communities were to share in all the beneficences which the Jewish community held out to its own members. Jews were ordained to sustain their needy, to visit their sick, and to bury their dead. As the rabbis put it: "We are obligated to feed non-Jews residing among us even as we feed Jews; we are obligated to visit their sick even as we visit the Jewish sick; we are obligated to attend to the burial of their dead, even as we attend to the burial of Jewish dead." The rabbis base their demand on the ground that these are "the ways of peace."[r_05_5][*5]

Nor was a person's worth a derivative of his status, whether political, social or cultural. In the sight of God the humble citizen is the equal of the person who occupies the highest office. The Talmud did not outlaw slavery which was an integral part of ancient economy, but it sought to limit its degrading aspects. Already Biblical law had declared a Hebrew slave free after a seven year period of service. Talmudic legislation continued to extend the solicitude on behalf of the slave's welfare. The slave was to live at the same level of comfort as was enjoyed by his master. "Do not eat fine bread and give black bread to your servant, do not sleep on cushions and have him sleep on straw." So exacting was the Talmud in its defense of the slave's dignity that it became a proverbial expression, "Whosoever buys a Hebrew slave, buys a master unto himself." Indeed,

[p. 106]

the Hebrew slave was really a workman who had temporarily sold his services but whose dignity and rights remained intact. And the Talmud condemned the man who was willing to accept personal bondage as a solution to his economic problem; for man was meant to serve only God and to recognize no other master beside Him.[r_05_6][*6]

But the Talmud includes equally telling expressions of solicitude on behalf of the pagan slave. He was not to be exposed to ridicule or humiliation. One Talmudist shared his meat and wine with his slave, explaining: "Did not He that made me in the womb make him also?" It was an old principle which the Pharisees had established that "slaves, unlike the ox or the ass, are human beings with minds and wills of their own."[r_05_7][*7]

The Talmud speaks repeatedly of the dignity of free labor. Creative labor, no matter how humble, is always honorable and is a form of divine worship, for it contributes to the maintenance and development of civilization. "Flay dead cattle on a highway," runs a Talmudic proverb, "and say not 'I am a priest, I am a great man and it is beneath my dignity.'" One of the responsibilities which every parent owes his son is to teach him a trade. The Talmudists, themselves, because their academic work was a labor of love which offered no remuneration, pursued various handicrafts as well as farming and commerce to earn a livelihood. Among them were shoemakers, tailors, bakers, woodcutters, a night watchman and even a grave digger.[r_05_8][*8]

Even he who had endangered social security in the commission of crime has not forfeited his inherent worth as a person. The Talmud ordained with great emphasis that every person charged with the violation of some law be given a fair trial, and before the law, all were to be scrupulously equal, whether a king or a pauper. One of two litigants was not to appear in court in expensive robes when the other came in tatters, lest there be a swaying of the juror-judges.[r_05_9][*9]

[p. 107]

Particularly in criminal cases did the Talmud seek to protect the accused against a miscarriage of justice. Circumstantial evidence, however convincing, was not acceptable. At least one of the judges was to act as the counsel of defense. The juror-judges could reverse a vote from guilty to not guilty, but not vice versa. The younger members of the court were first to announce their vote, so as not to be influenced by the actions of their seniors. Whereas in civil cases a majority of one was sufficient to establish guilt, in criminal cases a majority of two was required.

Even when he was found guilty, he had not lost his link to the human brotherhood. The larger ends of safeguarding the community may require his extermination, but whatever punishment is inflicted upon him must be humanized by a persistent love and not brutalized by vengeance. Certain Talmudists advocated the abolition of capital punishment, and it was agreed that any court that inflicts capital punishment once in seven years had exhibited brutality. The execution even of the most violent criminal is a cosmic tragedy. For he, too, was formed in the divine image and had been endowed with infinite possibilities for good.[r_05_10][*10]

In the hierarchy of Jewish values the knowledge and practice of the Torah represented the apex, but the master of the Torah was not to hold himself aloof from or superior to other men. He was to be "modest, humble ... to make himself beloved of men, to be gracious in his relations even with subordinates ... to judge man according to his deeds." To show pride in one's learning is to become "like the carcass of a dead beast from which all men turn away in disgust." The true master of Torah will be inspired by a greater learning and piety not to aggrandize himself over others or to detach himself from the common people and cultivate his virtues in the privacy of his own home, but to teach and lead the common people to a nobler way of life. He who has insights that can broaden the horizons of his neighbor's life

[p. 108]

and does not communicate them is robbing his neighbor of his due. The gifts of the spirit, like the gifts of substance, are a trust to be shared with others.[r_05_11][*11]

  

CONSENT AND THE MAJESTY OF THE LAW

Throughout Talmudic times the Jews lived under the domination of foreign imperialisms; in Palestine under the Romans and in Babylonia under the Parthians and neo-Persians. Whether a free Jewish commonwealth would have developed a democratic representative government, we do not know. But within the framework of the limited autonomy which the Jews enjoyed, they did develop certain democratic institutions. The most important instrument of Jewish autonomy was Jewish civil and religious law, and the Talmud developed the theory that the ultimate sanction of all law is the consent of the people who are to be governed by it. For the Talmud, of course, all authority, including the authority behind the makers and interpreters of law flowed from the divine source which manifests itself in every form of human leadership. But man is endowed with free will and his unrestrained conscience must give its assent to every legal institution that is to have moral claims over him. Judges and legislators must not enact decrees unless a majority of the people find it possible to conform to them. Any decree which is resisted by a popular majority has, ipso facto, lost its validity and been rendered obsolete. Indeed, the Talmud even traced the authority of the Bible itself not so much to its divine source as to the consent of the people who fully agreed to live by it.[r_05_12][*12]

Social stability frequently calls for disciplined behavior; and in the field of social and religious conduct, the Talmud called upon the individuals to conform to the majority decisions of the duly constituted authorities who interpreted Jewish law. In the field of opinion, however, the individual

[p. 109]

remained essentially free to believe and speak in accordance with the dictates of his own conscience. Indeed, there has never been formulated an official creed in Israel as a criterion of loyalty to the mandates of Jewish life. And even in law, the minority could continue defending its position in the hope that the majority might eventually be moved to reconsider its judgment. As the Talmudists put it, majorities and minorities are equally "the words of the living God"; they both represent aspects of truth, and are equally precious. The Talmudists themselves preserved all dissident opinions which developed in their discussions and even recorded them side by side with the majority opinions which became authoritative law.

The Talmudists developed a system of democratically constituted town councils which were charged with the administration of local municipalities. All those residing in a community for a year or over enjoyed the right to participate in the election of the seven town councillors. The functions of these town councils were far-reaching, including the supervision of economic, religious, educational and philanthropic activities of the people. On important issues, town meetings were held in which the will of the people could be ascertained more directly. Certain local officials were of course appointed by the head of the Jewish community, the patriarch in Palestine, and the exilarch in Babylonia. But the most important requirement in all such appointments was that they meet with the public approval. In the words of the Talmud, "We must not appoint a leader over the community without first consulting them, as it is said, 'See, the Lord hath called by name Bezalel, the son of Uri' (Exodus 35:30). The Holy One, blessed be He, asked Moses, 'Is Bezalel acceptable to you?' He replied, 'Sovereign of the universe, if he is acceptable to Thee, how much more so to me!' God said to him, 'Nevertheless go and consult the people ...'"[r_05_13][*13]

[p. 110]

  

SOCIAL WELFARE AND PERSONAL FREEDOM

The social process frequently brings individuals into a position where they exercise power over the lives of others. In the social theory of Talmudic Judaism, it then becomes the task of the community to develop such instruments of social control as will rationalize that power with moderation and justice. The Talmudists declared individual property rights as subject to their consistency with the public welfare. When it is to serve the public interest, these rights may be modified or suspended altogether. Basing its action on this principle, Talmudic legislation regulated wages and hours of labor, commodity prices and rates of profit. They held it was similarly the task of the community to provide other facilities for promoting the public welfare, such as public baths, competent medical services, and adequate educational facilities for all, at least on an elementary level.[r_05_14][*14]

The poor had a claim upon the community for support in proportion to their accustomed standard of living. The more affluent individuals were to share their possessions with them, as members of a family circle were obligated to share with their own kin. To place the administration of poor relief on a more efficient and respectable basis, it was eventually institutionalized. Begging from door to door was discouraged. Indigent townsmen were given a weekly allowance for food and clothing. Transients received their allowance daily. Ready food was also kept available to cope with immediate needs. For the poor traveler and the homeless, public inns were frequently built on the high roads. All these facilities were maintained from the proceeds of a general tax to which all residents of a community contributed.[r_05_15][*15]

Perhaps the most interesting form of poor relief, from a modern standpoint, is a public works project for the assistance of the unemployed, the details of which have been preserved by Josephus but which was instituted in Talmudic

[p. 111]

times: "So when the people saw that the workmen were unemployed who were above 18,000 and that they, receiving no wages, were in want ... so they persuaded him (King Agrippa) to rebuild the eastern cloisters; ... he denied the petitioners their request in the matter; but he did not obstruct them when they desired the city might be paved with white stone ..."[r_05_16][*16]

  

DEMOCRACY AND FAMILY LIFE

The same concern for the values of humanitarianism and democracy appears in the Talmudic legislation bearing on the various aspects of family life. The Talmud does not regard the individual man as a self-sufficient personality. He is completed through matrimony. "The unmarried person lives without joy, without blessing and without good. He is not a man in the full sense of the term; as it is said (Genesis 5:2), 'male and female created He them, and blessed them and called their name man.'"

Happiness in married life involves many compromises, but these must be assumed in freedom. They should not be imposed through constraint from any external source. In the words of the Babylonian teacher Rab, "A man is forbidden to give his minor daughter in marriage without her consent. He must wait until she grows up and says 'I wish to marry so and so.'" If he did give her in marriage as a minor, she could protest the marriage on reaching maturity, and have it annulled without divorce. The man's choice, too, should be voluntary and an expression of considered choice. "A man should not marry a woman without knowing her lest he subsequently discover blemishes in her and come to hate her."[r_05_17][*17]

As the more dominant partner in the family circle, the husband was exhorted to treat his wife with tenderness and sympathetic understanding. "Whoever loves his wife as himself and honors her more than himself ... to him may be applied the verse, 'Thou shalt know that thy tent is in

[p. 112]

peace.'" Before the children, father and mother were equals. They were both to be accorded the very same devotion and respect.[r_05_18][*18]

The Talmud regards divorce as the greatest of all domestic tragedies. "Whoever divorces the wife of his youth, even the altar sheds tears on her behalf, as it is written, 'And this again ye do; ye cover the altar of the Lord with tears ... because the Lord hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously.'" There are occasions, however, when husband and wife cannot harmonize their natures and irreconcilable differences develop between them. The Talmud then sanctions divorce, as preferable to a life of continuing bitterness and distress.

Divorce could be achieved upon the considered request of either party. Theoretically, it was always the husband who severed the marriage ties and not the wife. But the wife could sue for divorce and, if the request seemed warranted, the court forced the unwilling husband to divorce her. Among the circumstances warranting such action by the court, the Talmud lists the husband's impotence, failure of proper support, denial of conjugal rights, contraction of a loathsome illness, or engaging in a repugnant occupation. The divorced woman was protected by the Ketubah or marriage contract, which provided a financial settlement for her maintenance.[r_05_19][*19]

For the Talmudists, children are the noblest fulfillment of married life. For it is man's elemental duty to the continuity of life to bring children into the world and to raise them properly. Nevertheless, where conception was likely to prove dangerous to the mother, birth control was recommended. In the words of the Talmud, "Three types of women should employ an absorbent to prevent conception: a minor, a pregnant woman, and a nursing mother; a minor lest pregnancy prove fatal, a pregnant woman lest she have an abortion, and

[p. 113]

a nursing mother because of the danger to her young infant."[r_05_20][*20]

The Talmud offers detailed advice on how to bring up children. Parents must treat all children equally and avoid any display of favoritism between them, which can only lead to jealousy and family discord.

Parents must not over-indulge their children, which is the surest road to character depravity. Thus the Talmudists blame the depraved character of Absalom who led a revolt against King David, his father, to his pampered youth. But excessive severity is no less harmful. The Talmud cites the case of a child who committed suicide after some petty misdeed because he was in such mortal fear of his father.

The Talmud ordains a profound respect which children owe to their parents. Even he who begs from door to door is committed to provide for the sustenance of his needy parents. But the proper respect due parents is not merely a matter of material help. The intangibles of tenderness and consideration are equally important. To cite a Talmudic illustration, "There was a person who fed his father on fat poultry. Once his father asked him, 'My son, where do you get all this?' To which he replied, 'Old man, eat and be quiet, for dogs eat and are quiet.' Though he fed his father fat poultry, such a person will inherit Gehinnom."[r_05_21][*21]

  

EDUCATION AND THE COMMON MAN

Perhaps the most significant triumph for democracy in Talmudic Judaism was the development of a system of free, universal education. The Jewish school system began with higher rather than elementary education. The most important institution of higher education was the Sanhedrin itself and the hierarchy of various lower courts which functioned under its supervision. Their deliberations were made accessible to advanced students who were preparing themselves for ordination; and they were even permitted to participate

[p. 114]

in the discussions. Witnessing the conflicts of personalities, the play of minds, and the manipulation of dialectic by which the Torah supplementation was evolved, represented a vivid and unforgettable educational experience. In addition the leaders of Pharisaic and rabbinic Judaism conducted a formal instruction in their own schools. Some of these schools were particularly famous. The schools of Shammai and Hillel were continued even after their founders were gone. Akiba's school which was finally conducted at B'nai Brak is said to have had an enrollment of 12,000 students, like a modern metropolitan university.

In early times, these schools charged tuition fees which were payable upon admission to each lecture. And many made great sacrifices to attend, frequently working their way through school. This is vividly illustrated in the famous story of Hillel's struggle for an education. Hillel spent half of his daily earnings for admission to the lectures in the academy of Shemaya and Abtalyon. One winter day, being out of work, he could not pay the necessary admission charge, and the doorkeeper refused to admit him. Deter. mined not to miss the session, he climbed up the roof and listened to the discussion through the skylight. On the following morning the room was darker than usual; and looking up at the skylight, they saw the figure of a human body. Hillel had been snowed under. Fortunately the discovery had been made in time, and Hillel was saved. This admission fee was abolished after the destruction of the Temple and higher education became wholly free. In addition, lectures were offered in the evening which facilitated attendance for those who had to work for a livelihood during the day.[r_05_22][*22]

Elementary education was originally left to the home, but in time this too was institutionalized. As the Talmud relates it: "Were it not for Joshua ben Gemala (high priest who was in office in the latter part of the first century), the Torah would have been forgotten in Israel." In antiquity

[p. 115]

every father taught his own child. Those who were without fathers to teach them were thus left without education. Later on, schools were established in Jerusalem to which the children were to be sent from all over the country. But these too were inadequate. Thereupon they established regional schools to which youths of 16 or 17 were admitted. But it was soon apparent that adolescents could not first begin to subject themselves to school discipline. "Rabbi Joshua then instituted schools in each province and town and children were enrolled at the age of six or seven." Classes were generally conducted in the synagogue buildings, though they were frequently transferred to the outdoors. There were, according to the Talmud, three hundred and ninety-four schools in Jerusalem before its destruction by the Romans in 70 C.E. The curriculum concentrated on Biblical literature, Midrash and, later on, also on the Mishnah.

The rabbis were equally devoted to educating the general public. Their formal lectures in the schools were generally open to lay auditors. In addition they utilized the synagogue service which brought out large numbers, as an opportunity for educational work. The liturgy itself, which was eventually recited thrice daily by every Jew, was an affirmation of the fundamental beliefs of Judaism. Readings from the Torah, with appropriate elucidations in the Aramaic vernacular, had been made an integral part of the synagogue ritual ever since the days of the Sopherim. Four times weekly, Saturday morning and afternoon, Monday and Thursday, as well as on all feasts and holidays, and on the new moon, the Jewish laity thus listened to Scripture lessons.

Under the inspiration of the Synagogue, smaller groups of people formed into individual study circles meeting at convenient hours on weekdays or the Sabbath for the study of Scriptures or some other branch of Jewish tradition. This was later enhanced with the introduction of the popular sermon

[p. 116]

[paragraph continues] Friday evening and Saturday morning, and there were special sermons before each holiday.

Some of the rabbis were not particularly gifted with eloquence, and it therefore became customary for an additional functionary to attach himself to the rabbi, the orator-commentator. In academy and synagogue alike, such a rabbi would first communicate his message to the commentator who then made this the theme of his oration before the public. The synagogues in every community, in addition to providing for religious worship also functioned as popular universities diffusing the knowledge of the Torah among the common people.[r_05_23][*23]

  

THE NATION AND THE WORLD COMMUNITY

The sanctity of human life implied for the Talmudists a similar concern for the national community. For each society, too, makes its unique contribution to the fulfillments of history. The Talmudists speak of Israel as being particularly creative in the field of religion, whereas other peoples achieved comparable distinction in other fields--in the arts and sciences. There were some who spoke with admiration of Roman law, of the Roman system of public markets, bridges and baths. The collective welfare of all humanity is contingent upon the welfare of every individual people, and the sacrificial cult of the second Temple in Jerusalem included, during the Feast of Tabernacles, seventy offerings invoking God's aid for each of the seventy nations of the world.

The aberration of human sin will occasionally drive groups to seek dominion over others. Thus in Talmudic times, the Jews suffered heavily from the oppression of Roman imperialism. The Talmudists decried this oppression and encouraged their people's resistance to it. As we have already noted, they denounced the Jewish tax farmer as a

[p. 117]

reprobate and robber because he collaborated with the Roman system of extortion and oppression. Deceiving the Roman tax collector they put on a par with deceiving a pirate, for Rome had no moral right to the country which she had occupied by force. The Pharisaic ostracism of the publican, which was but another name for the Jewish tax collector, was not, as has frequently been interpreted, an expression of self-righteousness. It was the reaction of liberty-loving men against those who, for a consideration, were willing to make themselves the partners of an alien imperialism in the plunder and oppression of their own people.

At the same time, the Talmudists guarded against transmuting the temporary historical struggles of their people against various imperialist oppressor-states into enduring hatreds against other nations. The Talmudists spoke with compassion about the vanquished Egyptians who drowned in the Red Sea in a vain pursuit of the fleeing Israelites. Thus they describe God as silencing an angelic chorus which chanted hallelujahs when the Egyptian hosts met their disaster. "My handiwork is perishing in the sea; how dare you sing in rejoicing!"

Even in the face of the tragedy inflicted upon their people by the Romans, the Talmudists sought to avoid hatred. Individual teachers spoke sharply in denunciation of Roman tyranny. But their collective reactions as summarized for instance in the liturgy of that day, is dedicated not to the denunciation of Rome, but to Jewish self-criticism. "It is because of our sins that we have been banished from our land," is the principal motif in the liturgical reaction to the national disaster. And the way of redemption toward which they were taught to strive was moral regeneration in their inner personal and social lives and the interpenetration of the same ideals of a loftier morality among all mankind. In time, the strife of nations, like the strife of individuals, will come to an end in the discovery of their universal interdependence. Israel's cry for justice will be vindicated in a

[p. 118]

universal fulfillment when the "kingdom of wickedness" shall pass away and all mankind join to form "one fellowship to do the divine will with a perfect heart" (from the liturgy of the New Year, composed by Abba Areka, d. 247).[r_05_24][*24]

  

THE DOCTRINE OF RESPONSIBILITY

But the Talmudic conception of man implied a reciprocal responsibility from individual men and nations to the collective human community. For the fulfillment of the larger organism is dependent upon the integrated functioning of its constituent parts. The unique gifts of energy, substance, or spirit with which an individual is endowed must all be directed to larger human service. As one Talmudist interprets it, the second commandment ordains not alone repose on the seventh day of the week, but also creative labor on the six days. "For is it not written, 'Six days shalt thou do thy work, and on the seventh day shalt thou rest'?" The Talmud denounced asceticism, even when religiously motivated, as sinful, for it withdrew essential creative energies from the tasks of civilizations.

The responsibilities of service rest similarly on every society. And the Talmud called upon the Jews to share with the rest of mankind their achievements in the field where they believed they had distinguished themselves, the field of religion and morality. According to the Midrash, the Torah was originally revealed in the desert and not in the land of Israel, in order to suggest that its teachings were meant for all mankind and not for a particular people exclusively.

Implementing the ideal of its mission, the Judaism of the early Talmudic period proselytized extensively throughout the pagan world. Judaism became, in the words of Professor George Foote Moore, "the first great missionary religion of the Mediterranean world." Because it conceded salvation even to those who were outside its fellowship, Jewish missionaries

[p. 119]

did not seek only formal conversions; with equal diligence they sought to make what were known to the Romans as metuentes, or "God-fearing men," sympathizers of Judaism who, while not conforming to the Jewish ceremonial discipline, would yet order their lives by Jewish ideals of personal and social morality. Through this dissemination of the unique values in Jewish tradition, the Jewish people were to meet their responsibilities to the larger human community of which they recognized themselves to be a part, and to whose service they saw themselves committed by the God who had made them a distinct people in civilization.[r_05_25][*25]

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120] [p. 121]

  

Personal Morality in the Talmud

THE TALMUD is concerned with man himself, and not only with the social consequences of his actions. Scattered throughout Talmudic literature, we have therefore a description of the ideal in human character. It is inspired by the religious and moral values which are taught in Talmudic Judaism.

  

CONFIDENCE IN LIFE

The basic attitude which the Talmudists prized in people is a disposition of confidence in life. Such confidence flows directly from faith in God. For if God's providence extends to all His creatures, then we may be certain that whatever transpires is for the best--at least for the best of creation. A well-known Talmudic maxim reads: "Whatever the Lord does is for the best."

There are occasions when events transpire that we judge injurious to ourselves. In many instances, however, they are really to our advantage, though we may not be aware of it at the time. The Talmud cites an anecdote from the career of Rabbi Akiba which illustrates this truth. While on a journey he sought hospitality in a certain town, but he was turned down, and he had to spend the night in the field. That very night robbers came and plundered the entire town. "He thereupon said to the inhabitants, 'Did I not tell you that whatever the Holy One, blessed be He, does is for the best!'"[r_06_1][*1]

The rabbis urged a man to labor diligently in order to provide for himself and his family. "One must not depend on miracles," is a familiar maxim in the Talmud.[r_06_2][*2] But once

[p. 122]

a person assumes his obligations and acts on them he need not be unduly anxious about his livelihood. "A person who has today's bread in his basket and is worried, 'What will I eat tomorrow?'--is a man of little faith," declared Rabbi Eliezer.[r_06_3][*3] The Lord stands behind our own endeavors, and as He provides for the raven in the field, He provides for man also. In the words of the rabbis: "He who created each day provides for the needs thereof."[r_06_4][*4]

The portions allotted to us in life will of course differ. Some attain riches and some struggle for subsistence. But ultimately there is no objective standard for affluence. Affluence is only in one's art of being content with what one has. As the ethical tractate Abot declared it: "Who is rich? He who is content with his lot."[r_06_5][*5]

  

ENVY, JEALOUSY AND PRIDE

The rabbis decried envy and jealousy, in which a person, out of discontent with his portion, begrudges the good fortune that has come to others. Envy and hatred of one's fellow-man were cited by the rabbis as vices that "take a man from the world."[r_06_6][*6] One of the rabbis was accustomed to offer a daily prayer: "May it be acceptable before Thee O Lord my God and God of my fathers, that no hatred against us may enter the heart of any man, that no hatred of any man enter our heart, that no envy of us enter the heart of any man, nor the envy of any man enter our heart ..."[r_06_7][*7]

The rabbis were equally emphatic in denouncing pride. "Humility," one of the rabbis said, "is the greatest of all virtues."[r_06_8][*8] A person who is puffed up with an arrogant spirit is as though "he had worshipped idols, denied the basic principles of religion, and committed every kind of immorality ..."[r_06_9][*9] Arrogance is not only an evil trait because it hurts other people. It is equally injurious to its own possessor for it sends him on a road that will inevitably lead to

[p. 123]

frustration. The rabbis generalized thus: "Whoever runs after greatness, greatness will elude him; whoever flees from greatness, greatness will pursue him."[r_06_10][*10]

  

THE MEANING OF GOOD WILL

The proper disposition of man toward his neighbor is an unreserved good will. The ethical tractate Abot reiterates this demand repeatedly. Matthew ben Heresh taught: "Be the first to offer cordial greetings to every man." Shammai was the author of a similar maxim: "Receive every person with a glad disposition." Ben Zoma was wont to say: "Who is deserving of honor? He who honors other people." Rabbi Eliezer urged: "Let the honor of your friend be as dear to thee as thine own." Rabbi Hanina ben Dosa declared: "He who pleases the spirit of man, will also please the spirit of God; and he who does not please the spirit of his fellowman, will not please the spirit of God either."[r_06_11][*11]

The Talmud tells many anecdotes to illustrate the need of being ever vigilant to maintain one's good will toward others. One of these is the case of Rabbi Elazar ben Simeon who had become corrupted with pride because of his great learning and then came to look with disdain on other people. He once rode leisurely on his donkey at the edge of the river and felt especially pleased with himself, when he noticed a very ugly-looking person coming his way. The latter greeted him but he did not reply. Instead he asked whether all his townsmen were as ugly as he. The stranger's comeback was: "I don't know, but I suggest you go to my Maker and tell him: 'How ugly is this vessel you have made!'" At once the rabbi was aware that he had sinned. He descended from his donkey and bowed before the stranger and asked his forgiveness. The latter refused and he followed him with his entreaties to the entrance of the town. The people turned out in large numbers to welcome Rabbi Elazar and the stranger reported to them the incident. They joined in the entreaties,

[p. 124]

and the latter then agreed to accept the apology, on the understanding "that he shall never again act thus."[r_06_12][*12]

Even if one have a genuine grievance toward his neighbor, he ought not to respond with hatred. The Talmud cited the case of a man cutting with one hand and inadvertently hurting the other hand. "Shall he in retaliation cut the hand that wielded the knife?" We are all part of one another and the hurts we inflict on others really strike at ourselves, since our lives are interdependent.[r_06_13][*13] There are other ways of coping with grievances--to speak with candor and through honest voicing of our grievances to bring about a reconciliation. Indeed, a lasting friendship depends on the regular rebukes that one administers to the other. "A love without rebuke is no real love."[r_06_14][*14] It takes much in self-control to act with such magnanimity toward those who have wronged us. But it is in such self-control that true character reveals itself. The true hero, teaches the Talmud, is "one who converts an enemy into a friend."[r_06_15][*15]

One's good will should be extended without limits. Even the sinner is entitled to it. A Talmudic anecdote illustrates this. "There were some lawless men living in the neighborhood of Rabbi Meir and they used to vex him sorely. Once Rabbi Meir prayed for their death. His wife, Beruriah, thereupon exclaimed: 'What do you take as the sanction for your prayer? Is it because it is written, Let sinners cease out of the earth? (Ps. 104:35) But the verse may also be rendered to mean, Let sin cease out of the earth. Consider, moreover, the conclusion of the verse: And let the wicked be no more. When sins shall cease, the wicked will be no more. Rather should you pray that they repent and be no more wicked.' Rabbi Meir offered prayer on their behalf and they repented."[r_06_16][*16]

The Talmud includes many anecdotes to illustrate the extent to which one ought to be patient with people. The hero in one such anecdote is Hillel. "Our masters have taught: A

[p. 125]

person should always be patient like Hillel and not quick-tempered like Shammai. Two men once made a wager that whoever would succeed in getting Hillel to lose his temper would win four hundred zuz. That day happened to be the eve of the Sabbath and Hillel was then washing his head. One of the men came to the door of the house and shouted, 'Is Hillel here? Is Hillel here?' Hillel wrapped himself, came out and asked him, 'What do you want, my son?' 'I have a question to put to you.' 'Ask it, my son.' 'Why are the Babylonians round-headed?' 'You have put an important question to me,' Hillel answered. 'The reason is that they have no skilled midwives.'

"The man left and after a short while returned, shouting, 'Is Hillel here? Is Hillel here?' The Rabbi wrapped himself, came out to him and asked, 'What do you want, my son?' 'I have a question to put to you.' 'Ask it, my son.' 'Why are the inhabitants of Palmyra bleary-eyed?' 'You asked an important question,' Hillel again replied. 'The reason is that they live in sandy districts.'

"The man went away, waited a brief while and again returned, shouting, 'Is Hillel here? Is Hillel here?' The Rabbi wrapped himself, came out to him and inquired, 'What is it, my son?' 'I have a question to put to you.' 'Ask it, my son.' 'Why are the Africans broad-footed?' 'You have asked an important question,' Hillel once more responded. 'The reason is that they live in marshy districts.'

"The man said, 'I have many more questions to ask, but I am afraid of provoking your anger.' Hillel folded the wrap about himself, sat down and said, 'Ask all that you desire.' 'Are you Hillel whom people call Prince in Israel?' 'I am.' 'If so, may there not be many like you in Israel.' 'Why, my son?' 'Because through you I have lost four hundred zuz.' The Rabbi then told him, 'Be careful, Hillel is worthy that you should lose through him four hundred zuz and still another four hundred zuz. But Hillel will not lose his temper.'"[r_06_17][*17]

[p. 126]

A good man is a peace-loving man. It was Hillel who extolled the virtue of peace in these words: "Be of the disciples of Aaron, a lover of peace and a pursuer of peace, one who loves mankind and draws them nearer to the Torah." According to Rabban Simeon ben Gamaliel, peace is one of the three pillars that sustain civilization, the other two being justice and truth.[r_06_18][*18] Peace is the condition for the enjoyment of all other blessings. There may be food, there may be drink, but "if there is no peace there is nothing." Thus the rabbis advised people to shun quarreling. One who can exercise such restraint "will escape a hundred evils." The quarrelsome person who readily gives vent to his anger "will destroy his home."[r_06_19][*19]

The strife between people arises often through misunderstandings. If we only knew all the circumstances under which our neighbor acted, we might understand and readily forgive that which caused our resentment. The rabbis accordingly recommend that we be cautious in judgment and that we accord each person the full benefit of our doubt. Hillel said: "Do not judge your neighbor unless you have been put in his place." Joshua ben Perahyah generalized: "Judge every man by the scale of merit."

As a helpful attitude to the maintenance of good relations with people, the rabbis suggested: "If you have done your neighbor a little wrong, let it be in your eyes great; if you have done him much good, let it be in your eyes little; if he has done you a little good, let it be in your eyes great; if he has done you a great wrong, let it be in your eyes little."[r_06_20][*20]

The admiration of the rabbis for the peacemaker is clearly revealed in the following story: "A rabbi was standing in the marketplace when Elijah appeared to him. The rabbi asked him, 'Is there anybody in this marketplace who will have a share in the life of the world to come?' Elijah answered that there was not. Then two men appeared, and Elijah said, 'These two will have a share in the world to

[p. 127]

come.' The Rabbi asked them what they had done to earn such distinction. They answered, 'We are merrymakers; when we see people troubled in mind we cheer them, and when we see two men quarreling we make peace between them.'"[r_06_21][*21]

  

THE IMITATION OF GOD

A person should actively pursue the welfare of his neighbor. The rabbis rooted this demand in man's duty to imitate God's providence. Thus the Talmud expounds: "What is the meaning of the verse, 'Ye shall walk after the Lord your God' (Deut. 13:4)? It is to follow the attributes of the Holy One blessed be He: As He clothed the naked (Gen. 3:21), so do you clothe the naked; as He visited the sick (Gen. 18:1), so do you visit the sick; as He comforted mourners (Gen. 25:11), so do you comfort those who mourn; as He buried the dead (Deut. 34:6), so do you bury the dead." The same thought is expressed in the Midrash: "As the All-present is called compassionate and gracious so be you also compassionate and gracious and offering thy gifts freely to all. As the Holy One, blessed be He, is called righteous (Ps. 145: 17) be you also righteous; and as He is called loving (ibid), be you also loving."[r_06_22][*22]

  

THE MEANING OF BENEVOLENCE

The active concern for another person's welfare finds many expressions, but none is prized as much as gemilut hasadim, acts of loving-kindness or benevolence. Among the typical acts of loving-kindness mentioned in the Talmud are visiting the sick, hospitality to strangers, providing a proper outfit and dowry for a poor bride, caring for the orphaned. Highest of all is what we do for the departed such as attending a funeral and comforting the mourners.[r_06_23][*23]

Talmudic literature abounds in the request to relieve the

[p. 128]

poor in their distress. But acts of benevolence are greater than almsgiving. The rabbis contrasted benevolence from almsgiving: "Greater is the benevolence than alms in three respects--almsgiving is performed with money and benevolence with personal service or money; almsgiving is restricted to the poor and benevolence applies to the poor as well as to the affluent; almsgiving applies only to the living and benevolence applies both to the living and the dead."[r_06_24][*24]

The obligation to help the poor was an axiomatic element in Jewish morality. To the Romans it seemed strange, however. They treated the destitute with contempt, holding them in some ways responsible for their own distress. Occasionally Romans challenged the Jewish emphasis on the duty of helping the poor. The Talmud quotes one such discussion between Rabbi Akiba and Tineius Rufus, the Roman governor of Palestine: "Tineius Rufus asked, 'If your God loves the poor, why does He not provide for them? To cite a parable: Suppose a human king was angry with his slave, imprisoned him and ordered that he was not to be provided with food and drink; and then a person goes and feeds him and offers him to drink. When the king hears of it, will he not be angry with him?' Akiba replied, 'I will offer you a more appropriate parable: Suppose a human king was angry with his son, imprisoned him and ordered that he was not to be provided with food or drink; and then a person goes and feeds him and offers him to drink. When the king hears of it, will he not reward him?' We are called God's children, as it is said, 'You are the children of the Lord your God' (Deut. 14:1). Behold it was He who declared, 'Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house?'" (Is. 58:7)[r_06_25][*25]

Rabbi Akiba is the hero in another story which likewise extols our responsibility for the poor. "It was said of Rabbi Tarphon that he was exceedingly rich but did not give to the poor. Once Rabbi Akiba met him and asked, 'Would

[p. 129]

you like me to buy a town or two for you?' He agreed and offered him four thousand golden denarii. Akiba took them and distributed them to the poor. After a while, Rabbi Tarfon met him and asked, 'Where are the towns you bought for me?' Akiba took him by the hand and led him to the House of Study; he then brought a copy of the Psalms, placed it before the two of them, and they continued to read till they reached the verse, 'He hath dispersed, he bath given to the needy; his righteousness endureth forever' (Ps. 112: 9). Akiba exclaimed, 'This is the City I bought for you!' Tarphon arose, kissed him, and said, 'My master and guide, my master in wisdom, and my guide in right conduct.' He handed him an additional sum to distribute in charity."[r_06_26][*26]

  

TRUTH IS THE SEAL OF GOD

Another great virtue extolled by the rabbis is truthfulness. "Truth," taught Rabbi Hanina, "is the seal of God Himself." Those who simulate in their speech were looked upon by the rabbis as idolators. Not merely fraud itself, but misleading a person in his opinions is condemned by the rabbis. The rule of the Talmud is: "It is forbidden to mislead a fellow-creature, including a non-Jew." "The Holy One, blessed be He," a Talmudic statement generalizes, "hates a person who says one thing with his mouth and is of another opinion in his heart." According to Rabban Simeon ben Gamaliel, truth is one of the three pillars on which the world rests; the other two are justice and peace.[r_06_27][*27]

The rabbis condemned even the innocent lies which parents tell their children. These lies set an example in untruthfulness which children will in due time imitate. As one rabbi put it: "A person should not promise his child that he will give him something without giving it to him, for thus he teaches him to lie."[r_06_28][*28]

The Talmud recounted with much admiration the exemplary honesty of some of its heroes. Rabbi Pinhas ben Yair

[p. 130]

and Rabbi Simeon ben Shetah figure in some of these stories. "It happened that Phineas ben Yair was living in one of the cities of the South, and some men who came there on business left two measures of barley in his possession and departed, forgetting all about the barley. He sowed the barley and each year stored the produce. After seven years had elapsed the same men returned to the town, and asked for their barley. He recognized them and asked them to take the entire produce." Another incident is related concerning Simeon ben Shetah. He had purchased a donkey from an Arab. His disciples noticed a gem hung from its neck, and they said, 'O, master, in you has been fulfilled, The blessing of the Lord maketh rich' (Prov. 10:22). He replied to them: 'I bought the donkey and not the gem.' He then proceeded to return it to its owner. The Arab, on getting it back, exclaimed, 'Blessed be the God of Simeon ben Shetah.'"[r_06_29][*29]

  

THE PLEA FOR MODERATION

The man idealized by the rabbis is not the ascetic who shuns the world and its pleasures. It is rather the one who knows how to live within it in moderation. The world in all its fulness is a divine creation. Enjoying it is therefore a person's privilege, nay, his duty. The rabbis declared that a person is destined to give account to his Maker for all the good things his eyes beheld that he did not partake of. The rabbis commended the person who possessed "a beautiful home, a beautiful wife, fine furnishings." These put a person into "a happy frame of mind."[r_06_30][*30]

The rabbis decried the ascetic's assumption of voluntary fasts as evil. According to the Babylonian teacher Samuel, he who indulges in fasting "is called a sinner." Another teacher, Resh Lakish, forbade fasting because it weakens one's body and thus lessens his services to God's kingdom. As a mark of disapproval, another teacher suggested giving

[p. 131]

the food shunned by the ascetics, to the dogs. The nazirite whose vow to reject wine is recognized as binding in the Bible (Nu. 6:1-4), the rabbis held to be a sinner, and they added: "If a person who withholds himself from wine is called a sinner, how much more so is one a sinner who withdraws from all of life's enjoyments."[r_06_31][*31]

The rabbis were not unmindful of the dangers in indulgence to excess. Wine especially may be taken to excess and then it is injurious. Thus they warned: "Do not become intoxicated and you will not sin"; "when wine enters, sense leaves, when wine enters, the secret blurts out"; "one cup of wine is good for a woman, two are degrading, three make her act like a lewd woman and four cause her to lose all self-respect and shame."[r_06_32][*32]

A rabbinic story portrays vividly the steps in degradation which a man walks when he gives himself to excessive drinking: "When Noah came to plant a vineyard (Gen. 9:20), Satan appeared before him and asked, 'What are you planting?' 'A vineyard,' Noah replied. 'What is its nature?' Satan continued. 'Its fruits are sweet whether fresh or dry, and wine is made of them, which gladdens the heart,' Noah answered. 'Come now, let us two form a partnership in this vineyard,' Satan proposed. 'Very well,' said Noah. What did Satan do? He brought a sheep and slew it under the vine; then he brought in turn a lion, a pig and a monkey, slew each of them and let their blood drip into the vineyard and drench the soil. Thus he hinted that before a person drinks wine he is simple like a sheep and quiet like a lamb before his shearers. When he has drunk in moderation, he is strong like a lion and feels as though there is none to equal him in the world. When he has drunk more than enough, he becomes like a pig, wallowing in filth. When he is intoxicated he becomes like a monkey, dancing about, uttering obscenities before all, and unaware of what he is doing."[r_06_33][*33]

The study of Torah was regarded by the rabbis as the

[p. 132]

supreme good of life, and yet they cautioned that even our preoccupation with Torah must not displace our concern with our worldly obligations. "Torah is good," said the rabbis, "when combined with a worldly occupation."

The Talmud tells of Rabbi Simeon ben Yahai who had hidden in a cave for twelve years in order to elude the Romans who sought to arrest him. When he finally emerged from his hiding place, he noticed that people about him were going on with their usual affairs, plowing and sowing, and exclaimed: "They forsake the life of eternity and busy themselves with the life that is transitory!" A heavenly voice finally rebuked him: "Have you left your cave to destroy my world? Go back to it!"[r_06_34][*34]

  

CLEANLINESS AND HEALTH

The Talmud urged the proper care of the body as an obligation which one owes toward himself. Cleanliness they held a basic prerequisite to good health. "Rinse the cup before and after drinking," recommended the rabbis. Similarly they cautioned, "A person should not drink from a cup and hand it to another, for it is dangerous to health." The Talmudists lived among people who were especially troubled with eye disease, still a common affliction in oriental countries. But the Talmudists blamed it principally on the lack of sanitary habits among the people. "Better a drop of cold water in the morning, and the washing of hands and feet in the evening than all the eye salves in the world."[r_06_35][*35]

The rabbis looked upon the maintenance of bodily health as a religious obligation. This is made clear in the following anecdote, in which Hillel is once more the hero. When Hillel had finished a session of study with his pupils, "he accompanied them part of the way. They said to him, 'Master, where are you going?' 'To perform a religious duty,' he replied. 'Which religious duty?' they asked. 'To

[p. 133]

bathe in the bath-house.' 'Is that a religious duty?' they wondered. He answered them: 'One who is designated to scrape and clean the statues of the king which are set up in theatres and circuses is paid for the work and he associates with nobility. Surely must I who am created in the divine image and likeness, take care of my body!"[r_06_36][*36]

The Talmud abounds in rules of health, some of which will continue to interest the modern reader. The rabbis cautioned against overeating: "Restrain yourself from the meal you especially enjoy, and do not delay answering nature's call." They urged sufficient sleep, which will do its best however only at night; late morning sleep was regarded as injurious. Above all they urged general moderation in living: "In eight things excess is harmful and moderation beneficial: travel, sexual intercourse, wealth, work, wine, sleep, hot water (for drinking and bathing) and blood-letting." It is interesting that the rabbis recognized that bodily illness often derives from psychic causes. Thus they listed fear and sin among the things which "weaken a man's strength." In the event of illness the rabbis urged that a physician be consulted, and they forbade people making their homes in communities that were without the services of a competent physician: "It is forbidden to live in a city that is without a physician."[r_06_37][*37]

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 134] [p. 135]

  

The Jurisprudence of the Talmud

TALMUDIC LAW differs from other systems of jurisprudence in its all-inclusive character. It is not confined to the realm of social relations. It seeks to implement the entire range of values which are taught in Judaism, whether they derive from religion or morality. We may define its goal as the enforcement of those elements of doctrine and conduct that the rabbis deemed indispensable to the life of the individual or the community.

Talmudic law concerns itself with doctrine, but it does not establish dogmas that must be believed in as true. On the level of opinion great freedom existed in the Jewish community and individuals were allowed to follow their own inclination of heart and mind. There was ample literature expounding the basic conviction of Judaism and the very diversities of thought and interpretation were deemed a source of strength in Jewish tradition. Truth cannot be contained in one easy formula. Like the fire which breaks into many sparks, so does truth break into many fragmentary truths, which are caught by diverse human minds. Talmudic law centers on the discipline of action, but the actions which it prescribed were also a vehicle of doctrines that the rabbis deemed indispensable in their way of life.[r_07_1][*1]

  

LAW, THEOLOGY AND RITUAL

Talmudic law recognizes two general categories of value. One is the duties which derive from man's relationship to God; the other is duties which derive from man's relationship to his neighbor. The laws dealing with man's relationship to God are, in a sense, the implementation of Jewish

[p. 136]

teachings in theology. They are intended to deepen man's consciousness of those doctrines through repeated actions in which they are enshrined. Thus Talmudic law ordains the recitation of the shema (Deuteronomy 6:4) affirming the unity of God, twice daily, morning and evening. It establishes a ritual of daily public and private prayer. It formulates the specific texts of the benedictions on partaking of various foods. Through these rituals man was to be made more keenly aware that he is living in God's world and that he must be ever grateful for the privilege of enjoying its manifold blessings. To accept what the world offers us without a thought of what we owe to God for it, marks a man an ingrate. As the rabbis put it: "It is forbidden a man to enjoy the things of this world without a prayer."[r_07_2][*2]

The law governing man's relation to God often serves also as a precautionary measure to prevent the transgression of more fundamental principles or doctrines. The rabbis pictured the basic elements of religion and morality which they wanted their people to maintain as a kind of vineyard that must be fenced in against violators. This was one of the guiding rules of the men of the Great Assembly: "Build a fence to the Torah."[r_07_3][*3]

The law as a "fence to the Torah" is clearly illustrated in the widely ramified rules bearing on idolatry. The cult of idol worship was widespread throughout the Roman empire, and its visible symbols, images of all kinds, dotted prominent sites in city and country. Surrounded by these manifestations of paganism on all sides, the Jews were in danger of contamination. The danger was met by Talmudic law which forged a mighty fence to protect the religious purity of Jewish life. It declared all idolatry, its symbols, the site where they were located and all activities associated with it, out of bounds for a Jew. Even the broken wood or metal that had ever been part of an idol was forbidden. A grove where an idol was situated was not to be entered, even

[p. 137]

for the innocent purpose of being shaded from the sun. The wine employed in idolatrous offerings was not to be used. Even a drop of it falling into another liquid would render it unfit for normal consumption.[r_07_4][*4]

The rabbinic struggle against idolatry was not a novel phenomenon in Jewish tradition. It appears in the Bible where it was directed against earlier forms of this religious primitivism. It is a continuation of one of the permanent characteristics of Judaism, its battle against the artistic glorification of the blasphemous error which reduced God to finite form. The discouragement of painting and sculpture in classic Judaism derives from this struggle against error made more palatable through beautiful representation. The rabbis fought an important episode in this struggle, and they achieved their victory through law.

The law which governs man's relation to God possessed qualities of adaptability, as did law of human relations. And it responded to the pressures of the circumstances under which it was to be lived. This is well illustrated in the law which forbids travel on the Sabbath.

The Sabbath was instituted in Judaism for a dual purpose. It was to be a memorial to creation, to recall to us the divine source of all existence. It was likewise endowed with social significance, to rest the bodies and minds of men, a goal that was inspired by the remembrance of the emancipation from Egyptian bondage. The measures by which the Sabbath was to be commemorated were many, and among them was the rule against travel. An examination of this rule in all its wide ramifications reveals the profound religious and moral ends which the rabbis sought to accomplish by it, and the fine line of development through which its basic elements finally emerged.

The prohibition to travel on the Sabbath is derived from the verse in Ex. 16:29: "Abide ye every man in his place; let no man go out of his place in the seventh day." Originally

[p. 138]

directed at the gatherers of manna in the wilderness, this verse was seen in a more general light, as an interdiction of all movement on the Sabbath beyond one's domicile.

Rabbinic sources offer us two general reasons for the objection to travel, both related to the goal of liberating man on the Sabbath day from labor as well as anxiety and distraction. The first consideration is expressed in the principle of tehumin, the need of fixing one's domicile in a particular place, and then limiting one's motions within a prescribed radius of that place. The Sabbath experience depended on keeping the family together within the atmosphere of the home, and the home had to be fixed in space, even as the Sabbath was fixed in time. On that day, man was therefore to confine his life to the home and its surroundings.

The original interpretation of the Biblical verse was literal, and the place of permissible movement was confined to the home plus an additional 2000 cubits. The tendency to socialize the Sabbath finally wrought a change in interpretation and the home was then taken in the widest possible sense, to include one's city, supplemented by the usual radius of 2000 cubits of additional movement. The terminus of allowed movement by an additional provision of the law, could, moreover, be pushed farther away when necessary through an erub, a conscious designation of the desired place outside the city as part of one's home, by depositing there some food as a token of home. A traveller who chanced to be away from a city at the advent of the Sabbath could, by an act of conscious designation known as kinyan shebitah, fix his home anywhere and then he was free to move within the 2000 cubit radius of that place.

Travel on the Sabbath by riding an animal was also forbidden for the additional reason of seeking to avoid involvement in incidental labor, such as possibly cutting down a twig in order to prod the animal on its way. There is also the suggestion that one who rides an animal might easily

[p. 139]

move beyond the confines of the tehum and cross the area around the home which is the zone of allowed movement on the Sabbath.

There are other elements in the law of the Sabbath which regulate movement, but they all testify to the same underlying goal. The rabbis did not seek arbitrarily to stifle the free movement of life. They sought to reject tension, undue exertion. They sought to mold the Sabbath into a day of serene, relaxed living. Thus they banned the pesia gasa, the hurried walk of the busy days of the week. The Tosefta generalized: "One may not run on the Sabbath to the point of exhaustion, but one may stroll leisurely throughout the day without hesitation." The Sabbath was to be a day of peace, and the halakah was engaged in fashioning the usual rabbinic fence that was to keep man from crossing over into the domain where the world and its cares stood ready to devour his serenity and his rest.

The Sabbath law was as flexible as every other branch of the halakah. Under some circumstances the prohibition against riding was waived, simply because other values at stake were deemed more pressing. Thus it eventually ceased to operate altogether in the case of ocean travel. The difficulty of pacing travel in such a way as to avoid being on the boat on the Sabbath was clearly the most significant factor. It would have paralyzed movements from Palestine to other parts of the world, which in many cases depended on schedules beyond the control of the individual passengers. In some instances the journey as a whole was of more than a week's duration, and it was clearly impossible to halt the ship for the Sabbath observing passenger.

That the rabbis originally looked upon ocean travel as included in the category of prohibited movement is manifestly clear from our sources. Thus the Talmud provides: "One must not undertake a boat voyage less than three days prior to the Sabbath. ... On the other hand, the short distance

[p. 140]

from Tyre to Sidon one may undertake even the day preceding the Sabbath."

In time the law reckoned with life and the formula was eventually worked out, allowing even the boarding of the ship on the Sabbath itself, provided one had deposited there some of his belongings, thereby designating it as his home for the Sabbath through an act of kinyan shebitah.

Travel on land, too, was in some exceptional cases suspended in consonance with other considerations, deemed even more pressing than Sabbath rest. Thus a witness testifying as to the appearance of the new moon--a vital consideration in the then current system of calculating the calendar--was permitted to travel on the Sabbath. He was to come riding on an animal even on the Sabbath day.[r_07_5][*5]

  

LAW AND A JUST SOCIETY

The underlying goals of the law which derives from the relationships between man and man are more apparent. They seek to create a just social order that shall liberate man from arbitrary impediments to his growth. But the law of the Talmud does not consider itself as an impartial umpire that is to keep individuals within their respective spheres, without encroaching upon one another. "One who asserts what is mine is mine, and what is yours is yours, is only of medium ethical stature," according to the Talmud. There is even an opinion that such a standard corresponds to the ethics of the wicked city of Sodom.[r_07_6][*6] The standard commended by the rabbis is the willingness to bend self-interest in acts of helpfulness toward others. And Talmudic law reflects this higher standard. It does not seek to balance self-interests. It seeks to bend the enterprises of society toward acts of welfare for the common man, especially for the underprivileged members of the community.

The standard of welfare which the Talmud recognized as

[p. 141]

ideal is total self-identification with the needs and aspirations of one's fellow-man. The Talmud calls it the standard of saintliness. The Mishnah defines it thus: "What is mine is thine and what is thine is thine is a hasid, a saintly man."[r_07_7][*7] The standard of saintliness was not a practical standard by which men could order their lives in society. It projects an ideal which most men could not attain. The law crystallized at a moral level below this, but the ideal of saintliness played a tremendously vital role in rabbinic law. It proclaimed that the law in itself does not exhaust the moral ideal. It enabled men to judge their conduct by an ideal which, precisely because it was unattainable, could ever serve as a source of vital self-criticism and as a spur to new moral endeavor.

The recognition that the law did not realize the highest moral ideal led to a demand that men go beyond the limits of the law in their dealings with each other. This is clearly conveyed in the rabbinic interpretation of the verse in Exodus 18:30, "And thou shalt make them know the path they are to walk in and the work they are to do." "The path they are to walk in" according to Rabbi Elazar of Modein, refers to the law, while "the work they are to do," he continues, refers to acts of saintliness "beyond the measure of the law."[r_07_8][*8] The rabbis cite various cases in which people of moral sensitivity acted on a higher standard than the one called for by the law, and their conduct is hailed as exemplary.[r_07_9][*9]

Those actions "beyond the line of the law," as the Talmud calls it, constituted a free zone in which individuals expressed their generosity and love for their fellow-men, without compulsion from outside sources. The Talmud hailed this free zone of moral action as the very foundation of a good society. A community in which men are content to hew to the strict letter of the law was devoid of the moral cement that gives a social order stability and enables it to

[p. 142]

survive. "Jerusalem was destroyed," according to Rabbi Jananan, "because her people hewed strictly to the letter of the Torah."[r_07_10][*10] It is actions beyond the law that give evidence of a vibrant morality and save the law itself from becoming a soulless formalism devoid of feeling and vitality.

  

MORAL PRESSURES ON THE LAW

The standard of saintliness was important not only for the individual in keeping alive for him the underlying moral impulses which the law in itself could not fulfill. It acted as a pressure on the law, forcing it to move forward to new frontiers of human service. The Talmud gives evidence of a continuously growing program of welfare legislation, in which ever wider sectors of social life were brought under the control of a law, whose motivating impulse was the welfare of the common man. Thus the law empowered the community to assume responsibility for elementary education and poor relief. It authorized the supervision of weights and measures, and of fair wages and prices to prevent unethical business practices.[r_07_11][*11] The law compelled children to provide for the maintenance of parents, even as parents were compelled to provide for the maintenance of children.[r_07_12][*12]

The law forced a person to help his neighbor where it was clear that he himself would not lose by it. Thus, heirs dividing land that had come to them by inheritance were expected to consider that one among them owned land contiguous to the parcel to be divided and to give him his share near his own land. The Talmud generalized: "We coerce against the standard of Sodom." A person did not have the absolute right to be mean.[r_07_13][*13]

The pressure of a higher moral standard inspired the Talmudic liberalization of the Jewish criminal code. Capital punishment is provided in the Bible for a variety of crimes. But the rabbis, as we have already noted, found

[p. 143]

capital punishment reprehensible, and they rendered it almost inoperative by hedging it with conditions that made of the old law a dead letter. Thus they insisted that the commission of the culpable act must be preceded by a warning and by an expression of defiance on the part of the criminal in the face of that warning.[r_07_14][*14] And the Mishnah declares explicitly, "A Sanhedrin which decides a verdict of death once in seven years is called murderous. Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah said, even if only once in seven years. Rabbi Tarphon and Rabbi Akiba said: 'If we were members of the Sanhedrin, there would never be a verdict of death.'"[r_07_15][*15]

The growth of Talmudic law, in all its aspects, was for the most part, we have already noted, the work of judicial interpretation rather than of formal legislation. The rabbis who were called upon to administer the old law reckoned with the conditions under which it was to be applied. And if they thought the mechanical application of precedent in conflict with the demands of equity, they resorted to reinterpretations which withdrew the new case from the old category into which it seemed, by the rules of formal logic, to fall. The case so decided then became precedent for parallel situations.

The judge served in effect as a creator of law and not only as its interpreter--a phenomenon which has been duplicated in every system of jurisprudence. Thus the limitation of capital punishment to instances which satisfied the qualifying circumstances was an act of judicial interpretation. But it set a precedent which broke new ground in the entire range of Jewish criminal law.

  

THE BASIS OF LEGAL CONTROVERSY

It goes without saying that these far-reaching judicial interpretations did not proceed with universal concurrence. Considerations of equity are ultimately subjective in character and they will reflect the diverse hearts and minds in

[p. 144]

which they occur. This is the principal reason for the marked presence of controversy in the Talmud. The rabbis were not contentious for contention's sake. They disagreed as do the judges on any judicial tribunal. They were simply offering diverse reactions to the problems of life, born of diverse backgrounds and of those intangible diversities of temperament, character and outlook, which naturally divide men from one another. Thus, the decision against capital punishment was challenged by Rabbi Simeon ben Gamaliel who defended the old law as an indispensable deterrent to crime. The reform proposed, he argued, would "cause an increase of bloodshed in Israel."

The differences of opinion among the Talmudists are rot always indications of genuine disagreement. They are rather, in many cases, the varying customs and usages which derive from their respective backgrounds. Thus Rabbi Eliezer, who was an aristocrat, exempted arms from the prohibition of carrying unnecessary objects on the Sabbath. He regarded them as ornaments and they were to be worn as a normal part of a person's apparel. His colleagues, representing the point of view of the common people, forbade it. Citing the prophetic contempt for war and its implements, they branded the wearing of arms as a "disgrace".[r_07_16][*16]

A similar difference, deriving from the diverse backgrounds of the rabbis, is offered us in the definition of the time when the Shema is to be recited, evening and morning. The Bible defined the time as "when thou liest down" and "when thou risest up." Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus, reflecting his rural background where it is customary for people to retire early and rise early, sets the time in the evening from sunset to the end of the first watch of the night, or nine o'clock. In the morning he sets the time from the appearance of the first streaks of light till sunrise. His colleagues, reflecting an urban practice, permit the Shema in the evening until midnight and in the morning until nine o'clock.[r_07_17][*17]

[p. 145]

  

TALMUDIC LAW AND THE STATE

The rabbis who created Talmudic law were the religious representatives of the Jewish community; they were not functionaries of the state. Prior to the destruction of the Temple in 70 C.E. the state was intermittently under the influence of the Pharisees, the forerunners of the rabbis who were the great builders of Talmudic law. The most influential molders of policy, however, were Sadducees. Pharisaic interpretation had a great moral force among the people, and to that extent exerted pressure with which the state had to reckon. We have a record of Alexander Jannai, king and high priest, proceeding to perform the succot ritual in the Temple according to Sadducean ritual, whereupon the assembled worshippers demonstrated in protest.

Talmudic law came into its own after the destruction of the Temple. In the limited autonomy enjoyed by the Jewish community in Palestine and in Babylonia, Jewish law was given far-reaching scope; and that law was the law as interpreted and administered by the rabbis. Yet in many cases the state asserted its own sovereignty to supersede the internal law of the Jewish community. The rabbis advised conformity. The Babylonian teacher Samuel ruled explicitly: "The law of the state is law."[r_07_18][*18] This became the basic rule governing the Jewish attitude toward his obligations as a citizen. His own law retreated to make room for the law decreed by the state of which he deemed himself a part.

The Talmud drew a line, however, as to how far the accommodation of Jewish law to the state was to proceed. Where the state sought to violate basic principles of morality and faith, its law was to be resisted. As the Midrash declared, commenting on the verse: "I counsel thee, keep the king's command and that in regard of the oath of God" (Eccles. 8:2): "The Holy One, blessed be He, said to Israel, 'I adjure you that if the government decrees harsh decrees,

[p. 146]

rebel not against it in any matter which it imposes upon you, but keep the king's command; if, however, it decrees that you annul the Torah and the precepts, do not obey.'"[r_07_19][*19]

The dilemma here posed became a real issue during the reign of the Emperor Hadrian. As part of the Roman empire, Palestine and her Jewish community became subject to imperial law. The edict of Rome proscribed all the practices of Judaism on pain of death. The rabbis met the challenge by calling for conformity, with the exception of the three fundamentals, the laws against idolatry, immorality and murder. A person was to suffer martyrdom rather than violate these in conformity to the unjust will of the state. As the rabbis put it: "Nothing must stand in the way of self-preservation, except idolatry, immorality and bloodshed." Rabbi Ishmael limited the demand for martyrdom in the case of idolatry, to its public profession. In privacy he called for compromise even in this instance, rather than suffering martyrdom.[r_07_20][*20]

  

LAW AND INWARDNESS

Law is a discipline which governs action. But the rabbis were keenly aware that the inner man is more important than the deed through which he expresses himself. "The Holy One, blessed be He, is concerned above all with what is in man's heart."[r_07_21][*21] For a person may conform to the demands of the law, and remain inwardly corrupt. And similarly a person may in the midst of a life of wrongdoing go through an intense experience of inner change that leaves him a noble character. "One man earns his place in the world," Rabbi Judah the Prince, once reflected, "through the efforts of many years, and another earns it in one hour."[r_07_22][*22] Indeed, Rabbi Abahu ranked the penitent even above the man who had never sinned.[r_07_23][*23]

The decisive hour of repentance may transform a sinner into a saint. But the rabbis distinguished as to its sufficiency

[p. 147]

between the relations of man to God and the relations of man to man. Repentance will wholly clear a person for transgressing laws expressive of our relations to God. More is, however, required in the case of transgressions of the law of human relations. The aggrieved person must be appeased. Thus the Mishnah declares: "Transgressions between man and God may be atoned on the Day of Atonement, but transgressions between man and man will not be atoned on the Day of Atonement until one has appeased his fellow-man."[r_07_24][*24]

It is significant, however, that the rabbis limited the scope of this required appeasement, in order not to place a discouraging burden on the would-be penitent. Thus one who had robbed a beam and built it into his house, was not required to damage his building by tearing out the beam to return it. It was deemed sufficient if he returned the value of it.[r_07_25][*25]

The recognition of inwardness as a factor in law led to far-reaching consequences in the jurisprudence of the Talmud. It led to the demand that in the application of law we reckon not only with the letter of the law, but also with the manifest intention of those responsible for its enactment. This is well illustrated in the Talmudic interpretation of the Sabbath law. Thus, according to the Bible, violators of the Sabbath law by performing forbidden labor, whether in error or ignorance, were required to bring a sin-offering as a sacrifice. But what if a person committed, in one span of forgetfulness, a number of Sabbath violations, either on the same Sabbath or spread over a number of Sabbaths? How many sin-offerings was he to bring? The Talmudists ruled that the sin-offering was obviously intended to atone for negligence, and not for the labor as such. Since only one span of forgetfulness was involved, only one sin-offering was to be brought.

The Talmudists demanded also that the law reckon with the intention behind the deed, and not merely with the deed itself. Thus they absolved a person from all guilt if a stone

[p. 148]

thrown by him accidentally fell upon some one and injured him. They also absolved a person from the charge of murder if, intending to kill an animal, he missed his target and killed a human being. Where a person intended to kill a human being and missed his target, killing instead another human being, there was a difference of opinion among the Talmudists. Rabbi Eliezer regarded the act as murder; Rabbi Simeon did not.

The Talmudists allowed certain fulfillments of the law to the free play of spontaneous decision. No fixed measure was given for the area on the corner of each field which was to be left as a beneficence to the poor. Nor was there a fixed measure for the offering of the first fruits of the harvest that was to be a gift for the priest, or for the offerings brought on appearing at the Temple during the pilgrimages on the three major festivals, or for the practice of charity and the study of Torah.

The most significant expression of spontaneity in Talmudic law was the recognition of a wide range of authority for local custom, or minhag, as it was called. Local communities, trades, and even family groups often adopted measures to govern their religious or social life, or commercial transactions. These arose spontaneously, in areas which were not covered by the law. The rabbis invested these customs or minhagim with authority, and demanded compliance with them. Indeed, where a law clashed with a deeply rooted custom, they often gave precedence to custom.[r_07_26][*26]

  

THE LAW IN MESSIANIC TIMES

The rabbis envisioned an even wider scope for religious and moral inwardness to be attained as history reaches its final unfolding. They anticipated that inwardness would eventually vanquish law altogether. In Messianic times when men will have learned the true lessons of the love of God and the love of man and feel that love deep within themselves, the law will no longer be necessary. The cult of worship

[p. 149]

by which we now express our relation to God and the apparatus of justice by which we now administer the law of human relations, will then become obsolete. For it will then be possible to depend on human spontaneity, expressing ennobled human characters, to suggest the right action in every situation without the discipline of law to channel it. "The laws," the Talmud declared, "will become obsolete in the hereafter."[r_07_27][*27]

In the present stage of human immaturity, however, the law is an indispensable guide to action. It is, moreover, a preparation for the next stage of civilization, when the law which has come "to ennoble the lives of men"[r_07_28][*28] will have done its work. A new human race will then arise to live on the level of true inwardness, in free gestures of adoration of God and in an all-embracing love for their fellow-men. The rabbis expressed this vision in their conception of the three stages of human history. The first is the stage of "chaos", before the leaven of a divine law has begun to work in the world; the second is the stage of "Torah"; and the last is the stage of Messianic liberation and enlightenment which will finally bring man to his pre-ordained destiny.[r_07_29][*29]

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150] [p. 151]

  

Human Wisdom in the Talmud

THE WORLD outlook of the rabbis is often an elaboration of some revered utterance by a Biblical writer or some other master of tradition; occasionally it is the fruit of some new inspiration that has carried its recipient into the ranks of the creative builders of Jewish thought. There is, however, an additional force that is represented in their pronouncements--it is the common human wisdom, which men have always distilled out of the general experiences of life.

  

DREAMS AND THE SUBCONSCIOUS

The rabbis were shrewd observers of human nature in action. They were aware of the subtle life of the mind, recognizing that conscious experience is only a phase of a larger world in which we have our being. The rabbis were of course far away from the insights of modern psychology. Yet they recognized fully that the subconscious performs its delicate operations--as in dreams for instance--out of the materials furnished by the conscious, out of the hopes and fears that agitate the mind in normal life.

The Talmud cites a variety of notions concerning the significance of dreams. Among them is the recognition that dreams are nothing but elaborations of thoughts dwelt upon in hours of consciousness. Thus R. Samuel ben Nahman on behalf of R. Jonathan said: "Dreams are representations of thoughts on which one continues to meditate in one's wakefulness." This conception of dreams is forcefully presented in a reported conversation between the Roman emperor and Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah: "'You claim to be wise men,'

[p. 152]

the emperor said to the rabbi. 'Tell me then what I shall see in my dream.' He replied, 'You will see the Persians (Parthians) enslaving you, despoiling you and making you pasture unclean animals with a golden staff.' The emperor continued to reflect on this all day and at night dreamed of it." The same Talmudic text records a similar experience on the part of the Parthian king, Shapur, with Samuel as the rabbi suggesting the subject of the dream.

The rabbis recognized that dreams are often pure fancy. Yet they felt that even in the seemingly incomprehensible dreams there are vital references to conscious experience. They sought a key to unravel the veiled allusions of our dreams which employ a language of symbols that need interpretation.

The interpretation of dreams was popular among the Talmudists. But they suggested that often it is the interpretation which becomes suggestive to the conscious mind of hopes or fears, which then condition the direction of our lives. The rabbis therefore cautioned people not to become unduly disturbed by dreams: "Dreams have no importance for good or ill."[r_08_1][*1]

  

THE HEART IS SOVEREIGN

The rabbis were impressed with the profoundly important role that emotions play in life. The heart, which they looked upon as the seat of emotion, was regarded by them the principal source of control over all human actions. "All of man's bodily organs are dependent on the heart," was a Talmudic dictum. It is the heart therefore which may be said to carry responsibility for whatever we do in life. Thus one rabbinic comment offers us the sweeping generalization: "The heart sees, hears, speaks, walks, falls, stands, rejoices, hardens, softens, grieves, fears, is broken, is haughty ... persuades, errs, fears, loves, hates, envies, searches, reflects. ..."

The rabbis prized highly the ability of some people to control

[p. 153]

their emotions. To control one's emotions and to bring life under the directing voice of reason was regarded by the rabbis as the mark of true heroism. "Who is a hero?" one rabbi asked in the ethical treatise Abot. His reply was: "He who controls his passion."

  

HABIT AND CHARACTER

The Talmud abounds with statements which clearly recognize the dominant role of habit in human conduct. Character is to a large extent a pattern of behavior formed by habit. Our conduct is always conditioned by the chain of preceding actions, which predispose us to one way of life or another. "A good deed," according to the ethical treatise Abot, "leads to another good deed, and the consequence of one transgression is another transgression."

Habit is a mighty fortification of the good life. For once we habituate ourselves to noble living, the normal bent of our character will incline us toward the right deed in the particular situation confronting us. And any attempt to deviate from what has become the norm for our life, will be met with inner resistance. But the rabbis warned that a pattern of behavior once formed, is not necessarily of permanent duration, and that the sensitivity to these deviations from the norm will gradually wane, as the act is repeated. As the Talmud puts it: "When one transgresses a commandment and repeats the offense he feels no further restraint."

The rabbis consequently urged caution in behavior, warning people against even seemingly trivial slips in conduct. These slips are grave, for they predispose man to a course from which he may find it difficult to turn back. "He who violates a seemingly trivial statute will eventually violate a weighty one." The only sound advice is thus constant vigilance: "Avoid even a minor transgression lest it lead you to a major one."[r_08_2][*2]

[p. 154]

  

A MAN WEARS MANY MASKS

The Talmudists recognized that human character is often hidden beneath appearances, and that men may simulate virtues they do not really possess. But they suggested situations which will reveal what is intrinsic in man. Pretense, they explained, will disappear in situations involving money matters, in moments of anger or by the way a man takes his liquor. As R. Ilai tersely phrased it: "You can recognize a person's real character by his wine cup (koso), his purse (kiso), and his anger (kaaso)."

The discussions of the rabbis reveal the recognition of the immense power which the craving for material possessions exercises over people: "No man departs from this world with half his cravings satisfied. When he has attained a hundred, he desires two hundred."

The rabbis commented sadly on the tendency of people to cultivate well-to-do friends, and then to desert them when they suffer a reversal in fortune. "At the gate of the enterprising shop, there are many friends and brothers. At the gate of a shop in decline there are neither brothers, nor friends." Raba was even more pointed in his observation: "When the ox is fallen the knife is sharpened."[r_08_3][*3]

The tendency of people to hide beneath a mask of pretense and falsification creates an element of uncertainty in every human relationship. It leads to deceit, and to the incompatible claims of litigants. The rabbis therefore sought a clue to the workings of the human mind which would enable us to probe through the false claim and to discover the true facts in a given situation. The Talmud records a number of principles which guided them in their deliberations.

It was taken for granted that a squatter's occupancy of any property would normally be challenged by its rightful owner within a three-year period of time. And if no such challenge developed in that time, the occupant may be presumed to be there by right, even though he might not have any documentary

[p. 155]

evidence to establish his rights. A liar was always presumed to fabricate the lie that would be to his greatest advantage. Greater credence was therefore to be placed to a plea yielding a lesser advantage than what was possible under the circumstances. It was assumed that falsification was less likely when the claimants confronted each other. Another important presumption was that a person does not normally pay his debts until they fall due. A person was assumed to be blind to his own shortcomings.

The application of these "presumptions" concerning human nature was at times challenged by the rabbis. For these are not iron-clad rules inexorably at work in all instances. Many a man may deviate from common procedure. This is clearly indicated in the following discussion: "Resh Lakish laid down the ruling: If a lender stipulates a date for the repayment of a loan, and the borrower pleads (when the date of payment arrives) that he paid the debt before it fell due, his word is not believed. It is enough if a person pay when his debts fall due. Abaye and Raba both concur in saying that it is not unusual for a man to pay a debt before it falls due; sometimes he happens to have money, and he says to himself, 'I will go and pay him, so that he may not trouble me.'"

The rabbis were fully aware of individual differences among people, and they often sought some indication of the mind of the particular parties involved in a litigation. This is well illustrated in the following case: "A certain Ronya had a field which was enclosed on all four sides by the fields of Rabina. The latter fenced them and said to him: 'Pay me toward what I have spent for fencing.' He (Ronya) refused. Then he asked, 'Pay toward the cost of a cheap fence of sticks.' But Ronya again refused. He continued, 'Then pay me toward the cost of a watchman.' Ronya still refused. Then one day Rabina saw Ronya gathering dates, and he said to his manager, 'Go and snatch a cluster of dates from him.' He went to take them, but Ronya shouted at him. Whereupon

[p. 156]

[paragraph continues] Rabina said, 'You show by this (shouting) that you are pleased with the fence. If it is only goats (you are afraid of), does not your field need guarding?' He replied, 'A goat can be driven off with a shout.' But he said, 'Don't you require a man to shout at it?' He appealed to Raba who said to him, 'Go and accept his last offer ...'" (to pay toward the cost of a watchman).[r_08_4][*4]

  

ON THE PSYCHOLOGY OF WOMEN

The Talmud quotes many proverbs that deal with the power of the sexual attractions of men and women. "No one is immune to the ravages of an illicit attraction." "There is only one real cause of jealousy among women--sex appeal." The Talmud recognized a woman's love for finery and personal adornment. "A woman is concerned principally with her appearance," one Talmudist observed. "And the greatest pleasure a man can give his wife is to clothe her in fine garments."

The love of self-adornment among women is more elaborately treated in the following passage: "These are the treatments of women--treating the eyes with kohl, curling the hair into ringlets, and rouging the face. The wife of R. Hisda used to adorn the face of her daughter-in-law. R. Huna ben Hinena once sat in the presence of Rab Hisda and, observing his wife apply the beauty treatment on her daughter-in-law, said, 'It is only permitted in the case of a young woman, not an old one.' He replied, 'By God, it is even permitted in the case of your mother and grandmother, and even if she stood on the brink of the grave; for as the proverb put it, "At sixty or at six, a woman runs after the sound of the timbrel."'"[r_08_5][*5]

The rabbis record other observations on the psychology of women: "God endowed a woman with keener judgment than man"; "women are compassionate"; women are "querulous

[p. 157]

and garrulous"; women have an affinity for the occult and they go in "for witchcraft."[r_08_6][*6]

The rabbis recognized the subtle influences of a woman in directing the life of her husband. This is told dramatically in the Midrash: "A pious man had been married to a pious woman but, being childless, they were divorced. He then went and married a wicked woman, and she made him wicked. The divorced woman proceeded and married a wicked man and she made a good man out of him. It thus follows that everything depends upon the woman."[r_08_7][*7]

The same Midrash tells another tale which extols modesty as a woman's noblest virtue, at the same time alluding to common weaknesses in a woman's character. The text on which this homily is based is Gen. 2:21, where it is told that Eve was formed from one of Adam's ribs: "God deliberated from which part of man to create woman. He said, 'I must not create her from the head that she should not carry herself haughtily; nor from the eye that she should not be too inquisitive; nor from the ear, that she should not be an eavesdropper; nor from the mouth that she should not be too talkative; nor from the heart that she should not be too jealous; nor from the hand that she should not be too acquisitive; nor from the foot that she should not be a gadabout; but from a hidden part of the body that she should be modest.'"[r_08_8][*8]

  

EDUCATION AND HUMAN NATURE

The psychological notions of the Talmudists had their most fruitful application in the field of education. The rabbis recognized individual differences among students, and they demanded that the educational process reckon with those differences. Some of these differences are discussed in the ethical treatise Abot: "There are four types among students. One comprehends readily but forgets readily--his advantage is nullified by his disadvantage; one is slow to comprehend

[p. 158]

but also slow to forget--his disadvantage is nullified by his advantage; one comprehends readily and forgets slowly--his is a good portion; one is slow to comprehend and quick to forget--this is a bad portion."

Another classification, also cited in the treatise Abot, deals with the relative reactions of students to knowledge given them: "There are four types among those who sit before the wise: the sponge, the funnel, the strainer, and the sieve. Some are like the sponge which absorbs everything; some are like the funnel which takes in at one end and lets out at the other; some are like the strainer which allows the wine to go out and retains the dregs; some are like the sieve which lets out the bran and retains the fine flour."

A more fundamental differentiation of students, on the basis of aptitude, is given in the Midrash: "Said R. Judan ben Samuel, 'The Torah, given by the Eternal, was offered us only in relative measure ... Some quality for the study of Bible; some for the Mishnah; some for the Talmud; some for Aggadah; and some for all of these.'"[r_08_9][*9]

A variety of other material in educational psychology is scattered in the writings of the Talmud. The importance of motivation and interest in education is recognized in the comment of Rabbi Judah the Prince: "A person can learn only those portions of the Torah which his heart desires." A combination of teacher's aloofness with a friendly interest in his students is demanded in the aphorism: "Always push the student away with the left hand and draw him near with the right." Teachers were urged to lay great stress on repetition. Rabbi Elazar was said to repeat his lesson four times. Students were urged to study out loud and place themselves in a position where they could see their teacher, for the added impression would aid to comprehension. Teachers were urged to be concise in speech and to present their material without ambiguities, which mislead students. The Talmud recommends group study, which allows for discussion, out of which comes greater clarity and a firmer grasp of the material

[p. 159]

studied. Humility was regarded as a prerequisite to a growth in knowledge, while arrogance was branded as its deadliest enemy.[r_08_10][*10]

  

AIDS TO MEMORY

The rabbis were conscious of the danger of forgetting what had been learned at great effort. Written reference works were not plentifully available in the age before printing. They therefore created a system of mnemonic devices as an aid to memory.

A common memory aid was a well-known quotation from the Bible or some other classical text. Thus the Mishnah enumerated the feasts of Roman paganism not in their 'seasonal order, as might have been expected. It mentions them in the reverse order, the later feast being cited earlier. The verse in Ps. 139:5 "Thou hast set me behind and before" is suggested as a mnemonic for this procedure: what should have been "behind" is listed "before".

A frequently used mnemonic is a word formed from the initial letters of crucial terms that figure in the theme to be remembered. Thus the Talmud, in describing the preparation of the High Priest for the solemn Day of Atonement service, at which he was to officiate, adds that he was to confine himself to a special diet for seven days. A mnemonic is suggested to help us remember the foods which were to be avoided. These foods were citron (athrog), eggs (bezim), and old wine (yayin yashan). The initial letters in the Hebrew words denoting these foods were joined, forming the word ABY. According to another opinion his diet was also to exclude fat meat (basar shamen). By the same process of joining initial letters, and now including the word for fat meat (basar shamen), the word ABBY was formed. By the simple device of remembering ABY and ABBY we are given a clue to a readier recollection of the High Priest's diet. To cite the Talmudic text: "Symachus said in the name of R. Mari: One does not feed him either Aby, and some say, neither Abby

[p. 160]

[paragraph continues] ... Aby, i.e., Athrog (ethrog, citron), nor Bezim (eggs), nor Yayin yashan (old wine). And according to others no Abby, i.e., neither Athrog (ethrog), nor Bezim, nor Basar shamen (fat meat), nor Yayin yashan."

The mnemonic occasionally consists of a key word taken from the passage that is to be fixed in memory. A good illustration of this appears in the following passage:--"(Mnemonic: Hear, And Two, Seven, Songs, Another). There was a man who used to say: Happy is a man who hears abuse of himself and ignores it, for a hundred evils pass him by. ... Again there was a man who used to say: Do not be surprised if a thief goes unhanged for two or three thefts; he will be caught in the end. ... Another used to say: Seven pits lie open for the good man (but he escaped); for the evil-doers there is only one, into which he falls. ... Yet another used to say: Let him who comes from a court that has taken from him his (ill-begotten) cloak sing his song (of relief) and go his way. ... Another used to say: When love was strong, we could have made our bed on a sword-blade; now that our love has grown weak, a bed of sixty cubits is not large enough for us. ..." The words listed in parentheses as the mnemonic are taken from each of the aphorisms in the passage. The word was to be a key to recall the text of the aphorism.[r_08_11][*11]

  

PARABLES AND PROVERBS

The rabbis utilized parables to illustrate more vividly certain truths that they were eager to convey to their people. Scattered throughout rabbinic literature, these illustrations deal with a multitude of diverse themes. They clothe abstract ideas with concreteness, bringing them within greater comprehension by the human mind.

The masters of parable found many suggestions for their labors in the metaphors of the Bible. God is often spoken of in the Bible as King. He is king of the universe and more

[p. 161]

specifically, of Israel. This suggested many parables which explain God's ways with His creatures by reference to a king's relationship with his subjects. Israel is characterized as the Lord's first-born, and this is further clarified by stories of a king who had a dearly beloved son. The Biblical allusions to Israel as the bride of God upon whom He lavishes His love and who on occasions proves faithless to Him, inspired a series of parables about the relations of a king and the woman of his love. The story of the prophet Jonah's flight from God was further clarified by the story of the servant who sought to flee his master.[r_08_12][*12]

The parables cited in the Talmud are for the most part centered in the moralistic sections of the literature. They are relatively absent in the discussions of law. By its very nature, the parable directs itself to the popular mind, which it seeks to impress by its homespun wisdom, rather than by formal analysis. Law was the field of interest of the scholarly community. The moralistic portions of the Talmud, on the other hand, spoke more directly to the common people.

Parables were occasionally employed in the current polemics of the rabbis against paganism. Thus Rabban Gamaliel had been asked why God's wrath is always spoken of as directed against idolators, rather than the idols. He replied by means of a parable: "A king had a son, who possessed a dog that he named after his royal father; and whenever he was about to take an oath he used to say 'By the life of the dog, the father.' When the king heard of it, at whom did he feel indignant? Against the dog or against his son? Surely against the son."[r_08_13][*13]

Some Talmudic illustrations are fables in which animals, and occasionally plants act and speak like human beings, their experiences serving as an allegory for human life. Thus the experience of the fox in the vineyard is made to suggest the well-known truth that earthly possessions are ultimately futile since we cannot take them with us when we pass to the great beyond. The Babylonian teacher, Geniba, developed

[p. 162]

this fable in a comment in Ecclesiastes 5:14: "As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked, shall he return; as he came, so shall he go." On this Geniba commented: "This might be compared to a fox who found a vineyard which was fenced round on all sides, but it had one small hole in it. He sought to enter but he could not. What did he do? He fasted three days until he became thin and emaciated. Then he entered through the hole, and he ate and grew sleek. When he wished to leave, he could not get through that hole. He then fasted another three days until he again grew thin and emaciated and reduced to his former state, and then he went forth. On leaving he turned and gazed at the place, saying: 'O vineyard, vineyard, how goodly art thou, and how goodly is the fruit which thou producest; all thy produce is beautiful and praiseworthy, but what enjoyment have I had from thee? In the state in which one enters thee, one must leave thee'. Even so it is with the world."

Rabbi Meir is said to have employed three hundred fables in which the fox is offered as the instructor of wisdom. Only three of these have remained. Some of the fables of the Talmud show marked similarity to the fables of Aesop and the Indian moralist Kybises, but many are without parallel in other literatures.[r_08_14][*14]

Some Talmudic illustrations are taken directly from human experience. Situations are projected in which the lesson to be taught seemed pointedly obvious, leading to its readier acceptance in the case dealt with by the rabbis.

The need for constant readiness to meet one's Maker is elaborated in a striking parable by Rabban Johanan ben Zaccai: "A king once invited his servants to a banquet without indicating the precise time when it would be given. Those who were wise remembered that things are always ready in a king's palace, and they arrayed themselves and sat by the palace gate attentive for the call to enter, while those who were foolish continued their customary occupations, saying: 'A banquet requires great preparation.' When the king suddenly

[p. 163]

called his servants to the banquet, those who were wise appeared in clean raiment and well adorned, while those who were foolish entered in soiled and ordinary garments. The king took pleasure at the wise, but was full of anger at those who were foolish, saying that those who had come prepared for the banquet should sit down and eat and drink, but those who had not properly arrayed themselves should remain standing and look on."[r_08_15][*15]

The Talmud cites a parable which was employed by Rabbi Zera in a funeral oration, to answer the challenge of R. Abin's death, at the untimely age of twenty-eight: "A king had a vineyard in which he employed many laborers, one of whom demonstrated special aptitude and skill. What did the king do? He took this laborer from his work, and strolled through the garden conversing with him. When the laborers came for their wages in the evening, the skillful laborer also appeared among them and he received a full day's wages from the king. The other laborers were angry at this and protested: 'We have toiled the whole day, while this man has worked but two hours; why does the king give him the full wage, even as to us?' The king said to them: 'Why are you angry? Through his skill he has done in two hours more than you have done all day'. So it is with R. Abin ben Hiyya. In the twenty-eight years of his life he has attained more in the Torah than others attain in 100 years."[r_08_16][*16]

The use of parable to offer consolation in bereavement is illustrated even more strikingly by the story concerning Beruria, wife of Rabbi Meir: "Their two sons died suddenly while Rabbi Meir was at the academy on a Sabbath afternoon. She put them on the bed and covered them with a sheet. In the evening Rabbi Meir returned and asked for the boys. She told him that they had gone to the academy. He protested that he had not seen them there. She gave him the cup of wine and he recited the prayers for the departure of the Sabbath. Then he asked once more: 'Where are our two sons?' She said to him: 'Perhaps they have gone out somewhere,

[p. 164]

but they will surely return soon.' Then she served him food and he ate. After he had eaten, she said to him: 'My master, I have a question to ask.' He said to her: 'What is your question?' She said to him: 'O my master, the other day someone came and left in my charge a treasure, but now he has come to claim it. Shall I return it or not?' He said to her: 'Is there any question about the duty of returning property left in safekeeping to its owner?' She said to him: 'I did not want to return it without your knowing it.' Then she took him by the hand and led him to the room where the boys lay, and she placed him before the bed. She removed the sheet and he beheld the two boys lying dead on the bed. He began to cry. ... Then she told him: 'Did you not tell me that we must return the treasure to its owner?' So it is. 'The Lord hath given and the Lord hath taken, may the name of the Lord be blessed forever.' Said Rabbi Hanina: By means of that parable she comforted him and his mind became resigned to his sorrow."[r_08_17][*17]

The rabbis found an important source of illustrations in the phenomena of nature, where they often found parallels to the phenomena of human life. The man of learning but without the necessary complement of character is compared by the rabbis to a tree laden with many heavy branches but insufficiently rooted in the earth; it lacks the sturdiness to withstand the storms ravaging the world. This illustration is quoted in the Ethics of the Fathers in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarish: "He whose wisdom exceeds his works, to what may he be compared? To a tree whose branches are many, but whose roots are few; and the wind comes and plucks it up and overturns it upon its face. ... But he whose work exceeds his wisdom, to what may he be compared? To a tree whose branches are few, but whose roots are many, so that even if all the winds in the world come and blow upon it, it cannot be stirred from its place, as it is said, 'And he shall be as a tree planted by the waters; and that spreadeth out its roots by the river, and shall not perceive when heat

[p. 165]

cometh, but his leaf shall be green; and he shall not be troubled in the year of drought, neither shall he cease from yielding fruit.'" (Jer. 17:8).

The illustrations of the Talmud are often directed to the explanation of a Biblical text even as they seek to reinforce independent comments of the rabbis. Thus in accounting for the divine command which directed Abraham to leave his kin and his native land to proceed on the fateful journey to Canaan one rabbi cites the illustration of a flask of perfume: "As a flask of perfume that is hidden away in a corner gives forth no fragrance but must be poured forth to yield its fragrance, so was Abraham at the time when the Lord commanded him 'Go thee out of thy land and out of thy kindred' (Gen. 12:1). 'Abraham, Abraham', God exhorted him, 'you are a person of many noble deeds and commandments. Wander about in the world and your name will become exalted in my world.' Thus what does the verse say after the directive to set out on the journey? 'And I shall make of thee a great nation" (Gen. 12:2).[r_08_18][*18]

Another source for Talmudic illustrations were proverbs, often drawn from popular culture. In concise and pithy formulations, often ironic in tone and peppered with humor, proverbs are copiously represented throughout Talmudic literature, and they drive home their points with a finality that no formal argument could possibly attain.

We cite here some Talmudic proverbs. Their meaning is generally self-evident, and there is no need to elucidate them by a commentary. "A person prefers one measure of his own to nine measures of his neighbor"; "Tell part of a person's praise in his presence and all of it in his absence"; "Heed your physician and you will not need him"; "The walls have ears, the woods have ears"; "Words follow the promptings of the heart"; "If the sword then not the book, if the book then not the sword"; "Who is a hero? He who can curb his passions"; "Who is wise? He who learns from all men"; "Don't consider the vessel, but what is in it";

[p. 166]

[paragraph continues] "If your wife is short in stature, bend down and whisper to her"; "When the shepherd strays, the sheep stray after him"; "Much happens through childishness, much happens through wine"; "If Tobias sinned, shall Sigood be punished?"; "Silence becomes the wise, and surely the foolish".[r_08_19][*19]

As a rule, the proverb is not stated independently. It is offered as additional support of some lesson that has been expounded. The following citations illustrate this: "Moses and Aaron once walked along, with Nadab and Abihu behind them, and all Israel following in the rear. Then Nadab said to Abihu, 'O that these old might die, so that you and I might become the leaders of our generation!' But the Holy One blessed be He said unto them, 'We shall see who will bury whom.' R. Papa said: Thus men say: 'Many an old camel is laden with the hides of the younger ones.'" The alleged conversation of Nadab and Abihu is a rabbinic suggestion as to what Scripture might have meant by the statement that those two had merited death because they had offered "strange fire before the Lord." (Lev. 10:1).

The identical procedure is involved in the following citation: "The vision of Obadiah. Thus said the Lord concerning Edom (Obadiah 1:1). Why particularly Obadiah against Edom? ... Ephraim Makshaah, the disciple of Rabbi Meir, said on Rabbi Meir's authority that Obadiah was an Edomite proselyte; and thus people say, 'From the very forest itself comes the handle of the axe that fells it.'"[r_08_20][*20]

The rabbis did not see themselves as pioneers in the use of parable and proverb. Both appear in the Bible, principally in the writings which have been ascribed to King Solomon. They therefore commended Solomon for his contributions to this important phase of tradition. Solomon, they said, was the perfect teacher in that by means of parables, he adapted his truth to the understanding of those whom he taught. The parable, the rabbis generalized, is to abstract truth what a thread is for a labyrinth, or a trail in a thick and dark forest, or a handle to a cask of fruit or to a demijohn

[p. 167]

of boiling water, or a rope and bucket to a deep well of fresh, cold water. "Disdain it not, the parable", they added. "Remember that when a pearl of great worth is lost, we search after it with a candle that costs but the smallest coin. So the lowly parable takes us home to the great teachings of the Torah."[r_08_21][*21]

In the style of their utterance no less than in the doctrine which they proclaimed, the rabbis regarded themselves not as innovators, but as expositors of the Scriptural word. Thus the line of development between Bible and Talmud runs clear and unbroken. In itself a vast body of literature, the Bible was also the seed for a new process of growth. And the Talmud has remained its most impressive consummation.

     
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 168] [p. 169]

  

NOTES

  

INTRODUCTION

[n_00_1][*1]. Beer ha-Golah, ch. 7.

[n_00_2][*2]. Vol. V, p. 773.

[n_00_3][*3]. See A. B. Tager, The Decay of Czarism. The Beiliss Trial, Based on Unpublished Materials in The Russian Archives, Philadelphia, 1935.

[n_00_4][*4]. This work is available in the original Polish and in a German translation by Minna Safier, published in Vienna, 1937.

[n_00_5][*5]. A Commentary on the Palestinian Talmud, N. Y. 1941, Vol. 1, pp. XXXIII, XLIII.

  

THE TALMUD AS LITERATURE

[n_01_1][*1]. Jebamot 90b; Moed Katan 9a. [**]

[n_01_2][*2]. Yerushalmi Sanhedrin 4:2. [***]

[n_01_3][*3]. Rosh ha-Shanah 25b.

[n_01_4][*4]. Baba Mezia 59b.

[n_01_5][*5]. Sanhedrin 27b.

[n_01_6][*6]. Mishnah, Baba Mezia 9:13; Kiddushin 24a.

[n_01_7][*7]. Mishnah, Shebiit 10:2, 3. Cf. Gittin 37b.

[n_01_8][*8]. Makkot 4b; Sanhedrin 54b.

[n_01_9][*9]. Yoma 85b; Mishnah, Berakot 9:5.

[n_01_10][*10]. Genesis Rabbah 39:21; Sanhedrin 93b; Baba Batra 15a.

[n_01_11][*11]. Sanhedrin 39a; Baba Kamma 38a.

[n_01_12][*12]. Mekilta on Exodus 14:15, 18:12, 21:14; Sifre on Deut. 11:13. Cf. however the analysis of S. Zeitlin, "The Halaka: Introduction to Tannaitic Jurisprudence", The Jewish Quarterly Review, XXXIV, I, (July 1948), pp. 14-21.

[n_01_13][*13]. Mishnah, Yoma 1:1, 2, and Yoma 18a; Mishnah Yoma 8:5 and Yoma 83a.

[n_01_14][*14]. Mishnah, Yoma 8:7, and Yoma 85a, 85b.

[n_01_15][*15]. Mishnah, Baba Mezia 2:4, and Yerushalmi Baba Mezia 2:5.

[p. 170]

  

THE FORERUNNERS OF THE TALMUD

[n_02_1][*1]. Ezra 7:11, Psalm 9:2, 14, 19:2, 50:16.

[n_02_2][*2]. Genesis 18:22 and Genesis Rabbah, ad locum.

[n_02_3][*3]. Abot 1:1, 2.

[n_02_4][*4]. Perushim is a passive construction of the verb parosh, but Talmudic Hebrew frequently uses the passive form with an active meaning as in Mishnah, Berakot 4:5; Tosefta Berakot 2:6, 3:18; Ketubot 26a, 66b.

[n_02_5][*5]. Abot 1:4, 1:6, 1:7.

[n_02_6][*6]. Megillat Taanit 4.

[n_02_7][*7]. Josephus, Antiquities XIII 10:6.

[n_02_8][*8]. Josephus, Antiquities XIII 10:5-6; Kiddushin 66a; Sanhedrin 19a.

[n_02_9][*9]. Shabbat 31a.

[n_02_10][*10]. Gittin 36b

[n_02_11][*11]. Abot 1:10; Mishnah, Nedarim 3:4.

[n_02_12][*12]. Yoma 39a.

[n_02_13][*13]. Antiquities XX 9:7.

[n_02_14][*14]. Mishnah, Yoma 1:1.

[n_02_15][*15]. Pesahim 57a.

[n_02_16][*16]. Pesahim 57a; Yoma 35b.

[n_02_17][*17]. Antiquities XX 8:8, 9:2.

[n_02_18][*18]. Josephus, Wars II 8:1 and Antiquities XVIII 1:6.

[n_02_19][*19]. Josephus, Wars II 17:6, 16:2, 17:4.

[n_02_20][*20]. Josephus, Wars IV 3:10, 6:1; Vita 35.

[n_02_21][*21]. Josephus, Wars, Preface 2.

[n_02_22][*22]. Yerushalmi Nedarim 5, end; Berakot 17a, 28b; Abot 2:8; Sukkah 28a; Tosefta Parah 4:7.

[n_02_23][*23]. Gittin 56b; Abot de Rabbi Nathan, ch. 4; Rosh ha-Shanah 29b, 30a.

  

THE TALMUD IN ITS HISTORICAL SETTING

[n_03_1][*1]. Tosefta Baba Kamma 9:30; Shabbat 151a.

[n_03_2][*2]. Jebamot 63b; Tosefta Sotah 15:11-13; Baba Batra 60b.

[n_03_3][*3]. Yoma 9b; Shabbat 119b, 120a; Gittin 57a.

[n_03_4][*4]. Mishnah, Jebamot 1:4.

[p. 171]

[n_03_5][*5]. Baba Mezia 59a, 59b.

[n_03_6][*6]. Mishnah, Abot 2:10.

[n_03_7][*7]. Sanhedrin 68a, and cf. B. Z. Bokser, Pharisaic Judaism in Transition, N. Y. 1935, pp. 28-35.

[n_03_8][*8]. Mishnah, Rosh Hashanah 2:7. The Talmud speaks of a third case in which the patriarch humiliated Rabbi Joshua.

[n_03_9][*9]. Berakot 27b, 28a. See L. Ginzberg, A Commentary on the Palestinian Talmud, III, pp. 195f.

[n_03_10][*10]. Abodah Zarah 18a.

[n_03_11][*11]. Sanhedrin 74a.

[n_03_12][*12]. Berakot 61b.

[n_03_13][*13]. Berakot 61b.

[n_03_14][*14]. Sanhedrin 14a.

[n_03_15][*15]. Shir Hashirim Rabbah 2:5.

[n_03_16][*16]. Ketubot 49b, 50a.

[n_03_17][*17]. Kiddushin 31a; Mishnah, Gittin 5:6; Megillah 5:2; Yerushalmi, Megillah 1:4; Abodah Zarah 37a; Yerushalmi Shabbat 6:5.

[n_03_18][*18]. Yerushalmi Terumot 2:3, Kiddushin 1:2, Demai 2:3, Peah 2:6, Baba Kamma 8:4; Shabbat 127a; Abodah Zarah 26b; Megillah 16a; Ketubot 111a; Genesis Rabbah 76:5.

[n_03_19][*19]. Yerushalmi Nedarim 6, end.

[n_03_20][*20]. Berakot 33b; Hullin 110a, 137b; Erubin 50b; Sanhedrin 5a, 64b; Yerushalmi Hagigah 1:5; Yoma 20b; Yerushalmi Rosh ha-Shanah 57a; Pesahim 50b, 113a; Yerushalmi Kiddushin 12b, end; Kiddushin 39a, 41a; Baba Mezia 59a; Baba Batra 21a, 54b; Moed Katan 24a; Genesis Rabbah 44:1

[n_03_21][*21]. Shabbat 133b; Baba Mezia 85b, 108a; Baba Kamma 113b; Baba Batra 55a.

[n_03_22][*22]. Baba Mezia 86a.

  

THEOLOGICAL ELEMENTS IN THE TALMUD

[n_04_1][*1]. Genesis Rabbah 39:1

[n_04_2][*2]. Hagigah 13a; Yerushalmi Hagigah 2:1.

[n_04_3][*3]. Baba Mezia 31b; Sukkah 5a.

[n_04_4][*4]. Genesis Rabbah 4:4.

[n_04_5][*5]. Hullin 59b; Midrash Tehillim, Ps. 103:1.

[n_04_6][*6]. Exodus Rabbah 5:14.

[p. 172]

[n_04_7][*7]. Genesis Rabbah 10:7; Yalkut on Proverbs, 16:4.

[n_04_8][*8]. Genesis Rabbah 1:3, 12:1; Sifre Deut. section 307.

[n_04_9][*9]. Genesis Rabbah 5:5; Nedarim 41a; Pesahim 118a.

[n_04_10][*10]. Sifra on Leviticus 19:18.

[n_04_11][*11]. Makkot 24a.

[n_04_12][*12]. Tosefta Shebout 3, end.

[n_04_13][*13]. Shabbat 31a.

[n_04_14][*14]. Genesis Rabbah 9:7.

[n_04_15][*15]. Sifre on Deut. 6:5.

[n_04_16][*16]. Megillah 14a; Baba Batra 15b.

[n_04_17][*17]. Baba Batra 14b, 15a; Leviticus Rabbah 15:2. The two verses alluded to are Isaiah 8:19, 20.

[n_04_18][*18]. Sifre, Deut. section 343; Numbers Rabbah 13:10; Mekilta on Exodus 19:2; Sifre, Deut. section 40.

[n_04_19][*19]. Sanhedrin 56a.

[n_04_20][*20]. Baba Kamma 38a; Abodah Zarah 3a; Yalkut on Judges 4:1.

[n_04_21][*21]. Abot 4:1.

[n_04_22][*22]. Abot 2:6, 1:15, 2:9, 4:11, 6:1, 11.

[n_04_23][*23]. Menahot 43b.

[n_04_24][*24]. Genesis Rabbah 44:1.

[n_04_25][*25]. Berakot 33b.

[n_04_26][*26]. Midrash on Tehillim, Shohar Tob, on Ps. 23:5; Taanit 8a.

[n_04_27][*27]. Berakot 5a, 5b.

[n_04_28][*28]. Exodus Rabbah 1:1, on Ex. 27:20.

[n_04_29][*29]. Sanhedrin 98b, 97a; Megillah 11a.

[n_04_30][*30]. Sanhedrin 98a.

  

SOCIAL ETHICS IN THE TALMUD

[n_05_1][*1]. Tosefta Sanhedrin 8:4.

[n_05_2][*2]. Erubin 19a; Sanhedrin 101a.

[n_05_3][*3]. Sanhedrin 38a; Berakot 17a.

[n_05_4][*4]. Mishnah Sanhedrin 4:5; Shabbat 127a.

[n_05_5][*5]. Yalkut on Judges 4:1; Gittin 61a.

[n_05_6][*6]. Tanhuma on Deuteronomy 29:9; Baba Kamma 116b; Kiddushin 20a, 22b.

[n_05_7][*7]. Niddah 47a; Yerushalmi Baba Kamma 6c; Mishnah, Yadaim 4:7.

[p. 173]

[n_05_8][*8]. Nedarim 49b; Abot de Rabbi Nathan II, ch. 21; Pesahim 113a; Baba Batra 110a; Kiddushin 29a; Abot 4:4; Yerushalmi Hagigah 77b; Nedarim 24b; Yoma 35b; Yerushalmi Shabbat 35a.

[n_05_9][*9]. Shebuot 31a.

[n_05_10][*10]. Tosefta Sanhedrin 8:3; Sanhedrin 43a, 45a; Mishnah, Makkot 1:10; Mishnah, Sanhedrin 6:5; Sanhedrin 46b.

[n_05_11][*11]. Derek Erez Zuta I: Abot de Rabbi Nathan ch. 11; Sanhedrin 91b.

[n_05_12][*12]. Abodah Zarah 36a; Shabbat 88a.

[n_05_13][*13]. Mishnah, Eduyot 1:5; Erubin 13b; Megillah 27a; Berakot 55a.

[n_05_14][*14]. Jebamot 89b; Baba Batra 8b; Sanhedrin 17b.

[n_05_15][*15]. Tanhuma, Shemot, ed. Buber, p. 43a; Tosefta Peah 4:8-13; Baba Batra 8a, 9b.

[n_05_16][*16]. Antiquities XX, 9:7.

[n_05_17][*17]. Jebamot 62b, 63a; Kiddushin 41a.

[n_05_18][*18]. Jebamot 62b; Kiddushin 30b.

[n_05_19][*19]. Gittin 90b; Mishnah, Ketubot 5:6, 7:9, 10, Ketubot 77a; Mishnah, Nedarim 11:12; Mishnah, Arakin 5:6.

[n_05_20][*20]. Jebamot 63b; Kiddushin 29a ff; Tosefta Niddah 2:6; Jebamot 12b.

[n_05_21][*21]. Shabbat 10b; Genesis Rabbah 1; Gittin 6b; Semahot 2:6; Yerushalmi Peah 1:1.

[n_05_22][*22]. Yoma 35b; Berakot 28a; Pesahim 72b.

[n_05_23][*23]. Ketubot 105a; Gittin 38b; Yerushalmi Sotah 1:4; Yerushalmi Megillah 4:1.

[n_05_24][*24]. Megillah 9b; Ekah Rabba 2:17, ed. Wilna, 1897; Shabbat 93b; Genesis Rabba 9, on 1:31; Sukkah 55b; Mishnah, Nedarim 3:4; Sanhedrin 39b; Tanhuma Mishpatim 12.

[n_05_25][*25]. Abot de Rabbi Nathan II ch. 21, p. 22b, ed. Shechter; Sanhedrin 91b; Taanit 11a; Mekilta on Exodus 19:2; Judaism in the First Centuries of the Christian Era, Cambridge, 1927, I, p.324.

  

PERSONAL MORTALITY IN THE TALMUD

[n_06_1][*1]. Berakot 60b.

[n_06_2][*2]. Shabbat 32a.

[n_06_3][*3]. Sotah 48b.

[n_06_4][*4]. Yalkut, Beshalah, 16.

[n_06_5][*5]. Abot 4:1.

[p. 174]

[n_06_6][*6]. Abot 2:16, 4:28.

[n_06_7][*7]. Yerushalmi Berakot 7d.

[n_06_8][*8]. Abodah Zarah 20b.

[n_06_9][*9]. Sotah 4b.

[n_06_10][*10]. Erubin 13b.

[n_06_11][*11]. Abot 4:20, 1:15, 4:1, 2:15, 3:10.

[n_06_12][*12]. Taanit 20b.

[n_06_13][*13]. Yerushalmi Nedarim 9:4.

[n_06_14][*14]. Genesis Rabbah, ch. 54, section 3.

[n_06_15][*15]. Abot de Rabbi Nathan, ch. 23.

[n_06_16][*16]. Berakot 10a.

[n_06_17][*17]. Shabbat 31a.

[n_06_18][*18]. Abot 1:18.

[n_06_19][*19]. Numbers Rabbah 11:7; Sanhedrin 7a, 102b.

[n_06_20][*20]. Abot 1:6; Abot de Rabbi Nathan ch. 41.

[n_06_21][*21]. Taanit 22a.

[n_06_22][*22]. Sotah 14a; Sifre, Deut. section 49.

[n_06_23][*23]. Shabbat 127a; Ketubot 50a; Nedarim 39b; Megillah 3b; Berakot 18a.

[n_06_24][*24]. Sukkah 49b.

[n_06_25][*25]. Baba Batra 10a.

[n_06_26][*26]. Leviticus Rabbah, ch. 34, end.

[n_06_27][*27]. Sanhedrin 24a, 92a; Tosefta Baba Kamma 7:8; Hullin 94a; Pesahim 113h, Abot 1:18.

[n_06_28][*28]. Sukkah 46b.

[n_06_29][*29]. Deuteronomy Rabbah 3:5.

[n_06_30][*30]. Berakot 57b.

[n_06_31][*31]. Taanit 11a, 11b.

[n_06_32][*32]. Berakot 29b; Numbers Rabbah 10:8.

[n_06_33][*33]. Tanhuma, Noah, 14

[n_06_34][*34]. Abot 2:2; Shabbat 33b.

[n_06_35][*35]. Taanit 27b; Derekh Eretz 9; Shabbat 108b.

[n_06_36][*36]. Leviticus Rabbah 34:3.

[n_06_37][*37]. Erubin 65a; Berakot 62b; Abot 3:14; Gittin 70a; Sanhedrin 17b; Yerushalmi Kiddushin 66d.

[p. 175]

  

THE JURISPRUDENCE OF THE TALMUD

[n_07_1][*1]. Mishnah, Berakot 1:1, 4:3, 6:1; Berakot 28b.

[n_07_2][*2]. Berakot 35a.

[n_07_3][*3]. Abot 1:1.

[n_07_4][*4]. Mishnah, Abodah Zarah 3, 4, 5.

[n_07_5][*5]. Mekilta on Exodus 16:29; Beza 36b; Mishnah Erubin ch. 4, 5; Tosefta Shabbat, ch. 16, end (ed. Zuckermandel); Shabbat 19a.

[n_07_6][*6]. Abot 5:10.

[n_07_7][*7]. Abot, ibid.

[n_07_8][*8]. Mekilta on Exodus 18:20.

[n_07_9][*9]. Baba Mezia 83a; Ketubot 61a, 97a.

[n_07_10][*10]. Baba Mezia 88a.

[n_07_11][*11]. Baba Batra 21a, 8b; Ketubot 49b.

[n_07_12][*12]. Ketubot 65b; Yerushalmi Kiddushin 1:7.

[n_07_13][*13]. Baba Batra 12b.

[n_07_14][*14]. Sanhedrin 40a.

[n_07_15][*15]. Mishnah, Makkot 1:10.

[n_07_16][*16]. Mishnah, Shabbat 6:4.

[n_07_17][*17]. Mishnah, Berakot 1:1, 2, and cf. B. Z. Bokser, Pharisaic Judaism in Transition, N. Y. 1935, pp. 97 f.

[n_07_18][*18]. Baba Kamma 113a.

[n_07_19][*19]. Tanhuma, Noah, section 10.

[n_07_20][*20]. Ketubot 19a; Sanhedrin 74a.

[n_07_21][*21]. Sanhedrin 106b.

[n_07_22][*22]. Abodah Zarah 17a.

[n_07_23][*23]. Berakot 34b.

[n_07_24][*24]. Mishnah, Yoma 8:9.

[n_07_25][*25]. Gittin 55a.

[n_07_26][*26]. Mishnah, Keritot 3:10; Baba Kamma 41b; Mishnah, Sanhedrin 9:2; Ketubot 33a; Mishnah, Peah 1:1; Yerushalmi, Pesahim 4:3; Pesahim 50a, 53a, 53b, 54b, 55a; Baba Batra 93b; Sanhedrin 23a, 23b; Soferim 14:18; Yerushalmi Baba Mezia 7:1. Rabbi Eliezer also disagreed on the number of sin-offerings required. He demanded one for each act by which the Sabbath was violated. Cf. Bokser, Pharisaic Judaism, pp. 129-144.

[n_07_27][*27]. Niddah 61b.

[p. 176]

[n_07_28][*28]. Tanhuma, Buber, Shemini, p. 30 and cf. also Genesis Rabbah 44:1.

[n_07_29][*29]. Abodah Zarah 9a.

  

HUMAN WISDOM IN THE TALMUD

[n_08_1][*1]. Berakot 55b, 56a; Sanhedrin 30a.

[n_08_2][*2]. Yerushalmi, Terumot 8, end; Ecclesiastes Rabbah 1:38; Abot 4:1, 2; Yoma 86b; Sifre on Deut. 19:11; Abot de R. Nathan 2:2.

[n_08_3][*3]. Erubin 65b; Kohelet Rabbah 1; Shabbat 32a.

[n_08_4][*4]. Baba Batra 29a, 31a; Jebamot 117b; Shabbat 119a; Baba Batra 5a, 5b.

[n_08_5][*5]. Ketubot 13b, 59b; Megillah 13a; Moed Katan 9b.

[n_08_6][*6]. Niddah 45b; Megillah 14b; Yoma 83b; Sanhedrin 67a; Genesis Rabbah 45:5.

[n_08_7][*7]. Genesis Rabbah 17:7.

[n_08_8][*8]. Genesis Rabbah 18:2.

[n_08_9][*9]. Abot 5:12, 5:18; Leviticus Rabbah 15:2.

[n_08_10][*10]. Abodah Zarah 19a; Sotah 47a; Erubin 54a, 54b, 55a; Sifre on Numbers 19:2; Erubin 13b; Abot 4:13; Pesahim 112a; Hullin 63b; Taanit 7a.

[n_08_11][*11]. Abodah Zarah 8a; Yoma 7a, 18a; Erubin 54b.

[n_08_12][*12]. Psalms 10:16, Zeph. 3:16, Zech. 14:16-17, Mal. 1:14 and Numbers Rabbah 2:24; Ex. 4:22, Deut. 14:1 and Berakot 13a, Deut. Rabbah 3:12, Exodus Rabbah 19:18; Isa. 54:5, Jer. 2:2, Hosea 2:18, 21, 22 and Numbers Rabbah 2:14, 15, Deut. Rabbah 3:9, 11, 16; Jonah 1 and Mekilta, Bo, ed. Weiss 1b.

[n_08_13][*13]. Abodah Zarah 54b.

[n_08_14][*14]. Kohelet Rabbah on 5:14; Sanhedrin 38b. Cf. Joseph L. Jacobs, Jewish Encyclopedia, s. v. Aesop.

[n_08_15][*15]. Shabbat 153a.

[n_08_16][*16]. Yerushalmi Berakot 2:8.

[n_08_17][*17]. Yalkut Shimoni on Proverbs section 964.

[n_08_18][*18]. Abot 3:22; Shir ha-Shirim Rabbah on 3:22. Cf. A. Feldman, The Parables and Similes of the Rabbis, Cambridge 1924.

[n_08_19][*19]. Baba Mezia 38a, 59a; Erubin 18a; Yerushalmi Taanit 3:6; Leviticus Rabbah, 32:2; Berakot 9a; Abot 4:1, 27; Pirke de R. Eliezer 40; Abodah Zarah 17b; Sotah 7a; Makkot 11a; Pesahim 99a.

[n_08_20][*20]. Sanhedrin 39b, 52a.

[n_08_21][*21]. Shir ha-Shirim Rabbah 1:1.

Footnotes

^169:* The citation of sources does not always follow the consecutive order of the volumes, but corresponds to the order in which these sources were used.

^169:** Quotations from the Palestinian Talmud are prefaced by the term Yerushalmi.

All other quotations are from the Babylonian Talmud.

    
The Wisdom of the Talmud, by Ben Zion Bokser, [1951], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 177]

  

Index

Ab bet din--<page 58>

Abahu--<page 146>

Abaye--<page 155>

Abba Areka--<page 78>, <page 118>, <page 163>

Abtalyon--<page 41>

Aelia Capitalina--<page 65>

Aesop--<page 162>

Agrippa--<page 47>

Akhnai Stove--<page 59>

Akiba--<page 54>, <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 64>, <page 66>, <page 67>, <page 71>, <page 90>, <page 128>, <page 129>, <page 142>

Alexander Jannai--<page 24>, <page 38>, <page 39>, <page 145>

Alexander of Macedon--<page 26>

Alexander Severus--<page 71>

Alexander the Great--<page 31>, <page 74>

Amoraim--<page 71>

Anan ben David--<page x>

Antiochus IV--<page 31>, <page 32>, <page 64>

Antonius Pius--<page 67>

Aquila--<page 56>

Aristobulus--<page 39>

Asceticism--<page 118>, <page 130>, <page 131>

Ashi--<page 82>, <page 83>

Assi--<page 24>

 

Babylonia, as a center of Judaism--<page 21>, <page 22>, <page 23>, <page 74>-<page 83>

Bacchus--<page 65>

Bar Kokba--<page 64>

Baraita--<page 21>

Beillis--<page xv>

Ben Azzai--<page 91>

Benevolence--<page 127>, <page 128>

Beruria--<page 163>

Bet Shearim--<page 69>

Bible, supplementation of--<page 2>-<page 5>

Bible and Talmud--<page ix>

Biblical Supplementation, sanction for--<page 5>-<page 9>

Bloch, Joseph S.--<page xiii>

Body--<page 132>

Boethus--<page 37>

Briman, Aaron--<page xiv>

 

Cabbala--<page xiv>

Character--<page 153>, <page 154>

Clement--<page xiv>, <page xv>

Cohen, A--<page xix>

Commandments, purpose of--<page 97>, <page 98>

Constantine--<page 73>

Criminal--<page 106>, <page 107>

Cyrus--<page 74>

 

Danby, Herbert--<page xviii>

Delitzsch, Franz--<page xiv>, <page xvi>

Democracy--<page 108>, <page 109>, <page 111>, <page 113>

Dirksen, A. H.--<page xvi>

Donin, Nicholas--<page xii>

Divorce--<page 112>

Dosa--<page 62>

Dreams--<page 151>, <page 152>

 

Ecker, Jacob--<page xiv>

Edels, Samuel--<page x>

Education--<page 113>, <page 114>, <page 115>, <page 157>, <page 158>, <page 159>, <page 160>

Eighteen Benedictions--<page 56>

Eisenmenger, Andreas--<page xiii>, <page xv>

Elazar ben Azariah--<page 25>, <page 63>, <page 143>

Elazar bar Zimra--<page 13>

Eleazar ben Shammua--<page 67>

Eliezer--<page 16>, <page 20>, <page 56>, <page 58>, <page 59>, <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 144>, <page 148>

Eliezer ben Hyrcanus--<page 54>

Elijah ben Solomon--<page x>

Elisha ben Abuyah--<page 65>

Emotions--<page 152>, <page 153>

Envy--<page 122>

Epstein, I.--<page xviii>

Equity--<page 143>

Evil Impulse--<page 93> 

Excommunication--<page 59>

 

Fables--<page 161>

Family--<page 111>, <page 112>, <page 113>

Finkelstein, Louis--<page xiv>

Florus--<page 46>

Forstat, Walter--<page xvi>

Free Will--<page 98>

Freedom--<page 109>

 

Gamaliel--<page 14>, <page 62>, <page 63>, <page 64>, <page 161>

Gamaliel II--<page 51>, <page 55>

[p. 178]

Gamaliel III--<page 78>

Gamaliel VI--<page 74>

Gemara--<page xvii>, <page 23>-<page 26>, <page 27>, <page 74>, <page 83>--Palestinian, <page 23>

Gezera--<page 10>

Ginzberg, Louis--<page xviii>, <page xix>

God, attributes of--<page 86>, <page 87>, <page 88>; existence of--<page 85>; imitation of--<page 127>

Good will--<page 123>, <page 124>

Goldin, Judah--<page xix>

Goldschmidt, Lazarus--<page xviii>

Gratus, Valerius--<page 44>

Great Assembly--<page 30>, <page 31>, <page 34>

Gregory IX--<page xii>

 

Habit--<page 153>

Hadrian--<page 10>, <page 64>, <page 67>

Haggadah--<page 13>, <page 23>, <page 56>

Hakam--<page 69>

Halakah--<page 9>, <page 18>, <page 23>

Hananiah--<page 76>, <page 77>

Hanina ben Dosa--<page 90>

Hanukkah--<page 10>

Hasid--<page 141>

Health--<page 132>, <page 133>

Hellas--<page 64>

Heller, Yom Tob Lippman--<page x>

Herford, I. Trevers--<page xviii>

Herod the Great--<page 44>

Hillel--<page 11>, <page 41>, <page 54>, <page 58>, <page 68>, <page 76>, <page 124>, <page 125>, <page 126>, <page 132>

Hillel II--<page 74>

Humanitarianism--<page 111>

Humility--<page 122>, <page 123>

Huna--<page 14>

Hyrcan II--<page 39>

 

Idolatry--<page 137>

Ilai--<page 154>

Innocent IV--<page xv>

Interpretation, judicial--<page 143>

Inwardness--<page 146>, <page 147>, <page 148>

Iserles, Moses--<page x>

Ishmael--<page 25>, <page 42>

Israel, election of--<page 95>, <page 96>

 

Jabneh--<page 51>, <page 54>, <page 55>, <page 63>, <page 64>, <page 67>, <page 71>

Jaffe, Mordecai--<page x>

Jannai (Rabbi)--<page 7>

Jealousy--<page 122>

Jeremiah (Rabbi)--<page 8>

Jews, under Rome--<page 40>, <page 42>, <page 43>, <page 44>, <page 45>, <page 53>, <page 65>, <page 66>, <page 67>, <page 73>, <page 76>, <page 116>, <page 117>

Johanan--<page 72>, <page 73>, <page 78>

Johanan ben Zaccai--<page 41>, <page 49>, <page 50>, <page 51>, <page 58>, <page 62>

John Hyrcanus--<page 38>

Jonathan ben Joseph--<page 12>

Jose ben Halafa--<page 67>

Jose ben Kisma--<page 66>

Jose the Galilean--<page 66>

Joseph (Rabbi)--<page 24>

Josephus--<page 47>, <page 48>

Joshua--<page 11>, <page 14>

Joshua (Rabbi)--<page 8>, <page 56>, <page 61>, <page 62>, <page 63>

Joshua ben Gamala--<page 24>

Joshua ben Hananiah--<page 54>, <page 58>, <page 76>, <page 151>

Judah (Rabbi)--<page 20>, <page 25>

Judah I--<page 69>, <page 71>, <page 78>, <page 79>, <page 82>

Judah II--<page 71>, <page 73>

Judah ben Baba--<page 67>

Judah ben Ilai--<page 67>

Judah Loew (Rabbi)--<page xii>

Judah the Prince--<page 19>, <page 146>, <page 158>

Judas--<page 46>

Judas Maccabeus--<page 33>

Jupiter--<page 64>, <page 65>

Dr. Justus--<page xiv>

 

Kalla--<page 81>

Karaites--<page x>, <page xi>

Karo, Joseph--<page x>

Katzya--<page 26>

Kybises--<page 162>

 

Labor, dignity of--<page 106>

Law and Life--<page 12>

Law and Justice--<page 140>, <page 141>, <page 142>, <page 143>; and the State--<page 145>, <page 146>

Law, authority of--<page 57>, <page 58>; circumvention of--<page 11>; codification of,--<page x>; content of--<page 135>, <page 136>; flexibility of--<page 139>; growth of--<page 143>; values of--<page 135>, <page 136>

Legislation--<page 10>

Levi ha-Saddar--<page 25>

Life, confidence in--<page 121>, <page 122>

Luria, Solomon--<page x>

 

Makshaah, Ephraim--<page 166>

Maccabees--<page 37>, <page 39>, <page 40>

Man, nature of--<page 92>, <page 93>, <page 103>, <page 104>; purpose of--<page 90>; sanctity of--<page 104>, <page 105>, <page 106>, <page 117>

Marriage--<page 111>

Martha--<page 24>

Mattathias--<page 32>

Meir--<page 20>, <page 67>, <page 71>, <page 162>, <page 163>, <page 166>

[p. 179]

Memory aids--<page 159>, <page 160>

Messiah--<page 100>, <page 101>

Messianic times--<page 148>, <page 149>

Metuentes--<page 119>

Midrash--<page 9>, <page 10>, <page 12>, <page 18>

Midrash haggadah--<page 13>-<page 16>

Midrash halakah--<page 9>, <page 13>

Midrashim--<page 16>, <page 23>, <page 27>

Minhag--<page 3>, <page 148>

Miracles--<page 89>-<page 90>

Mishnah--xvii, <page 19>-<page 21>, <page 27>, <page 71>, <page 72>, <page 74>, <page 78>, <page 79>, <page 81>, <page 83>

Mithridates I--<page 75>

Moderation--<page 130>, <page 131>, <page 132>

Moody, Joseph N.--<page xvii>

Moore, George Foote--<page 118>

Morality, source of--<page 91>, <page 92>

 

Nasi--<page 54>, <page 58>

Nathan--<page 9>, <page 76>

Nation, attitude toward--<page 116>

Nebuchadnezzer--<page 74>

Noeldeke, Theodor--<page xiv>

Non--Jews, attitude toward--<page 105>, <page 118>, <page 119>

 

Oral Torah--<page 27>

 

Palestine, under Persian rule--<page 31>

Papa--<page 166>

Parables and Proverbs--<page 160>-<page 167>

Patience--<page 125>

Patriarch--<page 27>

Patriarchate, abolition of--<page 74>

Peace--<page 126>

Peroz--<page 27>, <page 82>

Phanias ben Samuel--<page 46>

Pharisees--<page 33>, <page 34>, <page 36>, <page 37>, <page 38>, <page 39>, <page 42>, <page 57>, <page 117>, <page 145>

Pinhas ben Yair--<page 90>, <page 129>

Pompey--<page 33>, <page 40>

Poor relief--<page 110>

Pranaitis, Justin--<page xv>, <page xvi>

Pride--<page 122>, <page 123>

Property, status of--<page 110>

Prosbul--<page 11>, <page 41>

Prophecy--<page 94>, <page 95>

Proselytes--<page 96>

Psychology--<page 151>, <page 154>-<page 160>

Rab--<page 78>, <page 79>, <page 80>, <page 81>

Raba--<page 81>, <page 92>, <page 154>, <page 155>

Rabban--<page 51>

Rabbi, title of--<page 52>

Rabina--<page 82>, <page 83>

Rebellion against Rome--<page 46>, <page 47>, <page 48>

Rebellion against Rome, renewal of--<page 63>-<page 65>, <page 73>

Repentance--<page 146>, <page 147>

Resh Galuta--<page 75>, <page 76>, <page 78>

Resh Lakish--<page 55>, <page 130>

Revolt, Maccabean--<page 12>

Reuchlin, Johann von--<page xvi>

Rohling, August--<page xiii>, <page xv>, <page xvi>

Rufus--<page 28>

 

Sadducees--<page 36>, <page 37>, <page 38>, <page 137>, <page 138>, <page 139>, <page 140>, <page 145>

Salome, Alexandra--<page 39>

Samuel--<page 12>, <page 78>, <page 80>, <page 81>, <page 152>

Samuel the Modest--<page 5>

Sanhedrin--<page 34>, <page 35>, <page 39>, <page 42>, <page 45>, <page 51>, <page 54>, <page 57>, <page 58>, <page 62>, <page 64>, <page 68>, <page 69>, <page 73>, <page 76>, <page 77>

Schwab, M.--<page xviii>

Sedarim--<page 19>

Seleucus--<page 31>, <page 75>

Septuagint--<page 56>

Serapis--<page 65>

Seven Noahite laws--<page 96>

Shammai--<page 41>, <page 58>

Shapur--<page 152>

Shemaya--<page 42>

Shila--<page 78>

Shulhan Aruk--<page x>, <page xiv>

Simeon--<page 69>

Simeon ben Gamaliel--<page 41>, <page 68>

Simean ben Gamaliel III--<page 76>, <page 126>

Simeon ben Gamaliel III--<page 76>, <page 126>, <page 129>

Simeon ben Johai--<page 67>

Simeon ben Menasyah--<page 25>

Simeon ben Shetah--<page 38>, <page 39>, <page 130>

Simeon the Just--<page 31>

Simlai--<page 91>

Slavery--<page 105>, <page 106>

Sopherim--<page 29>, <page 30>

Solomon--<page 6>, <page 11>, <page 166>

Speculation--<page 86>

State, attitude toward--<page 145>, <page 146>

Strack, Hermann--<page xviii>

Subconscious--<page 151>

Suffering--<page 99>, <page 100>

Syrian--Greeks--<page 12>

 

Takanna--<page 10>

Talmud and anti-semitism--<page xiii>-<page xvii> censorship of--<page xii>; controversy in--<page 144>; criticism of--<page xi>;

[p. 180]

definition of--<page 5>; defense of--<page xii>, <page xvi>-<page xvii>; development of--<page xvii>; final edition of--<page 27>; Palestinian and Babylonian contrasted--<page xvii>-<page xviii>, <page 23>, <page 27>; public burning of--<page xii>; studies on--<page xvii>-<page xix>; translations of--<page xviii>

Tannaim--<page 71>

Tarfon--<page 66>, <page 129>

Torah--<page 97>

Tosefta--<page 21>, <page 22>, <page 23>, <page 27>

Truth--<page 129>

 

Usha--<page 67>, <page 68>, <page 69>, <page 77>

 

Val, Merry del--<page xv>

Venus--<page 65>

 

Wine--<page 131>

Wisdom--<page 151>

Women--<page 156>, <page 157>

Wuensche, August--<page xiv>

 

Yezdegerd--<page 27>

Yezdegerd II--<page 82>

 

Zaderecki, Thadeus--<page xvii>

Zera--<page 163>

Zscholk, Hofrat--<page xiii>

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: wov.txt =====


    
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2] [p. 3]

The Wisdom of the East Series

EDITED BY

L. CRANMER-BYNG

Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE BUDDHA'S

  

"WAY OF VIRTUE"

  

A TRANSLATION OF THE DHAMMAPADA

  

FROM THE PALI TEXT

  

BY W. D. C. WAGISWARA

AND

  

K. J. SAUNDERS

MEMBERS OF THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, CEYLON BRANCH

  

LONDON

  

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

  

[1920]

  

THE BUDDHIST IDEAL

"Eschew all evil: cherish good: cleanse your inmost thoughts--this is the teaching of Buddhas."

                                                                                                                                  Dhammapada, 183.

"Everything has two handles, the one by which it may be carried, the other by which it may not... Lay hold of the handle by which it can be carried."

                                                                                                                     EPICTETUS (Encheiridion xliii).

[p. 4] [p. 5] [p. 6]

FIRST EDITION...July 1912

Reprinted...October 1920

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

TO

N.P.C.

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, March-April 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

CONTENTS

          INTRODUCTION

        

       <page 9>

     
      NOTE

        

       <page 19>

     
      EDITORIAL NOTE

        

       <page 20>

     
       section I.

       THE TWIN TRUTHS

       <page 21>

     
       section II.

       ZEAL

       <page 24>

     
       section III.

       THE MIND

       <page 26>

     
       section IV.

       FLOWERS

       <page 28>

     
       section V.

       THE FOOL

       <page 30>

     
       section VI.

       THE WISE MAN

       <page 32>

     
       section VII.

       THE ARAHAT

       <page 34>

     
       section VIII.

       THE THOUSANDS

       <page 36>

     
       section IX.

       VICE

       <page 38>

     
       section X.

       PUNISHMENT

       <page 40>

     
       section XI.

       OLD AGE

       <page 42>

     
       section XII.

       SELF

       <page 44>

     
       section XIII.

       THE WORLD

       <page 46>

     
       section XIV.

       THE BUDDHA

       <page 48>

     
       section XV.

       BLISS

       <page 51>

     
      [p. 8]

        

        

     
       section XVI.

       AFFECTION

       <page 53>

     
       section XVII.

       ANGER

       <page 55>

     
       section XVIII.

       SIN

       <page 57>

     
       section XIX.

       THE RIGHTEOUS

       <page 60>

     
       section XX.

       THE PATH

       <page 62>

     
       section XXI.

       MISCELLANY

       <page 66>

     
       section XXII.

       HELL

       <page 68>

     
       section XXIII.

       THE ELEPHANT

       <page 70>

     
       section XXIV.

       DESIRE

       <page 72>

     
       section XXV.

       THE BHIKKHU

       <page 76>

     
       sectionXXVI.

       THE BRAHMIN

       <page 79>

     
      NOTES

        

       <page 85>

     
      ILLUSTRATIVE SAYINGS OF THE DISCIPLES OF THE BUDDHA

       <page 100>

     
      APPENDIX:

       THE BUDDHIST IDEA

       <page 102>

     
   
     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

INTRODUCTION

  

 section I

THE Dhammapada was accepted at the Council of Asoka in 240 B.C. as a collection of the sayings of Gautama; yet it was not put into writing until some generations had passed, and probably contains accretions of later date.

However that may be, there is no doubt that it breathes the very spirit of the Teacher, and it has always been used in Buddhist lands as a handbook of "devotion" or meditation, in whose solemn precepts men hear the voice of Sakyamuni summoning them to the life of contemplation, of strenuous mind-culture. The world, it tells them, is without permanence or purpose, other than that of expiation; the body is "a nest of disease" and the seat of "desire"; the mind itself is subject to decay, and capricious, easily led away after false pursuits.

Yet here, in the mind of man, lies his hope of salvation: he may make it a strong tower of defence. Though the world is out of gear,

[p. 10]

yet, like the Stoic, he may build within himself a kingdom and be at peace.

And so the call to "play the man" rings out with sturdy confidence. All men may attain, if they will, to happiness and serenity, for, with a modern Stoic, the Buddhist proclaims:

"I am the master of my fate;
      I am the captain of my soul."

Gautama then was no thoroughgoing pessimist; that such a nature was pessimistic at all is due to the age in which he lived. It was the "sub-conscious mind" of his nation, and not his own brave spirit, that shut him in to the belief in a ceaseless flux of "becoming," a weary round of pain and retribution. For, by the sixth century B.C., India had passed from the sunny paganism of the Rig Veda into a more thoughtful and more gloomy phase of her religious development.

There were not wanting heroic spirits who offered a way of escape, urging men to plunge into asceticism or to court the mystic trance. These were the religious leaders of the day, at whose feet Gautama sat. Others, the great majority, were not ready for such heroic measures. They tried to square the gods, and to live unmolested, or to forget all in the pleasures of sense or the more subtle joys of the intellect.

To Gautama, all alike seemed "to follow

[p. 11]

wandering fires." How degrading this thraldom to immoral and capricious gods! How empty and unsatisfying this mysticism when shorn of all ethical content! Which is more to be pitied, the grasping priest or the foolish worshipper? Which more deluded, the worldling or the devotee?

To all alike the Dhammapada has a message of warning and encouragement: to the worldling it holds out the promise of a truer wealth and fame (75, 303) and a more blessed family life (204-7, 302); to the warrior it offers a higher "chivalry" (270) and a more heroic contest (103, 104); to the philosopher a deeper wisdom than much speaking (28, 100, 258); to the mystic a purer and more lasting bliss (197-200); to the devotee a more fruitful sacrifice (106 -7); and to the Brahmin a more ennobling service ( section xxvi) and a more compelling authority (73, 74). It is, in fact, possible largely to reconstruct the religious life of Gautama's day from the stanzas of the Dhammapada.

For all classes the Buddha has the same message: the great reality is character; all else are shadows not worth pursuing, for none of them strengthens moral fibre, and all alike are tainted with "desire."

Like Socrates, he saw in himself a physician of the soul, and at times he resorted to surgery to "stab the spirit broad awake," to call men from superstition on the one hand and materialism

[p. 12]

on the other. With Epictetus he would have said, "A philosopher's school, my friends, is a surgery, on leaving which you look to have felt, not pleasure but pain."

Men needed above all things a moral tonic; there lies the secret at once of his stoicism and his agnosticism; luxury here, a barren mysticism there--these were sapping men's strength, and all the energy they could command was needed in the fight for character. They must strive and agonise to "cut out desire," to push their way "against the stream," to cross life's stormy "ocean" and reach the haven of peace. And they must do it alone, not trusting to priest, or sacrifice, or the help of Heaven.

For this insistence upon morality to the exclusion of "religion" Gautama is often labelled "atheist." Nothing could be more unfair: agnostic he may have been or seemed to be; but his was no irreligious spirit: the man who scoffs at the "other world" he condemns in uncompromising terms, and Ethics so lofty as this "Way of Virtue" never emanated from any but a reverent spirit. It is one of the puzzles of Psychology that so pure a soul ever stopped short at Ethics; yet we must remember that he was a reformer, that reformers are apt to be one-sided, and that during long and painful years he had suffered at the hands of a false "religiosity"; the iron had entered into his soul.

[p. 13]

"If Buddhists admit neither judge nor creator," says Professor de la Vallee Poussin, "at least they recognise a sovereign and infallible justice--a justice of wonderful insight and adaptability, however mechanically it acts... In my opinion it is a calumny to accuse Buddhists of atheism: they have, at any rate, taken full cognisance of one of the aspects of the divine." [**]

Gautama believed above all things in a moral order, which, if it is inexorable, is also too righteous to yield to sacrificial bribes:

"Not in the sky, nor in mid-ocean, nor in mountain-cave, can one find sanctuary from his sin... Often do men in terror seek sanctuary in mountains and in jungles, by sacred groves or trees: in them there is no safe sanctuary." (Dhammapada, 127, 188-9.)

So too the Psalmist cries, "Whither shall I flee from Thy presence? If I ascend into heaven, Thou art there: if I go down to hell, Thou art there also."

Like the Hebrew prophet, too, he strikes a note of strenuous endeavour, of profound dissatisfaction with the actual, and of aspiration after the ideal: unlike the Hebrew and the Christian, he sees in the actual no promise of the ideal. His "way of salvation" is therefore monastic; men are to leave the world if they would escape suffering and be truly happy: the layman may one day attain the far-off goal,

[p. 14]

but for him remains a long and weary pilgrimage, many revolutions of the wheel of existence.

It is to Bhikkhus then that these stanzas are in the main addressed. They are comments made by the Teacher to his disciples as occasion arose; and to study them in a sympathetic spirit we of the West must for a time forget our impatience with "cloistered virtue." The saintly life in the world is no doubt a truer ideal than the saintly life out of it, yet saintliness of any type is not to be despised.

The Buddhist holds that in contemplative activity a man may best serve the world: is it not true that "we need reservoirs of every kind of excellence"? We read in the Dhammapada of the fragrance of holy deeds which pervades the high heavens, and of the light that such a life may cast athwart a dark world. The "religious" is more to be envied than kings or even gods, and more fruitful.

"Good is kingship of the earth;
 Good attaining heavenly birth:
 World-conquest's good, but better far
 The fruits of true conversion are."
                      (Dhammapada, 178.)

These fruits are "self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control" (cf. 261); self-culture is in the end the truest benevolence, says the Buddhist, and the deepest wisdom. That "wisdom" of which we shall hear so much in the following

[p. 15]

pages, is "a certain over-mastering principle or power, that lays hold, primarily indeed, of the intellect, but through the intellect of the entire personality, moulding and disciplining the will and the emotions into absolute unison with itself, a principle from which courage, temperance, justice, and every other virtue inevitably flow." [**]

"A man is not wise by much speaking...He is the wise man who is forgiving, kindly, and without fear."
 (Dhammapada, 258.)

[paragraph continues] For Gautama sees in ignorance not merely a calamity, but also a moral fault; he agrees with the Darwinians in recognising in man the ape and the tiger, but adds, with Dr. Creighton, that "when the ape and the tiger go, there still remains the donkey, a far more formidable beast." [*+]

Moha, infatuation, and Avijja, ignorance, are everywhere, and "Ignorance is the greatest of taints, more destructive than avarice and impurity." (Ibid., 242, 243.)

He himself was the "enlightened," "the seer" who by insight had won emancipation, and he teaches that if men will only see things as they are, then they cannot but eschew evil and do good; but the great multitude are

[p. 16]

fools and blind. To give them new ideals and to lift the veil off their darkened hearts--this was the work of Gautama, and in attempting it he revealed a sturdy optimism and a magnetic personality which went far to energise his ideal. These qualities place him high amongst ethical teachers.

  

 section II

And what shall we say of his system as religion? The student of these pages will find himself in a moonlit world, beautiful yet cold:

"A common greyness silvers everything."

[paragraph continues] Here is no "sunset touch," no mystic hint of Him "whose dwelling is the light of setting suns"; our hearts are not stirred as we read by any assurance of the reality of the Unseen.

Mysticism in short finds no entrance here--a fact which makes the Dhammapada almost unique amongst the great things of religious literature. Instead we find "common sense" supreme, mathematical, and a little cold, yet confident of itself and of its firm grasp of all the factors in life's equation. Instead of passion and romance we shall find self-mastery and a half-humorous sweet reasonableness. Everywhere Law is at work, and there is nothing besides: no hint of whence law emanates, of how it works, or why. These are questions alike

[p. 17]

unprofitable and unanswerable. It is enough, the Buddha would say, that the world makes for righteousness, that sin is punished, and that goodness does not go unrewarded. "As you sow, so shall you reap." Happiness is the bloom upon virtue; sorrow is the blight upon sin: and this is the ultimate motive to the strenuous life.

"Is such a world worth while?" asks full-blooded Youth. "And is a calm like this enough?" "The world," comes the serene answer, "is worth nothing at all: it has no reality and no purpose, save that of retribution: man's only happiness is to escape. The calm and peaceful frame of mind is the only happy one, the promise of a Rest hereafter, ineffable and placid: to this man can and must attain."

K. J. S.

TRINITY COLLEGE, KANDY.
 Eastertide, 1912.

Footnotes

^13:* Bouddhisme, p. 70.

^15:* Dr. J. Adam, The Religious Teachers of Greece, p. 329.

^15:+ Tibetan Buddhism illustrates these three cardinal vices by pictures of the cock (lust), the snake (anger), and the hog (stupidity).

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18] [p. 19]

  

NOTE

AN accurate and sympathetic knowledge of Buddhism and of the spirit of the Buddha is best got from such a book as the Dhammapada, which contains the concentrated essence of the religion. In view of widespread misinterpretation, a literal and accessible translation of this book, therefore, needs no apology. I have worked at the translation throughout with my friend Mr. Wagiswara, himself a Buddhist, and for many years a Bhikkhu; that fact and the appearance of our translation in this series will vouch for sympathetic treatment in the rendering. It is notoriously difficult to find the exact English equivalents of Eastern terms, yet we trust that the spirit has been truly reproduced, and our version aims rather at accuracy than at elegance. Great thoughts are best "plain-set," and moreover it is impossible to reproduce the music of the old slokas of Indian poetry. We have referred frequently to Dr. Fausboll's Latin version, and occasionally to Professor Max Muller's edition in "The Sacred Books of the East." Only where the Sinhalese and Chinese commentaries are really illuminating have I referred to them in the notes, for which I am chiefly responsible.

K. J. S.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

EDITORIAL NOTE

THE object of the Editors of this series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour.

L. CRANMER-BYNG.
 S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
       21 CROMWELL ROAD,
             KENSINGTON, S.W.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

THE BUDDHA'S

  

"WAY OF VIRTUE"

  

 section I

  

THE TWIN TRUTHS

FOR the proper understanding of Buddhism these opening stanzas are all-important. One of the Buddha's key-thoughts was what modern psychologists call the "law of apperception": the value of things depends upon our attitude to them.

Part of Gautama's work of reform was a "transvaluation of values," a shifting of emphasis; and, like the Stoics, he taught the indifference of the things of sense. "Men are disturbed," said Epictetus, "not by things, but by the view they take of things."

1. Mind it is which gives to things their quality, their foundation, and their being: whoso speaks or acts with impure mind, him sorrow dogs, as the wheel follows the steps of the draught-ox.

2. Mind it is which gives to things their quality,

[p. 22]

their foundation, and their being: whoso speaks or acts with purified mind, him happiness accompanies as his faithful shadow.

3. "He has abused me, beaten me, worsted me, robbed me"; those who dwell upon such thoughts never lose their hate.

4. "He has abused me, beaten me, worsted me, robbed me "; those who dwell: not upon such thoughts are freed of hate.

5. Never does hatred cease by hating; by not hating does it cease: this is the ancient law.

6. If some there are who know not by such hatred we are perishing, and some there are who know it, then by their knowledge strife is ended.

7. As the wind throws down a shaky tree, so Mara (Death) o'erwhelms him who is a seeker after vanity, uncontrolled, intemperate, slothful, and effeminate.

8. But whoso keeps his eyes from vanity, controlled and temperate, faithful and strenuous, Mara cannot overthrow, as the wind beating against a rocky crag.

9. Though an impure man don the pure yellow robe (of the Bhikkhu), himself unindued with temperance and truth, he is not worthy of the pure yellow robe.

10. He who has doffed his impurities, calm and clothed upon with temperance and truth, he wears the pure robe worthily.

11. Those who mistake the shadow for the

[p. 23]

substance, and the substance for the shadow, never attain the reality, following wandering fires (lit. followers of a false pursuit).

12. But if a man knows the substance and the shadow as they are, he attains the reality, following the true trail.

13. As the rain pours into the ill-thatched house, so lust pours into the undisciplined mind.

14. As rain cannot enter the well-thatched house, so lust finds no entry into the disciplined mind.

15. Here and hereafter the sinner mourns: yea mourns and is in torment, knowing the vileness of his deeds.

16. Here and hereafter the good man is glad: yea is glad and rejoices, knowing that his deeds are pure.

17. Here and hereafter the sinner is in torment: tormented by the thought "I have sinned"; yea rather tormented when he goes to hell.

18. Here and hereafter the good man rejoices; rejoices as he thinks "I have done well": yea rather rejoices when he goes to a heaven.

19. If a man is a great preacher of the sacred text, but slothful and no doer of it, he is a hireling shepherd, who has no part in the flock.

20. If a man preaches but a little of the text and practises the teaching, putting away lust and hatred and infatuation; if he is truly wise and detached and seeks nothing here or hereafter, his lot is with the holy ones.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

 section II

  

ZEAL

ZEAL or earnestness (appamado) plays an important part in Buddhist Ethics. The way is steep, therefore let the wayfarer play the man.

Zeal may be displayed either in strenuous mind-culture or in deeds of piety--these are the equivalents of "Faith" and "Works" in the Buddhist system.

21. Zeal is the way to Nirvana. Sloth is the day of death. The zealous die not: the slothful are as it were dead.

22. The wise who know the power of zeal delight in it, rejoicing in the lot of the noble.

23. These wise ones by meditation and reflection, by constant effort reach Nirvana, highest freedom.

24. Great grows the glory of him who is zealous in meditation, whose actions are pure and deliberate, whose life is calm and righteous and full of vigour.

25. By strenuous effort, by self-control, by

[p. 25]

temperance, let the wise man make for himself an island which the flood cannot overwhelm.

26. Fools in their folly give themselves to sloth: the wise man guards his vigour as his greatest possession.

27. Give not yourselves over to sloth, and to dalliance with delights: he who meditates with earnestness attains great joy.

28. When the wise one puts off sloth for zeal, ascending the high tower of wisdom he gazes sorrowless upon the sorrowing crowd below! Wise himself, he looks upon the fools as one upon a mountain-peak gazing upon the dwellers in the valley.

29. Zealous amidst the slothful, vigilant among the sleepers, go the prudent, as a racehorse outstrips a hack.

30. By zeal did Sakra reach supremacy among the gods. Men praise zeal; but sloth is always blamed.

31. A Bhikkhu who delights in zeal, looking askance at sloth, moves onwards like a fire, burning the greater and the lesser bonds.

32. A Bhikkhu who delights in zeal, looking askance at sloth, cannot be brought low, but is near to Nirvana. [**]

Footnotes

^25:* Better, perhaps, "in the very presence of Nirvana"

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

 section III

  

THE MIND

33. THIS trembling, wavering mind, so difficult to guard and to control--this the wise man makes straight as the fletcher straightens his shaft.

34. As quivers the fish when thrown upon the ground, far from his home in the waters, so the mind quivers as it leaves the realm of Death.

35. Good it is to tame the mind, so difficult to control, fickle, and capricious. Blessed is the tamed mind.

36. Let the wise man guard his mind, incomprehensible, subtle, and capricious though it is. Blessed is the guarded mind.

37. They will escape the fetters of Death who control that far-wandering, solitary, incorporeal cave-dweller, the mind.

38. In him who is unstable and ignorant of the law and capricious in his faith, wisdom is not perfected.

39. There is no fear in him, the vigilant one

[p. 27]

whose mind is not befouled with lust, nor embittered with rage, who cares nought for merit or demerit.

40. Let him who knows that his body is brittle as a potsherd, make his mind strong as a fortress; let him smite Mara with the sword of wisdom, and let him guard his conquest without dalliance.

41. Soon will this body lie upon the ground, deserted, and bereft of sense, like a log cast aside.

42. Badly does an enemy treat his enemy, a foeman his foe: worse is the havoc wrought by a misdirected mind.

43. Not mother and father, not kith and kin can so benefit a man as a mind attentive to the rights.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

 section IV

  

FLOWERS

44. WHO shall conquer this world, and the realm of Death with its attendant gods? Who shall sort the verses of the well-preached Law, as a clever weaver of garlands sorts flowers?

45. My disciple shall conquer this world and Death with its attendant gods: it is he who shall sort the verses of the well-preached Law as a clever garland-maker sorts flowers.

46. Let him escape the eye of Mara, regarding his body as froth, knowing it as a mirage, plucking out the flowery shafts of Mara.

47. He who is busy culling pleasures, as one plucks flowers, Death seizes and hurries off, as a great flood bears away a sleeping village.

48. The Destroyer treads him underfoot as he is culling worldly pleasures, still unsated with lusts of the flesh.

49. As a bee taking honey from flowers, without hurt to bloom or scent, so let the sage seek his food from house to house.

60. Be not concerned with other men's evil

[p. 29]

words or deeds or neglect of good: look rather to thine own sins and negligence (lit. "sins of commission and omission": things done and undone).

51. As some bright flower--fair to look at, but lacking fragrance--so are fair words which bear no fruit in action.

52. As some bright flower, fragrant as it is fair, so are fair words whose fruit is seen in action.

53. As if from a pile of flowers one were to weave many a garland, so let mortals string together much merit.

54. No scent of flower is borne against the wind, though it were sandal, or incense or jasmine: but the fragrance of the holy is borne against the wind: the righteous pervade all space (with their fragrance).

55. More excellent than the scent of sandal and incense, of lily and jasmine, is the fragrance of good deeds.

56. A slight thing is this scent of incense and of sandal-wood, but the scent of the holy pervades the highest heaven.

57. Death finds not the path of the righteous and strenuous, who are set free by their perfect wisdom.

58, 59. As on some roadside dung-heap, a flower blooms fragrant and delightful, so amongst the refuse of blinded mortals shines forth in wisdom the follower of the true Buddha.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

 section V

  

THE FOOL [**]

60. LONG is the night to the watcher, long is the league to the weary traveller: long is the chain of existence to fools who ignore the true Law.

61. If on a journey thou canst not find thy peer or one better than thyself, make the journey stoutly alone: there is no company with a fool.

62. "I have sons and wealth," thinks the fool with anxious care; he is not even master of himself, much less of sons and wealth.

63. The fool who knows his folly is so far wise: but the fool who reckons himself wise is called a fool indeed.

64. Though for a lifetime the fool keeps company with the wise, yet does he not learn righteousness, as spoon gets no taste of soup.

65. If but for a moment the thoughtful keep company with the wise, straightway he learns righteousness, as tongue tastes soup.

66. Fools and dolts go their way, their own

[p. 31]

worst enemies; working evil which bears bitter fruit.

67. That is no good deed which brings remorse, whose reward one receives with tears and lamentation.

68. But that is the good deed which brings no remorse, whose reward the doer takes with joy and gladness.

69. Honey sweet to the fool is his sin--until it ripens: then he comes to grief.

70. If once a month the fool sips his food from a blade of the sacred grass--his is no fraction of the Arahat's worth.

71. Evil does not straightway curdle like milk, but is rather like a smouldering fire which attends the fool and burns him.

72. When the fool's wisdom bears evil fruit it bursts asunder his happiness, and smashes his head.

73, 74. If one desire the praise of knaves, or leadership amongst the Bhikkhus, and lordship in the convents, and the reverence of the laity, thinking "Let layman and religious alike appreciate my deeds; let them do my bidding and obey my prohibitions," if such be his fond imaginings, then will ambition and self-will wax great.

75. One is the road leading to gain, another is that leading to Nirvana: knowing this, let the Bhikkhu, the follower of Buddha, strive in solitude, not seeking the praise of men.

Footnotes

^30:* cf. Introduction, pp. 14, 15.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

 section VI

  

THE WISE MAN

76. LOOK upon him who shows you your faults as a revealer of treasure: seek his company who checks and chides you, the sage who is wise in reproof: it fares well and not ill with him who seeks such company.

77. Let a man admonish, and advise, and keep others from strife! So will he be dear to the righteous, and hated by the unrighteous.

78. Avoid bad friends, avoid the company of the evil: seek after noble friends and men of lofty character.

79. He who drinks in the law lives glad, for his mind is serene: in the law preached by the Noble the sage ever finds his joy.

80. Engineers control the water; fletchers straighten the arrow; carpenters fashion their wood. Sages control and fashion themselves.

81. As some massive rock stands unmoved by the storm-wind, so the wise stand unmoved by praise or blame.

[p. 33]

82. As a deep lake, clear and undefiled, so are sages calmed by hearing the law.

83. Freely go the righteous; the holy ones do not whine and pine for lusts; unmoved by success or failure, the wise show no change of mood.

84. Desire not a son for thyself nor for another, nor riches nor a kingdom; desire not thy gain by another's loss; so art thou righteous, wise, and good.

85. Few amongst men are they who reach the farther shore: the rest, a great multitude, stand only on the bank.

86. The righteous followers of the well-preached law, these are the mortals who reach the far shore. But hard is their journey through the realm of Death.

87, 88. Leaving the way of darkness, let the sage cleave to the way of light: let him leave home for the homeless life, that solitude so hard to love (Nirvana). Putting away lust and possessing nothing, let the sage cleanse himself from every evil thought.

89. They are serene in this world, whose mind is perfected in that clear thought which leads to Arahatship, whose delight is in renunciation, free from taints, and lustrous.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

 section VII

  

THE ARAHAT

90. NO remorse is found in him whose journey is accomplished, whose sorrow ended, whose freedom complete, whose chains are all shaken off.

91. The mindful press on, casting no look behind to their home-life; as swans deserting a pool they leave their dear home.

92. Some there are who have no treasure here, temperate ones whose goal is the freedom which comes of realising that life is empty and impermanent: their steps are hard to track as the flight of birds through the sky.

93. He whose taints are purged away, who is indifferent to food, whose goal is the freedom which comes of realising life's emptiness and transciency, is hard to track as the flight of birds in the sky.

94. Even the gods emulate him whose senses are quiet as horses well-tamed by the charioteer, who has renounced self-will, and put away all taints.

95. No more will he be born whose patience

[p. 35]

is as the earth's, who is firm as a pillar and pious, pure as some unruffled lake.

96. Calm is the thought, calm the words and deeds of such a one, who has by wisdom attained true freedom and self-control.

97. Excellent is the man who is not credulous, who knows Nirvana, who has cut all bonds, destroyed the germs of rebirth, cast off lust.

98. In the village or the jungle, on sea or land, wherever lives the Arahat, there is the place of delight.

99. Pleasant are the glades where the herd come not to disport themselves: there shall the Holy take their pleasure, who seek not after lust.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

 section VIII

  

THE THOUSANDS

100. BETTER than a thousand empty words is one pregnant word, which brings the hearer peace.

101. Better than a thousand idle songs is a single song, which brings the hearer peace.

102. Better it is to chant one verse of the law, that brings the hearer peace, than to chant a hundred empty songs.

103. If one were to conquer a thousand thousand in the battle--he who conquers self is the greatest warrior.

104, 105. Self-conquest is better than other victories: neither god nor demi-god, neither Mara nor Brahma, can undo the victory of such a one, who is self-controlled and always calm.

106. If month by month throughout a hundred years one were to offer sacrifices costing thousands, and if for a moment another were to reverence the self-controlled--this is the better worship.

107. If one for a hundred years tended the

[p. 37]

sacred fire in the glade, and another for a moment reverenced the self-controlled, this is the better worship.

108. Whatsoever sacrifice or offering a man makes for a full year in hope of benefits, all is not worth a quarter of that better offering--reverence to the upright.

109. In him who is trained in constant courtesy and reverence to the old, four qualities increase: length of days, beauty, gladness, and strength.

110. Better than a hundred years of impure and intemperate existence is a single day of moral, contemplative life.

111. Better is one day of wise and contemplative life than a thousand years of folly and intemperance.

112. Better one day of earnest energy than a hundred years of sloth and lassitude.

113. Better one day of insight into the fleeting nature of the things of sense, than a hundred years of blindness to this transiency.

114. Better one day of insight into the deathless state (Nirvana), than a hundred years of blindness to this immortality.

115. Better one day of insight into the Supreme Law, than a hundred years of blindness to that Law.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

 section IX

  

VICE

116. CLING to what is right: so will you keep the mind from wrong. Whoso is slack in well-doing comes to rejoice in evil.

117. If one offends, let him not repeat his offence; let him not set his heart upon it. Sad is the piling up of sin.

118. If one does well, let him repeat his well-doing: let him set his heart upon it. Glad is the storing up of good.

119. The bad man sees good days, until his wrong-doing ripens; then he beholds evil days.

120. Even a good man may see evil days till his well-doing comes to fruition; then he beholds good days.

121. Think not lightly of evil "It will not come nigh me." Drop by drop the pitcher is filled: slowly yet surely the fool is saturated with evil.

122. Think not lightly of good "It will not come nigh me." Drop by drop the pitcher is

[p. 39]

filled: slowly yet surely the good are filled with merit.

123. A trader whose pack is great and whose caravan is small shuns a dangerous road; a man who loves his life shuns poison: so do thou shun evil.

124. He who has no wound can handle poison: the unwounded hand cannot absorb it. There is no evil to him that does no evil.

125. Whoso is offended by the inoffensive man, and whoso blames an innocent man, his evil returns upon him as fine dust thrown against the wind.

126. Some go to the womb; some, evil-doers, to hell; the good go to heaven; the sinless to Nirvana.

127. Not in the sky, nor in mid-ocean, nor in mountain-cave can one find sanctuary from his sins.

128. Not in the sky, not in mid-ocean, not in mountain-cave can one find release from the conquering might of death.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

  

 section X

  

PUNISHMENT

129. ALL fear the rod, all quake at death. Judge then by thyself, and forbear from slaughter, or from causing to slay.

130. To all is life dear. Judge then by thyself, and forbear to slay or to cause slaughter.

131. Whoso himself desires joy, yet hurts them who love joy, shall not obtain it hereafter.

132. Whoso himself desires joy and hurts not them who love it, shall hereafter attain to joy.

133. Speak not harshly to any one: else will men turn upon you. Sad are the words of strife: retribution will follow them.

134. Be silent as a broken gong: so wilt thou reach peace; for strife is not found in thee.

135. As the herdsman drives out his cows to the pasture, so Old Age and Death drive out the life of men.

136. Verily the fool sins and knows it not: by his own deeds is the fool tormented as by fire.

137. He who strikes those who strike not

[p. 41]

and are innocent will come speedily to one of these ten states:

138. To cruel torment, loss, accident, severe illness, and madness he will come:

139. To visitation from the King, grievous slander, loss of kith and kin, and perishing of his wealth he will come:

140. Ravaging fire will destroy his houses, and after death the poor wretch will go to hell.

141. Not nakedness, nor matted hair, not dirt, nor fastings, not sleeping in sanctuaries, nor ashes, nor ascetic posture--none of these things purifies a man who is not free from doubt.

142. If even a fop fosters the serene mind, calm and controlled, pious and pure, and does no hurt to any living thing, he is the Brahmin he is the Samana, he is the Bhikkhu.

143. Is there in all the world a man so modest that he provokes no blame, as a noble steed never deserves the whip? As a noble steed stung by the whip, be ye spirited and swift.

144. By faith, by righteousness, by manliness, by meditation, by just judgment, by theory and practice, by mindfulness, leave aside sorrow--no slight burden.

145. Engineers control the water, fletchers fashion their shafts, carpenters shape the wood: it is themselves that the pious fashion and control.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

 section XI

  

OLD AGE

146. WHERE is the joy, what the pleasure, whilst all is in flames? Benighted, would ye not seek a torch?

147. Look at this painted image, wounded and swollen, sickly and full of lust, in which there is no permanence;

148. This wasted form is a nest of disease and very frail: it is full of putrid matter and perishes. Death is the end of life.

149. What delight is there for him who sees these grey bones scattered like gourds in autumn?

150. Here is a citadel of bones plastered with flesh and blood, and manned by old age and death, self-will and enmity.

151. As even the king's bright chariot grows old, so the body of man also comes to old age. But the law of the holy never ages: the holy teach it to the holy.

152. The simpleton ages like the ox: his weight increases, but not his wisdom.

153. Many births have I traversed seeking

[p. 43]

the builder; in vain! Weary is the round of births.

154. Now art thou seen, O Builder. Nevermore shalt thou build the house! All thy beams are broken; cast down is thy cornerstone. My mind is set upon Nirvana; it has attained the extinction of desire.

155. They who have not lived purely nor stored up riches in their youth, these ruefully ponder, as old herons by a lake without fish.

156. They who have not lived purely nor stored up riches in their youth, are as arrows that are shot in vain: they mourn for the past.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

 section XII

  

SELF

157. IF a man love himself, let him diligently watch himself: the wise will keep vigil for one of the three watches of the night.

158. Keep first thyself aright: then mayest thou advise others. So is the wise man unblameable.

159. If one so shapes his own life as he directs others, himself controlled, he will duly control others: self, they say, is hard to tame.

160. A man is his own helper; who else is there to help? By self-control man is a rare help to himself.

161. The ill that is begun and has its growth and its being in self, bruises the foolish one, as the diamond pierces its own matrix.

162. As the creeper overpowers the tree, so he whose sin is great, works for himself the havoc his enemy would wish for him.

163. Ill is easy to do; it is easy to do harm: hard indeed it is to do helpful and good deeds.

164. Whoso fondly repudiates the teaching

[p. 45]

of the noble and virtuous Arahats, following false doctrine, is like the bamboo which bears fruit to its own destruction.

165. Thou art brought low by the evil thou hast done thyself; by the evil thou hast left undone art thou purified. Purity and impurity are things of man's inmost self; no man can purify another.

166. Even for great benefit to another let no man imperil his own benefit. When he has realised what is for his own good, let him pursue that earnestly.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

 section XIII

  

THE WORLD

167. LET no man foster evil habits; let no man live in sloth: let none follow false doctrines, none prolong his sojourn in this world.

168. Up! Idle not, but follow after good. The good man lives happy in this world and the next.

169. Follow after virtue, not after vice. The virtuous live happy in this world and the next.

170. The king of Death sees not him who regards the world as a bubble, a mirage.

171. Come then, think of the world as a painted chariot of the king--a morass where fools are sinking, where the wise take no pleasure.

172. He who in former days was slothful, and has put off sloth, lights up the world as the moon freed of the clouds.

173. He who covers his idle deeds with goodness lights up the world as the moon freed of clouds.

174. Blinded are the men of this world; few there are who have eyes to see: few are the

[p. 47]

birds which escape the fowler's net; few are they who go to heaven.

175. Through the sky fly the swans: Rishis too pass through the air. The wise leave the world altogether, deserting Mara and his hosts.

176. There is no wrong he would not do who breaks one precept, speaking lies and mocking at the life to come.

177. Misers go not to the realm of gods: therefore he is a fool who does not delight in liberality. The wise delighting in liberality come thereby with gladness to the other world.

178. Good is kingship of the earth; good is birth in heaven; good is universal empire; better still is the fruit of conversion.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

 section XIV

  

THE BUDDHA

179. INTO his victory which is never reversed there enters no element of weakness; through what fault can you lead captive the faultless one, the Buddha whose sphere is Nirvana?

180. By what fault will you lead captive the faultless Buddha, whose sphere is Nirvana? In him are no clinging meshes of desire to lead him captive.

181. The gods themselves emulate the truly wise and mindful, who are busy in meditation and prudent, delighting in the peace of Nirvana.

182. Arduous is human birth; arduous is mortal life: arduous is hearing of the Law: arduous the uprising of Buddhas.

183. "Eschew all evil: cherish good: cleanse your inmost thoughts"--this is the teaching of Buddhas.

184. "Patience and fortitude is the supreme asceticism: Nirvana is above all," say the Buddhas. He is no recluse who harms others: nor is he who causes grief an ascetic (samana).

[p. 49]

185. Hurt none by word or deed, be consistent in well-doing: be moderate in food, dwell in solitude, and give yourselves to meditation--this is the advice of Buddhas.

186. Not by a shower of gold is satisfaction of the senses found: "little pleasure, lasting pain," so thinks the sage.

187. The follower of the true Buddha finds no delight even in divine pleasures: but his joy is in the destruction of desire (tanha).

188. Often do men in terror seek sanctuary in mountains or jungles, by sacred groves or trees;

189. In them is no safe sanctuary; in them is not the supreme sanctuary; in them is not that sanctuary whither a man may go and cast aside his cares.

190. But he who goes for sanctuary to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha looks in his wisdom for the four noble truths:

191. "Sorrow, the arising of sorrow, the cessation of sorrow, and the noble eightfold path which leads to their cessation."

192. Here truly is the sure sanctuary: here is the supreme sanctuary: here is the sanctuary where a man may go and cast aside his care.

193. Hard to find is the Exalted One: he is not born in every place: happy dwells the household into which he, the wise one, is born:

194. A blessing is the arising of Buddhas, a blessing is the true preaching. Blessed is the

[p. 50]

unity of the Sangha, blessed is the devotion of those who dwell in unity.

195, 196. Immeasurable is the merit of him who does reverence to those to whom reverence is due, Buddha and his disciples, men who have left behind them the trammels of evil, and crossed beyond the stream of sorrow and wailing, calmed and free of all fear.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

 section XV

  

BLISS

197. O JOY! We live in bliss; amongst men of hate, hating none. Let us indeed dwell among them without hatred.

198. O Joy! In bliss we dwell; healthy amidst the ailing. Let us indeed dwell amongst them in perfect health.

199. Yea in very bliss we dwell: free from care amidst the careworn. Let us indeed dwell amongst them without care.

200. In bliss we dwell possessing nothing: let us dwell feeding upon joy like the shining ones in their splendour.

201. The victor breeds enmity; the conquered sleeps in sorrow. Regardless of either victory or defeat the calm man dwells in peace.

202. There is no fire like lust; no luck so bad as hate. There is no sorrow like existence: no bliss greater than Nirvana (rest).

203. Hunger is the greatest ill: existence is the greatest sorrow. Sure knowledge of this is Nirvana, highest bliss.

[p. 52]

204. Health is the greatest boon; content is the greatest wealth; a loyal friend is the truest kinsman; Nirvana is the Supreme Bliss.

205. Having tasted the joy of solitude and of serenity, a man is freed from sorrow and from sin, and tastes the nectar of piety.

206. Good is the vision of the Noble; good is their company. He may be always happy who escapes the sight of fools.

207. He who consorts with fools knows lasting grief. Grievous is the company of fools, as that of enemies; glad is the company of the wise, as that of kinsfolk.

208. Therefore do thou consort with the wise, the sage, the learned, the noble ones who shun not the yoke of duty: follow in the wake of such a one, the wise and prudent, as the moon follows the path of the stars.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

 section XVI

  

AFFECTION

209. HE who gives himself to vanity and not to the truly profitable, shunning the true pursuit, and grasping at pleasure, will come to envy him who has sought the true profit.

210. Let no man cleave to what is pleasant or unpleasant: parting with the pleasant is pain, and painful is the presence of the unpleasant.

211. Take a liking to nothing; loss of the prize is evil. There are no bonds for him who has neither likes nor dislikes.

212. From attachment comes grief, from attachment comes fear. He who is pure from attachment knows neither grief nor fear.

213. From affection come grief and fear. He who is without affection knows neither grief nor fear.

214. From pleasure come grief and fear. He who is freed from pleasure knows neither grief nor fear.

215. From lust come grief and fear. He who is freed from lust knows neither grief nor fear.

[p. 54]

216. From desire come grief and fear. He who is free of desire knows neither grief nor fear.

217. The man of counsel and insight, of righteousness and truth, who minds his own affairs, him the crowd holds dear.

218. If a man's heart be set upon the Ineffable (Nirvana), his mind brought to perfection, and every thought freed from lust, he is called the strong swimmer who forges his way against the stream.

219. When, after long voyaging afar, one returns in safety home, kinsfolk and friends receive him gladly;

220. Even so his good deeds receive the good man, when he leaves this world for the next, as kinsfolk greet a dear traveller.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

 section XVII

  

ANGER

221. PUT away anger, eschew self-will, conquer every bond; no suffering touches him who does not cling to phenomenal existence, but calls nothing his own.

222. Whoso controls his rising anger as a running chariot, him I call the charioteer: the others only hold the reins.

223. By calmness let a man overcome wrath; let him overcome evil by good; the miser let him subdue by liberality, and the liar by truth.

224. Speak the truth, be not angry, give of thy poverty to the suppliant: by these three virtues a man attains to the company of the gods.

225. The innocent, the sages, those whose action is controlled, these go to the eternal state where they know not sorrow (Nirvana).

226. All taints pass away from them who are ever vigilant and active day and night, with faces set towards Nirvana.

227. This is an ancient law, O Atula, not the jaw of a day; men blame the silent and they

[p. 56]

blame the talker; even the man of few words they blame. No one in the world gets off unblamed.

228. There never was, nor will be, nor is there now to be found, one wholly blamed or wholly praised.

229, 230. But who is worthy to blame him whom the wise praise after daily scrutiny, who is himself wise and without blemish as a medal of purest gold? Even the gods seek to emulate such a one; even Brahma praises him.

231. Guard against evil deeds: control the body. Eschew evil deeds and do good.

232. Guard against evil words; control the tongue. Eschew evil words and speak good ones.

233. Guard against evil thoughts; control the mind. Eschew evil thoughts and think good ones.

234. The wise, controlled in act, in word, in thought, are well controlled indeed.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

 section XVIII

  

SIN

235. THOU art withered as a sere leaf: Death's messengers await thee. Thou standest at the gate of death, and hast made no provision for the journey.

236. Make to thyself a refuge; come, strive and be prudent: when thy impurities are purged, thou shalt come into the heavenly abode of the Noble.

237. Thy life is ended; thou art come into the Presence of Death: there is no resting-place by the way, and thou hast no provision for the journey.

238. Make for thyself a refuge; come, strive and play the sage! Burn off thy taints, and thou shalt know birth and old age no more.

239. As a smith purifies silver in the fire, so bit by bit continually the sage burns away his impurities.

240. It is the iron's own rust that destroys it: it is the sinner's own acts that bring him to hell.

[p. 58]

241. Disuse is the rust of mantras; laziness the rust of households; sloth is the rust of beauty; neglect is the watcher's ruin.

242. Impurity is the ruin of woman; and avarice the ruin of the giver: ill-deeds are the rust of this world and the next.

243. More corrosive than those is the rust of ignorance, the greatest of taints: put off this rust and be clean, O Bhikkhus.

244. Life is easy for the crafty and shameless, for the wanton, shrewd, and impure:

245. Hard it is for the modest, the lover of purity, the disinterested and simple and clean, the man of insight.

246, 247. The murderer, the liar, the thief, the adulterer, and the drunkard--these even in this world uproot themselves.

248. Know this, O man, evil is the undisciplined mind! See to it that greed and lawlessness bring not upon thee long suffering.

249. Men give according to faith or caprice. If a man fret because food and drink are given to another, he comes not day or night to serene meditation (i.e. Samadhi).

250. He in whom this (envious spirit) is destroyed and wholly uprooted, he truly day and night attains serene meditation.

251. There is no fire like lust, no ravenous beast like hatred, no snare like folly, no flood like desire.

[p. 59]

252. To see another's fault is easy: to see one's own is hard. Men winnow the faults of others like chaff: their own they hide as a crafty gambler hides a losing throw.

253. The taints of this man are ever growing. He is far from the purification of taints (Arahatship), the censorious one who is ever blaming others.

254. There is no path through the sky: there is no "religious" apart from us. The world without delights in dalliance: the Blessed Ones are freed from this thrall.

255. There is no path through the sky; there is no "religious" apart from us. Nothing in the phenomenal world is lasting; but Buddhas endure immovable.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

  

 section XIX

  

THE RIGHTEOUS

256, 257. HASTY judgment shows no man just. He is called just who discriminates between right and wrong, who judges others not hastily, but with righteous and calm judgment, a wise guardian of the law.

258. Neither is a man wise by much speaking: he is called wise who is forgiving, kindly, and fearless.

259. A man is not a pillar of the law for his much speaking: he who has heard only part of the law and keeps it indeed, he is a pillar of the law and does not slight it.

260. No man is made an "elder" by his grey locks; mere old age is called empty old age.

261. He is called "elder" in whom dwell truth and righteousness, harmlessness and self-control and self-mastery, who is without taint and wise.

262. Not by mere eloquence or comeliness is a man a "gentleman," who is lustful, a miser, and a knave.

[p. 61]

263. But he in whom these faults are uprooted and done away, the wise and pure is called a gentleman.

264. Not by his shaven crown is one made a "religious" who is intemperate and dishonourable. How can he be a "religious" who is full of lust and greed?

265. He who puts off entirely great sins and small faults--by such true religion is a man called "religious."

266. Not merely by the mendicant life is a man known as a mendicant: he is not a mendicant because he follows the law of the flesh;

267. But because, being above good and evil, he leads a pure life and goes circumspectly.

268, 269. Not by silence (mona) is a man a sage (muni) if he be ignorant and foolish: he who holds as it were the balance, taking the good and rejecting the bad, he is the sage: he who is sage for both worlds, he is the true sage.

270. A man is no warrior who worries living things: by not worrying is a man called warrior.

271, 272. Not only by discipline and vows, not only by much learning, nor by meditation nor by solitude have I won to that peace which no worldling knows. Rest not content with these, O Bhikkhus, until you have reached the destruction of all taints.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

 section XX

  

THE PATH

HAPPINESS is for Gautama, as for Aristotle, "the bloom upon virtue." The path which leads to the Supreme Bliss is the path of morality defined as the Noble Eightfold Path. If a man follow this, he is happy here and hereafter.

It consists of:

Right Views,

Right Aspirations,

Right Speech,

Right Action,

Right Livelihood,

Right Effort,

Right Mindfulness,

Right Contemplation.

[paragraph continues] This is described by Gautama as a Middle Path between the extreme of sensuality on the one hand and asceticism on the other; or between superstitious credulity and sceptical materialism. It is a truly noble ideal: yet one must never forget that "Righteousness" throughout is Buddhistically defined: e.g. "Right Views"

[p. 63]

means a correct grasp of the Buddhist teaching that all is transient, all is sorrowful, all is unreal. Again, "Right Contemplation" is the practice of Samadhi, concentration of the mind upon Buddhist ideas, such as the above. The highest "Livelihood," again, is to live upon the alms of the faithful.

273. Best of paths is the Eightfold; the four truths are the best of truths: purity is the best state; best of men is the seer.

274. This is the way; there is none other that leads to the seeing of Purity (Nirvana.) Do you follow this path: that is to befool Mara.

275. Travelling by this way you'll end your grief: it is the way I preached when I learnt to throw off my bonds.

276. 'Tis you who must strive: the Blessed Ones are only preachers. They who strive and meditate are freed from Mara's bonds.

277. "All is passing": when one sees and realises this, he sits loose to this world of sorrow: this is the way of purity.

278. "All is sorrow": when one sees and realises this, he sits loose to this world of sorrow; this is the way of purity.

279. "All is unreal": when one sees and realises this, he sits loose to this world of sorrow this is the way of purity.

[p. 64]

280. He who fails to strive when 'tis time to strive, young and strong though he be, slothful and enmeshed in lust, the sluggard, never finds the path to wisdom.

281. Whoso guards his tongue and controls his mind and does nothing wrong: keeping clear these three paths, he will achieve the way shown by the wise.

282. From meditation springs wisdom; from neglect of it the loss of wisdom. Knowing this path of progress and decline, choose the way that leads to growth of wisdom.

283. Cut down the jungle (I do not mean with an axe!). For from the jungle of lust springs fear, and if you cut it down, you will be disentangled, O Bhikkhus!

284. Whilst the entanglement of a man with a woman is not utterly cut away, he is in bondage, running to her as a sucking calf to the cow.

285. Pluck out the bond of self as one pulls up an autumn lotus. Forge thy way along the path of safety, Nirvana, shown by the Blessed.

286. "Here will I pass the wet season; here the winter and summer," thinks the fool, unmindful of what may befall.

287. Then comes Death and sweeps him away infatuated with children and cattle, and entangled with this world's goods, as a flood carries off a sleeping village.

288. There is no safety in sons, or in father,

[p. 65]

or in kinsfolk when Death overshadows thee: amongst thine own kith and kin is no refuge:

289. Knowing this clearly, the wise and righteous man straightway clears the road that leads to Nirvana.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

 section XXI

  

MISCELLANY

290. IF at the cost of a little joy one sees great joy, he who is wise will look to the greater and leave the less.

291. Whoso seeks his own pleasure by another's pain, is entangled in hate and cannot get free.

292. Duty neglected; evil done: the taints of the proud and slothful wax ever more and more.

293. But those who are ever pondering the nature of the body, who run not after evil, who are constant in duty--in these, the vigilant and wise, taints come utterly to an end.

294. Having destroyed Mother and Father and two noble Kings, with the whole Kingdom and its Vizier, innocent goes the Brahmin!

295. Innocent goes the Brahmin having destroyed Mother and Father and two Brahmin Kings, and the five Roads and their fierce guardians.

296. The followers of Gautama are evervigilant; their thought day and night is set upon Buddha.

[p. 67]

297-301. The followers of Gautama are ever vigilant; day and night is their thought set upon the Dhamma, the Sangha, the body, compassion (not harming), mind-culture.

302. Hard it is to leave home as a recluse! hard also to live at home as a householder; hard is the community life; the lot of the wanderer in the world is also hard.

303. The faithful, upright man is endowed with (the true) fame and wealth, and is honoured wherever he goes.

304. Far off are seen the Holy Ones, like the Himalayas: the unholy pass unseen as arrows shot in the darkness.

305. Alone when eating, alone when sleeping, alone when walking, let a man strongly control himself and take his pleasure in the forest glade.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68]

  

 section XXII

  

HELL

306. THE liar goes to hell, and the villain who denies his crime; these mean ones are alike in the world beyond.

307. Though clad in yellow robe, the man of many sins who is uncontrolled is born in hell: the sinner is punished by his sin.

308. Better to swallow a ball of red-hot iron than to live uncontrolled upon the bounty of the faithful.

309. Four evil consequences follow the sluggard and the adulterer: retribution, broken slumber, an evil name, and in the end hell.

310. That way lie retribution and an evil character, the short-lived joy of trembling sinners, and a heavy penalty from the ruler. Therefore run not after thy neighbour's wife.

311. As pampas-grass clumsily handled cuts the hand, so is the community life: abused, it brings a man to hell.

312. All duties carelessly performed; all vows

[p. 69]

slightingly observed; the recluse life that is open to suspicion--these bear no great fruit.

313. If a duty is to be done, do it with thy might: a careless recluse scatters contagion broadcast.

314. Better leave undone a bad deed; one day the doer will lament: good it is to do the good deed which brings no remorse.

315. As a fortress guarded within and without, so guard thyself. Leave no loophole for attack! They who fail at their post mourn here, and hereafter go to hell.

316. Some are ashamed at what is not shameful, and blush not at deeds of shame: these perverse ones go to hell.

317. They who see fear where there is no fear, and tremble not at fearful things: these perverse ones go to hell.

318. They who think evil where there is no evil, and make light of grievous sin: these perverse ones go to hell.

319. But whoso calls sin sin, and innocence innocence: these right-minded ones go to happiness.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

 section XXIII

  

THE ELEPHANT

THE elephant is the symbol in Buddhism of endurance and solitary strength.

320. I will endure abuse as the elephant endures the arrow in the battle: evil is the crowd.

321. Men lead the tamed elephant into battle; upon his back the king rides: he who is tamed and endures abuse patiently is praised of men.

322. Noble are the tamed mules; noble the blood-horses of Sindh, and the great elephants of war: better is he who has tamed himself.

323. Not by bridling them will one journey to the unknown shore (Nirvana), but by bridling himself.

324. Dhanapalako, the great elephant, is hard to control in the time of rut: he will not taste his food in captivity, but longs after the elephant-grove.

325. If one becomes a sluggard or a glutton, rolling over in gross sleep like a stall-fed hog,

[p. 71]

again and again does he come to the womb, the foolish one!

326. This mind of mine would wander in days of old whither desire and lust and caprice led it: now will I control it as a mahout controls the elephant in rut.

327. Be ye zealous: guard your thoughts. As an elephant sunk in the mud extricate yourselves from the clutches of evil.

328. If you can find a dutiful friend to go with you, a righteous and prudent man not caring for hardships, go with him deliberately.

329. If you cannot find such a one, travel alone as a king leaving a conquered realm, or as the elephant in the jungle.

330. It is better to be alone; there is no companionship with a fool: travel alone and sin not, forgetting care as the elephant in the jungle.

331. Good are companions in time of need; contentment with thy lot is good; at the hour of death, merit is a good friend, and good is the leaving of all sorrow.

332. Good is reverence for mother and father: good, too, reverence for recluses and sages.

333. Good is lifelong righteousness; and rooted faith is good: good is the getting of wisdom, and good the avoiding of sin.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

  

 section XXIV

  

DESIRE

TANHa (desire) is defined as the hankering after pleasure, or existence, or success (or all three). (Mahavagga xvi. 20.) It is the germ from which springs all human misery: birth, old age, and suffering. To be rid of Tanha is to be free of pain, to pass into the Beyond, the painless dream-world of Nirvana.

334. As the "maluwa" creeper, so spreads the desire of the sluggard. From birth to birth he leaps like a monkey seeking fruit.

335. Whoso is subdued by this sordid clinging desire, his sorrows wax more and more, like "birana" grass after rain.

336. But his sorrows drop off like water from the lotus leaf, who subdues this sordid, powerful desire.

337. I give you this good counsel, all ye who are gathered here: cut out desire as one digs up the grass to find the fragrant root. Let

[p. 73]

not Mara break you again and again as the river breaks the rushes.

338. A tree, though it be cut down, yet springs up again, if its roots are safe and firm: thus sorrow, if it be not uprooted, springs repeatedly to birth.

339. If man's desires flow unchecked, the waves of his lust and craving bear him off--misguided one!

340. Everywhere flow the streams; everywhere the creeper sprouts and takes hold. If thou seest this creeper growing, be wise! pluck it out by the roots.

341. Men hug delights; they foster some pet sin, hankering after which they suffer birth and old age.

342. Dogged by lust, men double like a hunted hare. Fast bound in its fetters, they go through long ages to misery.

343. Dogged by lust, they double like a hunted hare. Throw off thy lust, O Bhikkhu, if thou wouldst be free.

344. Whoso has left the tangle of home-life for the solitude of the jungle, and goes back to it, regard him thus: "Lo, one who was freed, and ran back to his chains."

345. Iron and wood and hemp--these sages call not heavy bonds, but rather love of bejewelled women, and the care for children and wives.

346. This is a heavy bond indeed: light

[p. 74]

though it seem, it drags men down, and is not easily cut off. Yet some there are who cut even this asunder, and leave behind them pleasure and lust, with no backward glance.

347. Some again there are who fall into the meshes of their own lust as the spider falling into her own net: even this the wise cut through, leaving sorrow behind, with no backward glance.

348. Lay aside past, future, and present, escaping the world: wholly freed in mind, thou shalt not again return to birth and old age.

349. Desire waxes great in him who is oppressed by wandering thoughts, fired with lust and seeking after pleasure. So doth he make his fetters strong.

350. Whoso delights in calming his thoughts and looks askance at the things of sense, will thus come to an end, and cut the bonds of Mara.

351. This will be his last body, who has reached the goal, who is fearless, detached, and un-blameable: who has pulled out the rivets of existence.

352. He who is detached and not grasping, a clever student of the law and its meaning, knowing the words and their order, he is called the enlightened; this is his last birth.

353. "All conquering and all knowing am I, detached, untainted, untrammelled, wholly freed by destruction of desire. Whom shall I call Teacher? Myself found the way."

[p. 75]

354. The gift of the Law surpasses every gift; the savour of the Law surpasses every savour; the pleasure of the Law surpasses every pleasure. The destruction of desire conquers all sorrow.

355. Wealth kills the fool if he look not to the Beyond: for greed of wealth fools kill each other.

356. Weeds are the bane of fields, and lust the bane of the crowd. Therefore a gift given where there is no lust bears much fruit.

357-9. Weeds are the bane of fields; wrath, infatuation, and avarice are the bane of the crowd. A gift given where there is neither wrath, nor infatuation, nor avarice bears much fruit.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

 section XXV

  

THE BHIKKHII

360. GOOD is restraint of eye and ear: of smell and taste.

361. Good is restraint of action and of speech; restraint of mind and of every sense is good. The Bhikkhu restrained in all things casts aside every care.

362. Best amongst the temperate is he who is temperate in hand and foot and tongue: the man of inward joy and calm, him I call Bhikkhu.

363. The Bhikkhu who is temperate and moderate in speech, not puffed up, but a wise preacher and interpreter--sweet are his words!

364. He who abides in the law and takes his pleasure therein, revolving it in his mind and pondering it, he is a Bhikkhu who falls not away from the Law.

365. Let him neither make much of his own gain, nor envy that of others: the Bhikkhu who envies others attains not the true meditation.

366. Even the gods praise that Bhikkhu whose

[p. 77]

own gain is slight, yet who covets not the gain of other men, but lives pure and strenuous.

367. He who clings not to self-hood and to existence, but mourns at the vanity of this fleeting world, he is called Bhikkhu.

368. The Bhikkhu who lives kindly and trusts in Buddha's Teaching he approaches Nirvana, the calm and blissful end of rebirth.

369. Bale out the ship, O Bhikkhu, then will it go lightly; cut the thongs of lust and hate; so wilt thou come to Nirvana.

370. Cut the five bonds, leave other five, and take in their place five more: he who has got beyond the five evil states is said to have crossed the flood.

371. Keep vigil, O Bhikkhu, be not slothful, let not your mind dally with delights: suffer not the pangs of hell, and wail not as the flames devour you, "O day of woe"!

372. There is no meditation apart from wisdom; there is no wisdom apart from meditation. Those in whom wisdom and meditation meet are not far from Nirvana.

373. Divine pleasure is his who enters into solitude, the Bhikkhu who is calmed and sees the law with the seeing eye:

374. Whenever he ponders the beginning and the end of the elements of being, he finds joy and bliss; nectar it is to those who know.

375. This is the beginning in my teaching for

[p. 78]

a wise Bhikkhu; self-mastery, contentment, and control by the precepts: to cultivate those who are noble, righteous, and zealous friends;

376. To be hospitable and courteous, this is to be glad and to make an end of sorrow.

377. As jasmine sheds its withered blossoms so, O Bhikkhus, do you put away lust and hatred.

378. He who is controlled in act, in speech, in thought, and altogether calmed, having purged away worldliness, that Bhikkhu is called calm.

379. Come, rouse thyself! Examine thine own heart. The Bhikkhu who is thus self-guarded and mindful will live in happiness.

380. Each man is his own helper, each his own host; therefore curb thyself as the merchant curbs a spirited horse.

381. The glad Bhikkhu who puts his trust in Buddha's Preaching goes to Nirvana, calm and blissful end of rebirth.

382. Let the young Bhikkhu apply himself to Buddha's Preaching: so will he light up the world as the moon escaped from the clouds.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

 section XXVI

  

THE BRAHMIN

383. PLAY the man and stem the flood of passion! Cast off your lusts, O Brahmin; having known the ending of the perishable, thou knowest the imperishable, O Brahmin.

384. When the Brahmin has travelled the twofold path of meditation, then indeed his chains fall off him, for he knows the truth.

385. Him I call the Brahmin whom desire assails not from within nor from without, in whom is no fear, he is indeed free.

386. Him I call Brahmin who is meditative, clean of heart, solitary, who has done his duty and got rid of taints, who has reached the goal of effort.

387. The sun shines by day, the moon lights up the night; radiant is the soldier in his panoply, radiant the Brahmin in his meditation; but the Buddha in his brightness is radiant day and night.

388. By Brahmin mean one who has put

[p. 80]

away evil; for his serenity is a man called Samano; for excluding his own sin is a man called recluse.

389. Do no evil to a Brahmin; let not the Brahmin return evil for evil. Woe to him who kills a Brahmin; yea, rather, woe to that Brahmin who loses his temper!

390. It is no slight benefit to a Brahmin when he learns to hold his impulses in check; from whatever motive evil temper is controlled, by that control grief is truly soothed.

391. By whomsoever no evil is done in deed, or word, or thought, him I call a Brahmin who is guarded in these three.

392. As the Brahmin honours the burnt-sacrifice, so do thou honour him, from whomsoever is learnt the law of the true Buddha.

393. Not by matted locks, nor by lineage, nor by caste is one a Brahmin; he is the Brahmin in whom are truth and righteousness and purity.

394. What boots your tangled hair, O fool, what avails your garment of skins? You have adorned the outer parts, within you are full of uncleanness.

395. A man clothed in cast-off rags, lean, with knotted veins, meditating alone in the forest, him I call a Brahmin.

396. Not him do I call Brahmin who is merely born of a Brahmin mother; men may give him

[p. 81]

salutation as a Brahmin, though he be not detached from the world: but him I call a Brahmin who has attachment to nothing.

397. Him I call a Brahmin who has cut the bonds, who does not thirst for pleasures, who has left behind the hindrances.

398. Whoso has cut the cable, and the rope and the chain with all its links, and has pushed aside the bolt, this wise one I call a Brahmin.

399. Whoever bears patiently abuse and injury and imprisonment, whose bodyguard is fortitude, he is the Brahmin.

400. He is the Brahmin who does not give way to anger, who is careful of religious duties, who is upright, pure, and controlled, who has reached his last birth.

401. He who clings not to pleasures as water clings not to the lotus leaf, nor mustard-seed to the needle-point, him I call Brahmin.

402. He is the Brahmin who in this very world knows the end of sorrow, who has laid the burden aside and is free.

403. Whoso is wise with deep wisdom, seeing the right way and the wrong, and has reached the goal, him I call Brahmin.

404. He is the Brahmin who is not entangled either with householders or with recluses, who has no home and few wants.

405. He who lays down the rod, who neither

[p. 82]

kills, nor causes the death of creatures, moving or fixed, he is the Brahmin.

406. Not opposing those who oppose, calm amidst the fighters, not grasping amidst men who grasp, he is the Brahmin.

407. He is the Brahmin from whom anger, and hatred, and pride, and slander have dropped away, as the mustard-seed from the needlepoint.

408. If one were to preach gentle, and instructive, and truthful words by which no man is offended, he is the Brahmin.

409. Whoso takes nothing small or great, good or bad, unless it be given him, he is the Brahmin.

410. In whom are found no longings, who is free and detached from this world and the next, he is the Brahmin.

411. Him I call a Brahmin in whom lust is not found, who has cast off doubt, who knows the path that leads to Nirvana (the deathless state) and reaches it.

412. Who in this life has passed from the grip of either merit or demerit, free of sorrow, cleansed and purified, him I call Brahmin.

413. Who is clear as the moon, pure, and limpid, and serene, who has quenched his thirst for life;

414. Who has passed through this impassable quagmire of rebirth, and infatuation, has waded

[p. 83]

through it and got beyond it, who is meditative and supplies no fuel to the fires of lust and doubt, him I call a Brahmin.

415. Who in this life, deserting his lusts, goes from home into solitude, and has quenched lust, and with it the desire to be reborn;

416. Who in this life deserts craving, and goes from home into solitude, who has quenched craving, and with it the desire to be reborn, him I call Brahmin.

417. Who has left behind him human pleasures and passed beyond heavenly ones, and is freed from all entanglement of delight;

418. Who has left aside both gusto and disgust, who is cooled and has in him no spark of rebirth, victor in all worlds, and hero, him I call Brahmin.

419. He is the Brahmin who fully knows the perishing of living things and their uprising, who is detached and happy and wise.

420. He is the Brahmin whose way is not known to gods, nor heavenly minstrels, nor immortals; the Arahat pure of all taint, him I call the Brahmin.

421. Whoso has nothing left, of past or future or present states, who is poor and grasps at nothing, him I call Brahmin.

422. The Leader Supreme, the heroic, the great Rishi, the Victor without lust and purified, the Buddha, he is the Brahmin.

[p. 84]

423. He is the Brahmin indeed who knows his former lives, and who knows heaven and hell, who has reached the end of births, the sage whose knowledge is perfect, and who is perfect with all perfection.

THE END

OF

THE DHAMMAPADA

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

  

NOTES

1, 2. THESE stanzas contain two ideas which are of the very warp and woof of Buddhism:

(a) The view depends upon the point of view;

(b) Thought is potent in influencing man's destiny.

The Chinese Commentary illustrates both these ideas: Two merchants listened to the Buddha's preaching; one was delighted, the other angry: men hear what they are prepared to hear. Soon after one was killed, the other became King: so potent is thought!

8. Cf. Luke vi, 48.

9, 10. The Buddha often used a play upon words to arrest men's attention and help their memory. The Pali of these stanzas contains a pun of this kind, which cannot be imitated in English: Kasavam means either the yellow robe of the mendicant, or impurity, stain, sin.

11, 12. The work of Gautama as a preacher lay largely in this directing of men's efforts: the great reality is character; this and this alone is man's business upon earth.

All else are "shadows" not worth pursuing. Cf. St. John's words: "Little children, flee idols" (i.e. "shadows"), 1 John v, 21. So St. Paul speaks of covetousness as "idolatry"--the pursuit of the great "shadow," Mammon (Col. iii, 5).

When the Buddhist puts on the yellow robe, he symbolises his belief that "virtue is the truest wealth": the gold of character is alone worth striving after. (Cf. Dhammapada, 75 and note.) On the day of his ordination (upasampada) the candidate adorns himself with all the jewellery he can obtain, and doffs it only to don the yellow robe.

15-18. Here and Hereafter: i.e. in this birth and the next. Man may be reborn upon earth, or in one of the

[p. 86]

hells or in one of the heavens. A demon who does well may become a man or a god: a god who lives unworthily may become a man or a demon.

Tormented when he goes to hell. The Buddhist Temples are full of frescoes of these torments: men who have killed animals are being slowly devoured by them; other sinners are being forced by demon torturers to climb spiky trees, or burnt in fires most realistically drawn, or made to swallow balls of red-hot iron; low-caste men who have offended the high castes are being crushed by great rocks!

The Buddha's own discourses contain minute detail of such torments. It is not clear whether he was using an argumentum ad hominem, or really believed in a hereafter of physical torment. In any case his moral code has been strangely perverted in modern Buddhism.

18. The reward for virtue is twofold--the approval of conscience and a good rebirth.

19. Cf. Matt. xxiii, 2; John x, 12.

20. The holy ones: Arahats, those who have attained. The sentence means: "he is on his way to Nirvana."

21. Amatapadam: lit. "The endless or deathless state" (Fausboll). Nirvana is defined by many such phrases in the Dhammapada--sometimes negative, as here; sometimes positive, as in 23--"highest freedom." Whatever the Supreme Bliss be, it is unlike all human experience save that of the Arahat.

Rhys Davids translates "ambrosia, or nectar."

As it were dead: i.e. spiritually or morally dead. Cf. "Let the dead bury their dead," Matt. viii, 22, and "The life of the fool is worse than death," Ecclus. xxii, 11.

22. The lot of the Noble. The word "Aryo" meant in Gautama's day Nobleman, or Aryan. He defined the nobleman anew, making nobility consist not in birth, but in conduct. Then he developed the meaning till it stood for Arahats--the experts in his system, those who have attained.

23. Meditation: jhanam--that ecstatic contemplation in which the mind, rapt from the sounds and sights of the

[p. 87]

ordinary world, concentrates itself upon some single object or idea; this leads to serenity and a unique bliss, anticipation of Nirvana.

Highest freedom. Nirvana is complete freedom from: (1) The body and suffering; (2) Desire and other taints.

25. An island: i.e. Nirvana.

Self-control, temperance. Buddhism makes much of the "cardinal virtues."

26. The Buddhist motto may be said to be "Strive without ceasing."

27. The joy which is born of meditation plays a great part in Buddhist psychology and ethics. (Cf. Rhys Davids' Early Buddhism, pp. 62-5.)

28. Contrast this somewhat Epicurean attitude with St. Paul's exhortation "Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep" (Rom. xii, 15).

The Buddhist position is in reality midway between the Epicurean and the Christian; it is stoical: the attitude to be assumed towards the "crowd" is either mettam, benevolence if (one's own salvation being certain) one can help them: or it is upekha, detachment. "What can't be cured must be endured." Mudita, sympathy, and Karuna, pity, are also duties, but it is no use wasting those upon the blinded and foolish crowd. (Cf. 61, 64.)

30. Sakra: i.e. Indra, a high god of Hinduism whom Buddhism has relegated to the rank of an archangel, ruling the Tavatimsa heaven. He is said to have been a young Brahmin who for his zeal in doing good was reborn as Sakra. His human name was Magha. He is regarded by Buddhists as a kind of recording angel. (Childers.)

31. Bhikkhu. The "religious" of Buddhism is neither "priest" nor "monk" in the strict sense, for he offers no sacrifice, and he lives not alone, but either with one or two others, or with the "community." The word "bhikkhu" means "mendicant."

The greater and the lesser bonds: all those "trammels" which bind him to the phenomenal world; all that affects his senses.

[p. 88]

33. In his doctrine of the mind, Gautama was no pessimist; it is by nature fickle and difficult to control: yet nurture can make it stable and obedient. (Cf. especially 40, where Gautama's optimistic attitude to the mind is thrown into strong relief by his pessimistic attitude to the body; if the body be brittle and of slight value, yet the mind may be made strong and precious.) His pessimistic attitude to the body is partly assumed with intent "to wean men from it," and this view is borne out by the genial attitude he takes towards asceticism: once a man has learnt to sit loose to the things of sense he is free to enjoy them. Gautama laid himself open to the name of worldling, and the immediate cause of his death was his courteous acceptance of the rich meal prepared for him by Cunda the smith.

34. The simile is obscure: it is apparently only intended to make one point clear--the palpitating effort needed to escape Mara.

39. Merit. The desire for merit is almost universal in Buddhist lands; yet Buddha teaches that man should act with his eye fixed not upon "merit," but upon Nirvana. (But cf. 53.) By "merit" is meant the credit balance in the bank of character--procuring rebirth to a happy life on earth, or in a heaven.

46. The flowery shafts of Mara: the insidious advances of the King of Death. Cf. Ps. v, 9: "They flatter with their tongue."

49. The mendicant is to take what is given him by the faithful, doing them no harm, and taking nothing but what they freely give.

51. Cf. Matt. xxiii, 3: "They say and do not."

54. Natural law is not universally valid in the spiritual world!

56. Certain "rishis," having neglected cleanliness in their pursuit of holiness, were ashamed to come into the presence of the gods: "Never fear," said the gods, "our nostrils are filled with the fragrance of your good deeds"

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] Cf. our phrases "The odour of sanctity"; "The beauty of holiness."

61. According to Buddhism neither will profit by such companionship. (Cf. 64.)

64. Cf. Ecclus. xxii, 7: "He that teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a potsherd together."

70. i.e. extreme asceticism and religious observance are not worth a tithe of goodness.

73-4. Ambition and self-will are the besetting faults of the Brahmin.

75. Cf. "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon."

76. The wise will value a candid friend.

79. A better draught than the soma juice, which led to ecstasy!

89. That leads to Arahatship. Sambodhi (Arahatship) has seven component parts, which may be taken to represent the Buddhist ideal of character: mindfulness, wisdom, energy, joyousness, serenity, concentrated meditation, and equanimity.

Whose delight is in renunciation. Cf. Bhagavad-Gita xii:

"Near to renunciation--very near--
 Dwelleth eternal Peace."

92, 93. Whose goal is the freedom... A definition of Nirvana. The Commentator explains the simile as expressing the mysterious freedom of Arahats in the spiritual sphere. (Cf. "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound of it, but canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth: So is every one that is born of the Spirit."--John iii, 8.)

94. Even the gods. The true Buddhist is above all gods!

Charioteer. Cf. Plato's famous simile of the Charioteer Reason and the two horses of Sensibility and Spirit: one rebellious, the other docile. Cf. also "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak."

95. Whose patience is as the earth's: the earth does not shrink or protest whatever is laid upon it.

97. This is one of those curious enigmas or puzzles which

[p. 90]

occur in the Buddha's teaching. It can be translated in a sense opposed to that here given: viz. "Best of men is the faithless, the ungrateful, the rebel, who has lost his chance of salvation, who has given up all hope." It was spoken by Gautama to some thirty recluses who accused Sariputto of these faults, because he told his master not to preach to him, but to them, "I already know the truth by experience; these others need it on authority: therefore preach to them." Buddha's words express with great skill the two ways in which he and the recluses looked upon his disciple's sturdy confidence. It is of course quite impossible in an analytic language like English to reproduce the puns.

100. Cf. St. Paul: "I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that I might instruct others also, than ten thousand words in a tongue." (1 Cor. xiv, 19.)

103-5. Cf. Prov. xvi, 32: " He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty: and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city."

104, 105. Buddhist ethics make much of the truth that external forces cannot harm the true man: man cannot be hurt except by himself. (Cf. 124.)

106. Cf. 1 Sam. xv, 22: "To obey is better than sacrifice."

109. Cf. Manu, II, 121: and Asoka's Rock Edict, II: "Father and mother must be hearkened to... this leads to length of days." Cf. also the fifth commandment of the Decalogue: "Honour thy father and thy mother that thy days may be long in the land."

110, 111. Cf. the Psalmist: "One day in Thy courts is better than a thousand."

125. Gautama again and again insists that natural law holds good in the spiritual world, though there are exceptions. (Cf. 54.)

126. Go to the womb: i.e. are born upon earth.

127-8. Cf. Introduction, p. 13.

129-32. Cf. Luke vi, 31: The Golden Rule.

141. Doubt: one of the deadly sins in Buddhism. The Buddha claimed omniscience, and though he did not discourage

[p. 91]

investigation and inquiry, from the great mass of men, who are ignorant and foolish, he demanded the plunge of faith.

Matted hair, etc. The Sumagadha-avadana relates that Sumagadha, seeing the naked and unkempt ascetics of Brahminism, exclaimed: "O Mother, if these are saints, what must sinners be like?" (Cf. Max Muller's Dhammapada, p. 38.)

142. Buddhism--so often labelled pessimistic--is striking in the genial attitude it takes towards asceticism. It encourages fasting only as a means to self-control and concentration of mind: for the rest the only kind of fasting it urges is "fasting from sin." Even the "man of the world" may be a true "Brahmin"--though it is very difficult. (Cf. Asoka's Minor Rock Edict, I: "Even by the small man, who chooses to exert himself, immense heavenly bliss may be won.")

The Samana: lit. "the calmed" (see note on 264).

144. By faith Buddhism means the calm acceptance of all Gautama taught: after his death it ceased to be an attitude to his person and became a conviction that his claims to omniscience were well founded, and that his system is the true interpretation of the world and of human life.

But Buddhism is nothing if not psychological, and faith (saddha) came to mean a subjective state of consciousness akin to serenity (passadhi), consequent upon acceptance of Buddha's teaching.

146. Fire is for the Buddhist the synonym of suffering: all is regarded as a flux--the world dissolving "with fervent heat." There is no meaning or permanence in this world: all the more need to seek salvation. In the burning heat of India the metaphor is a very vivid one for weariness and pain.

147-51. The Body too is a poor thing: in these ways Buddhism is distinctly pessimistic as compared with Christianity, which sees in the world a potential Kingdom of God, and in the human body a "temple of the Holy Spirit": yet, be it noted, Gautama painted this lurid picture

[p. 92]

with intent to awaken men to the powers of their mind and character.

150. A citadel of bones. There are occasional gleams of grim humour in the Buddhist books: the following story illustrates both the "law of apperception" and the Buddhist attitude to the body. The hermit Maha-Tissa was walking near Anuradhapura meditating upon the transiency of life. A woman who had quarrelled with her husband passed him, gaily dressed and bejewelled, and smiled at him, showing her pearly teeth. When the husband, who was in pursuit, came up with him he called to him: "Reverend Sir, did you see a woman pass this way?" "I saw only a skeleton," replied the sage; "whether it was man or woman I know not" (Visuddhi-Maggai).

151. Cf. "My words shall never pass away."

152. Like the ox. So the prophet Amos addresses the fat and sensual women of his day: "Ye kine of Bashan" (Amos iv, 1): "massive in body but small in mind " (c f. Deut. xxxii, 15).

153, 154. These famous words are held by Buddhists to have been those uttered by Gautama at the moment of enlightenment.

The allegory that underlies them is this: The Builder is Desire (Tanha) the cause of rebirth: the seeker tried long to find this cause; at the moment of his enlightenment it flashed into his mind, "If desire be dead, then there is nothing to bind man to the wheel of existence." The Builder causes the body to be built: its "corner-stone" (or ridgepole) is ignorance (avijja), and its "beams" are bad states of consciousness.

Admirably rendered by Sir Edwin Arnold:

"Many a house of life
 Hath held me--seeking ever him who wrought
 These prisons of the senses, sorrow-fraught;
         Sore was my ceaseless strife.
             But now,
 Thou Builder of this tabernacle--Thou!

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] I know Thee! Never shall Thou build again
         These walls of pain,
 Nor raise the roof-tree of deceits; nor lay
         Fresh rafters on the clay;
 Broken Thy house is, and the ridge-pole split!
         Delusion fashioned it !
 Safe pass I them--deliverance to obtain."

155. Cf. "Like a pelican of the wilderness" (Ps. cii, 6).

157. This is a practice enjoined in the Books: the passage may mean also "for one of the three periods of life."

158. Cf. Matt. vii, 1-5: "Judge not, that ye be not judged," etc.

164. Bears fruit ...It dies down after flowering.

166. The hedonistic note in Buddhism cannot be denied: "Ethics," says Dr. Martineau, "must either perfect themselves in religion, or disintegrate themselves in hedonism." Buddhist ethics, seeing no great social purpose being worked out in the world, fails to reconcile the claims of self-culture and benevolence, falling back upon the monastic compromise that in the long run self-culture is the highest benevolence. (Cf. Introduction, p. 14)

171. It looks gay and splendid: it is an engine of destruction; it is treacherous as a morass.

174. Cf. Matt. vii, 14: "Narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it."

Ps. cxxiv, 7: "Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler."

175. The East has always held that holy living gives miraculous power. Arahats were said to possess this power (jddhi) of flying through the air, or "levitation." There are still Hindus who claim these powers: but southern Buddhism does not take them seriously. I asked several Buddhists if this power were now attainable. "Possibly in Thibet," they answered. [**]

176. Cf. Jas. ii, 10: "Whosoever shall keep the whole

[p. 94]

law, and yet stumble in one point, he is become guilty of all." But the underlying idea in St. James, of loyalty to the King, is of course not present to the Buddhist mind.

178. Universal empire: the height of worldly ambition. Conversion: i.e. the first step towards Nirvana, when the attention is fixed upon the Supreme Bliss. "Sotapattti" means "entering the stream," up which the convert has to forge his way. After this ethical change he may have to undergo seven more births before he attains the goal.

182. The Buddha, being free of all taints or germs of rebirth, has no crack in his armour through which he may be wounded: i.e. he has no cause of rebirth.

183. The ideal is not, as is often said, merely negative: it is also positive and inward. Cf. St. Paul's more emphatic words: "Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good" (Rom. xii, 9).

The Buddhas. According to the Books there are many Buddhas: some in the dim past, others in the distant future. In Ceylon, Buddhists look wistfully for the coming Buddha--Metteyya or Maitri--the Loving One. In Japan they worship Amida Buddha--an ideal.

184. The word translated "fortitude" is "kantibalam," patience-strength, that blending of great qualities, passive and active, Eastern and Western, which is as rare as it is beautiful.

194. Cf. Ps. cxxiii, 1: "Behold how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity."

197-200. This section may be regarded as the Buddhist, analogue of the Beatitudes of Christ: it depicts the blessed life as a life of calm and peace; either solitary or in the company of Buddha's true followers, a man may enjoy that bliss which is the bloom upon virtue in this life: and hereafter the Rest of the Ineffable.

207. Like Jesus, Gautama offers his followers a family life whose ties are more intimate and tender than those of blood. In the Sangha they are to find their kinsfolk and a better family life than they have left. (Cf. "Who is My mother

[p. 95]

or My brethren?... Whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is My brother and My sister and mother."--Mark iii, 35.) Yet it must be borne in mind that to enter this company a man must be a celibate: and that perfect solitude is held up as the safer ideal.

208. The cold clear moonlight of this simile is symbolic of the Buddhist ideal.

212, 213. Buddhism teaches benevolence to all, attachment to none. It is a monastic ideal, and may be paralleled from such books as the Imitatio Christi. Cf. Bk. I, chap. viii: "We must have charity towards all, but familiarity is not expedient."

There is, however, a vital difference: the Buddhist Bhikkhu is to shun society that nothing may mar his self-culture: the Christian monk that he may be "familiar with God alone, and with His Angels." When Prince Siddhartha (afterwards the Buddha) heard of the birth of his son Rahula, and they tried to bring him back, he is said to have remarked: "That is one more bond to be cut." The "Great Renunciation" involved no less than this.

218. The Ineffable. The Buddha describes Nirvana probably from his own experience of that ecstatic joy which is said to be the reward of deep meditation.

This word "ineffable" is one used all by who have known this experience. Cf. Myers' St. Paul:

"Oh could I tell, ye surely would believe it!
 Oh could I only say what I have seen!
 How should I tell, or how can ye receive it,
 How till He bringeth you where I have been?"

and St. Paul's words of his own experience in 2 Cor. xii, 2-4.

Against the stream. The fight for character is one against long odds. Nature has at times to be "pitchforked." (Cf. Mrs. Rhys Davids' Buddhist Psychology, p. lxvii.) Man is not at the mercy of the "stream" of natural impulse; but swimming against it is hard work. (Cf. 244, 245.)

[p. 96]

221. Phenomenal existence: Pali nama rupa, " name and form," i.e. things mental and material.

227. Atula: according to the Commentator, one of Gautama's disciples: he is not mentioned elsewhere. If we read "atulam" the meaning is "an incomparable saying."

241. Disuse...mantras: i.e. if the words are not used they are forgotten.

251. Lust... hatred... folly. The three inveterate foes of the good life. Buddhism sees that man has in him ape, tiger, and ass. (Cf. Introduction, p. 15.)

252. Or "as the fowler hides his snare."

254, 255. We have followed the Sinhalese scholar, Mr. James D'Alwis, in this translation: he is supported by the Commentary. Another possible rendering is: "No one outside the Buddhist community can walk through the air, but only a samana" (Fausboll). But this taxes the construction too severely, and as Professor Max Muller says, Buddha did not encourage the display of miraculous power.

264. Cf. Imitatio Christi, bk. I, chap. xvii: "The habit and the shaven crown do little profit: but change of manners, and perfect mortification of passions make a true religious man."

Samano, before Gautama's day, meant "ascetic," being derived from the root "sram"--to work hard, to do penance. He gave a new derivation and a new significance to the word--sam, meaning "calm."

264-9. These stanzas contain a play on the words: Gautama is giving new definitions of current terms. It is hardly possible to render these in English: perhaps in 264-5 the use of the word "religious" as both noun and adjective is a fair analogy from Christian monasticism. The pun in 270 is only to be permitted as illustrating the spirit of the section.

268-9. So Asoka says of impiety and piety: "The one course avails me for the present life, the other avails me also for the life to come." (Pillar Edict, III); and Thomas

[p. 97]

a Kempis, quoting Phil. iii, 8: "He is truly prudent, that regards all earthly things as dung, that he may gain Christ."

270. Meekness is the true heroism: "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth"; "Fight the good fight." As in mediaeval Europe, so in ancient India, all "nobles" (Aryans) were, warriors. Gautama gives a new definition of the true knight. (Cf. the history of the words "chivalry," "gentle," and "generous," under Christian influences.)

273. The four truths: suffering: its cause: its cure: the eightfold path of escape.

The seer: cakkhuma, the man who has the eye for truth: the man of insight.

274. The "seeing of Purity." The phrase may mean equally well the "purification of vision." The man of insight is the pure man; to one who ventured to dispute Gautama's judgment he exclaimed: "Shall he whose mind is dominated by passion surpass the Blessed One in wisdom?" (Cf. Christ's words: "My judgment is just, because I seek not Mine own will.")

276. Blessed Ones: Tathagata, "those who have arrived," or reached Nirvana.

277-9. "All is passing": one of the leading tenets of Heraclitus and the Orphists, who belong to the same century as the Buddha (sixth century B.C). Their teaching, so far as it has survived, has many points of similarity with his.

"All is passing... all is sorrow... all is unreal." The words ring out again and again like the solemn tolling of some cloister bell, summoning men away from the pursuit of shadows, to that only worthy object "the path of Purity"--Nirvana.

283. Vanam means either "lust" or a "forest": English cannot reproduce the play upon words.

284. Even married love is regarded by Buddhism as an "entanglement" of this kind.

[p. 98]

286. Cf. the parable of the Rich Fool, and St. James: "Go to now, ye that say to-day or to-morrow we will go into the city, and spend a year there... whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow " (iv, 13, 14).

294. The Commentator explains this curious verse as follows: The Mother is lust: the Father self-will: the Kings are heresies--two extremes on either side of the middle path (cf. Introductory Note,  section xx); the Kingdom is sensuality (cf. 97).

295. The five roads are lust, hatred, disturbance of mind, sloth, and doubt.

301. The principal objects of meditation.

302. Hard is the community life: reading samanasamvaso with Max Muller and the Chinese version, instead of 'samanasamvaso (= asamanasamvaso) with Fausboll and the Sinhalese.

The wanderer in the world: i.e. the layman.

307. Suffering is the blight upon sin.

310. Therefore... Cf. the simple authority of the seventh commandment, "Thou shalt not commit adultery," and of Christ's words to the woman taken in adultery, "Go and sin no more."

311. "Corruptio optimi pessima."

324. Dhanapalako: i.e. guardian of wealth.

340. The streams: sensations.

The creeper: passion.

344. The pun on the word vanam (forest and lust) is repeated here: "tangle" perhaps expresses both meanings.

353. Spoken, according to the Commentary, when the Buddha was on the way to Benares, and the Brahmin Upaka sceptically asked him who was his Teacher, and what the cause of his serenity and joy. Here Gautama claims omniscience: elsewhere he claims to be the only Teacher: " Non seulement Cakyamuni est source de verite, mais il est la source unique" (De la Vallee Poussin, Bouddhisme, p. 138). (Cf. Mahavagga i, 6, 8.)

356-9. As weeds spoil a good harvest, so these passions

[p. 99]

spoil the good harvest of character. Seed sown in clean soil is fruitful: so are gifts to the Noble.

370. The five bonds to be cut are egoism, doubt, false asceticism, lust, and hatred. The five to be left off are longing for higher states of birth, for still higher ones, self-will, want of purpose, and ignorance. The five to be taken are faith, manliness, mindfulness, deep meditation, and wisdom. (Commentary.)

"He who has crossed the flood" = Oghatinna.

Take five more. Man is destined to be yoked, if not by sin, then by duty. (Cf. "Whose service is perfect freedom.")

373. Divine pleasure: the joy of the unified will.

384. Meditation may be either special or general: i.e. upon any of the forty objects which lead to Samadhi, or upon the transiency, sorrow, and unreality of things.

For he knows... Cf. " Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free" (John viii, 32).

385. Lit. "In whom is found neither near bank nor far": i.e. neither noticing external objects by attending to them, nor letting his desires go out to seek them. (Commentary.)

387. The face of the seer is said to shine.

388. Deriving Brahmano from the root vah--or bah--to put away.

394. Cf. Luke xi, 39; Matt. xxiii, 27.

398. The cable is Dosa, hatred; the chain with its links is Tanha, desire in all its forms; the bolt is Moha, infatuation, or folly.

395. This stanza seems to have a Brahminical origin: unless we lay all the stress on meditating.

405. Fixed or moving creatures, according to the Sinhalese Commentary, refers either to men or to animals. In a metaphorical sense, fixed creatures are Arahats, moving ones are common men. In a literal sense fixed creatures may be such things as molluscs.

Footnotes

^93:* "The Buddhist," vol. i, No. 9, contains an account by an eye-witness of a self-levitated lama.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

ILLUSTRATIVE SAYINGS OF THE

  

DISCIPLES OF THE BUDDHA

THE following are selections from another book which bears the impress of a very early date, and gives us vivid glimpses of the Buddhist Ideal: the Thera-Theri-Gatha, or Songs of the Elders and Sisters. The Psalms of the Sisters, Mrs. Rhys Davids' fine translation of the latter portion of this book, is a valuable commentary on the Dhammapada, and reveals the great power of Buddhism (whilst the enthusiasm for Buddha was still alive) over the human heart.

  

SAYINGS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE BUDDHIST

  

IDEAL

Its asceticism:

"Gold-bedecked and bejewelled, carrying her son upon her hip and followed by attendants, came my wife.

"Beholding her, the mother of my son, I beheld a snare set by the Evil One [Mara]."

Thera-gatha, 299.

"Where a man dwells alone, he is as Brahma; where two dwell, they dwell as gods; where three dwell, it is as a village; where there are more, it is a rabble." (The fewer the safer!)

Ibid., 245.

[p. 101]

Its stoicism:

"The rain pours gurgling down: alone dwell I in dreadful cave. Yet for me it holds not dread nor fear; I am one who knows them not."

Ibid. 189.

"As the elephant calmly endures the battle, so this lean one, with limbs gnarled as tree-trunks, endures the sting of insects as he bathes."

Ibid., 243.

"The cold dark nights of winter chap the skin and freeze the thoughts, O Mogharaja! What shall the Bhikkhu do?

"The men of Magadha have taken in their harvest. I, too, like others who delight in life, will lie down and take my rest in the straw."

"Home have I left; for I have left my world!
 Child have I left, and all my cherished herds!
 Lust have I left, and Ill-will too is gone,
 And Ignorance have I put far from me;
 Craving and root of craving overpowered,
 Cool am I now, knowing Nibbana's peace."
                                       Thera-gatha, 18.
                       (MRS. RHYS DAVIDS' Translation.)

Its earnestness:

"Not for sleep is the star-spangled night, but for work to him who is wise."

Thera-gatha, 192.

"When disease assailed my body, then my mind awoke and cried, "The sickness is upon me! It is high time to play the man."

Ibid., 30.

"Happy freedom! Happy freedom! Good it is to be freed from three crooked things, from scythe and plough and hoe. There they stand; no use have I for them! Let me meditate again and again; let me lead the strenuous life (of thought)."

Ibid., 43.

"Of yore my mind would wander whither caprice and desire led it. To-day I hold it in check as the mahout can hold with his prod the elephant in rut."

Ibid., 76.

"They who have lost their foothold fall. But they can, if they will, arise again and yet again. I have won up the steep slope: loving what is lovely I have easily attained."

Ibid., 62.

     
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

  

APPENDIX

  

THE BUDDHIST IDEAL

  

(ARAHATSHIP OR NIRVaNA)

  

AS DEPICTED IN THE DHAMMAPADA

THE "ambrosial (or deathless) path," Nirvana, is the prize which these stanzas hold out to the strenuous: this is at once the goal of effort and its cessation, a calm haven after strenuous voyaging. [**] The seer speaks with a quiet rapture and a serene assurance which convince us as we read, that whether it is Gautama himself who speaks, or whether it is the collective voice of his followers, here is in any case the utterance of a real experience of the soul. Can it be that these men entered behind the veil of sense and time, and that their voices ring down the ages from that mysterious Beyond to which the mystics of all ages have aspired?

We cannot say; yet it is very clear that if the metaphysical Nirvana is a fantasy, the ethical Nirvana is real enough: and Gautama was above all things an ethical teacher. That

[p. 103]

we shall understand Nirvana from a perusal of those pages is not likely; that it will attract Western thinkers is not wholly to be desired; but we can at least study the ethical experience of which Nirvana is but the description and the attempted explanation: and a grasp of what Arahatship means is essential to the understanding of Buddhism. The Arahat is one who, through obedience to the preaching of Buddha, has reached that calm state when the will no longer struggles, but is unified and at rest.

As the eagle, after long strain of upward flight, stays poised in mid-air, so the seer reaches the calm and severe heights of character. This is Nirvana in the present world: and Nirvana hereafter may be more mysterious, but it must be of the same kind.

Very much as the Christian, experiencing "the peace that passes understanding," interprets in the light of this experience the serenity and calm of the Hereafter, so the Buddhist "saint," having known the quiet and serenity of the unified will, projects this experience into the future.

To both alike this future is "ineffably sublime"; words fail men when they attempt to speak of the Beyond: and yet we can piece together a picture of their inmost thoughts from such fragmentary descriptions of their experience as they let fall.

[p. 104]

Arahatship and Nirvana, then, form one ideal, and it is with this that the Dhammapada is concerned.

We have seen that Nirvana is ineffable (stanza 218 and note); but we have also to remember that it can be experienced here and now. In stanza 402 we read:

"He is the Brahmin who in this very world knows the end of sorrow, who has laid the burden aside and is free." [**]

For whilst "the burden" is ultimately bodily existence, yet it is the sinfulness and egoism and pride of the flesh which make that burden so intolerable: the body is in fact a good servant but a bad master, and he who masters his body is already as it were freed from it.

"Happy is he," says the Digha Nikaya, "who is free of lust and beyond its power: the highest bliss is freedom from pride and self-will."

"There is no sorrow like existence, no bliss like Nirvana," says the Dhammapada.

"The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, cries St. Paul...Unhappy man that I am! Who shall deliver me from this body of death?"

These and similar passages are a cry for deliverance; and both teachers insist upon the same great truth, that man's bodily life, in so far as it is dominated by self-will and lust, is an evil

[p. 105]

to be escaped at any cost. Neither is Manichean: it is not the body that is evil, but the body enslaved by the tyranny of evil desires.

And for both teachers it is the perversity of the "flesh" that shapes the ideal of escape; though the one longs after the life of dissolution, and the other believes that he will be "clothed upon" with a "glorified body" hereafter. [**]

The salient feature of the Buddhist ideal is freedom:

"Him I call Brahmin who has cut the bonds, who thirsts not for pleasure, who has left behind the hindrances."

(See 397 and note on 398.)

The phrase "highest freedom" occurs more than once in these stanzas as a synonym for Nirvana, and, as Mrs. Rhys Davids has shown, it is this aspect of Nirvana which is most frequently hymned in the Psalms of the Sisters, that remarkable collection of verses attributed to the women-elders of the Sangha. [*+] (Cf. Dhammapada, 90, 92, 93, 96, etc.)

Inasmuch as this "highest freedom" is escape from lust and other "bonds," it is an

[p. 106]

ideal for this life: inasmuch as it is escape from the round of rebirths it is an ideal for the future: here Arahatship passes over into Nirvana. [**]

And in both alike the way of escape lies in the mind of man:

"All that we are by Mind is wrought,
 Fashioned and fathered by our Thought." [**]

The Arahat has mastered his mind (that "frail and fickle thing" that in the worldling "leaps hither and thither, like a monkey seeking fruit)"; and therefore he is already free from the tyranny of the flesh (cf. 89). For it is the mental "bonds"--lust, pride, self-will--which have bound him through the long waste of years to one body after another; and it is "knowledge" which sets him free:

"He is the Brahmin indeed who... has reached the end of rebirths, the sage whose knowledge is perfect, and who is perfect with all perfection."

This freedom of Nirvana is envisaged as Rest: and there is in these stanzas a cry for rest which runs through all the Buddhist books like some pathetic fugue: a desire so passionate as to be almost unintelligible to Western minds.

But to men obsessed heart and spirit with the

[p. 107]

"weary weight of the intolerable years," life after life of suffering and care, it is a real longing which here finds rhythmic expression:

"All is fleeting, all is unreal, all is sorrowful." (277-9.)
 "There is no sorrow, like to existence: no bliss like Nirvana, the Supreme Rest." (202.)

Worldly existence is wholly evil; but every man is free to cultivate the "otherworldly" frame of mind, and be at peace. For Buddhism is in a sense eudaemonistic; it does not flout man's desire to be happy: only it defines this happiness in terms of inward peace and self-control.

Section XV of the Dhammapada is the Buddhist analogue of the Beatitudes of Jesus, and, as an ideal of the Happy Life, ranks high indeed.

It is an ideal of kindliness and serenity, of peace and unity, which is very winsome: it would be hard to pick a quarrel with the exponents of such a life!

To the Christian it seems none the less an ideal more passive and stoical, less loving and mystical than that of Jesus; and yet we cannot but rejoice that the East has had this ideal so long before it. To the Karma-haunted millions of India it has shone with a steady and alluring radiance, in time past more potent than to-day, but even now embedded in their subconsciousness.

Its calm and cool attractiveness is beautifully

[p. 108]

symbolised in the poetic imagery of the Dhammapada:

"The good man shines like the moon escaped from clouds, he is pure as some unruffled lake." (95.)

[paragraph continues] And the company of such a leader with his disciples is

"As the moon following the path of the stars." (208.)

Another lovely moonlit scene embodies and symbolises the spirit of this ideal:

The Buddha's six chief disciples are in a park, and as they sit in the tropical moonlight they ask one another what quality in the Bhikkhu could add to the beauty of the scene. Amongst the answers are three which throw light upon the meaning of Arahatship:

"The peace and insight of moral victory," says one,
 "The joy and insight of Emancipation," says another;

[paragraph continues] and Sariputta wins the Master's approval by his reply:

"When a Bhikkhu masters his heart (cittam) and does not let it master him."

"Hear from me," says Gautama. "Hear from me what kind of Bhikkhu could add a lustre to the wood; one who, sitting serene and controlled, resolves: "Till my heart is freed from the ferments of lust I shall not quit my seat." [**]

This scene is most suggestive, for it throws

[p. 109]

into strong contrast Buddhist and Christian Ethics, and further it leads us into the heart of a vexed and difficult problem.

With regard to the first point, it is sufficient to say here that Buddhism teaches a rigorous and calm self-mastery, Christianity demands a passionate self-surrender.

With regard to the second, we may state the problem thus: Is Nirvana a social ideal? Or is it an ideal of solitude and forgetfulness? The answer seems to be that Buddhism holds out no promise of the reunion of emancipated "souls"; Nirvana is the cessation of all personal existence: yet the experience of the peace and joy of Noble Companionship--such companionship and communion of soul as is here depicted--is too good not to be desired. And this desire has tinged the ideal picture of the Beyond: in spite of metaphysics the ethical, asserts itself

"Good is the Vision of the Noble" (i.e. Arahats).
 "Good is their company." (206.)
 "A loyal friend is the truest kinsman:
 Nirvana is the greatest Bliss." (204.)

To sum up the Buddhist position upon the question of "Society and Solitude" is no easy task; but we may express it tentatively thus: At first solitude is essential:

"Alone man lives like Brahma: in twos men live like gods: in threes they are as a village. More than this is a mob."

[p. 110]

[paragraph continues] And as the Dhammapada says,

"Even for great benefit to another let no man imperil his own benefit." (166.)

But if an Arahat is to be found, his society can do nothing but good: let the Bhikkhu resort to him. If there are a company of Arahats, let them rejoice in communion and fellowship. And hereafter

Nirvana is "the unknown shore." (323.)
 It is "the solitude which it is hard to love." (88.)

[paragraph continues] With all his kindliness and even geniality Buddha does not disguise the fact that victory will be purchased at a heavy cost:

"One is the road leading to wealth: another is that leading to Nirvana."

[paragraph continues] To win to the goal will mean asceticism all along the line:

"Cut out the bonds...
 Play the man...
 Travel stoutly alone..."

[paragraph continues] Such are his rallying-cries.

For the "Path of Safety" is beset with "evil beasts." And to win across "the torrent" to the safety of the "other side" needs courage and strenuous effort. And, having won through, men will find a great solitude, a peace, a freedom, only to be purchased by ceasing to be. Such is Nirvana in the fullest sense.

Freedom; Safety; Rest: Calmness; Kindliness;

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] Self-control: Solitary effort or the company of the select few. Above all, Bliss, ineffable yet traceable to its seat in the unified will. Such is Arahatship, or Nirvana in this present life. It is a lofty ideal, and though no Buddhist now strives to realise Nirvana, yet there are men in all Buddhist lands gazing into the remote future to see Arahatship shining afar off like some dim yet lovely star. And because it is ethical, therefore it is attainable:

"I ought, therefore I can."

In the days of Gautama it is clear that men reached the goal of Arahatship, and knew the peace and joy of a mind and conscience at rest. For the contagion of his enthusiasm and the magnetism of his personality went far to energise ideals which are real enough beneath a tropic sun, and, in so far as they are ethical ideals, vital enough in all lands. And to-day Buddhists look wistfully to a Coming One, Maitri, who shall spur them on to victory: or they put their trust in the grace of an Amida who demands only faith in his saving power.

The Christian will see in these aspirations and yearnings the promise of a speedy fulfilment, when men see the Majesty and the Love of God revealed in Christ: and he will welcome the teachings of Gautama the Buddha as the utterance of a prophet and a seer.

[p. 112]

  

NOTE

Nirvana is thus explained in the Abhidhammattha-Sangaha, translated by Mr. Shwe Zan Aung, and published by the Pali Text Society under the title Compendium of Philosophy.

  

OF NIBBANA

  

Now Nibbana, which is reckoned as beyond these worlds, is to be realised through the knowledge belonging to the Four Paths. It is the object of those Paths, and of their Fruits. It is called Nibbana, in that it is a "departure" from that craving which is called Vana, lusting. This Nibbana is in its nature single, but for purposes of logical treatment it is twofold, namely, the element of Nibbana, wherewith is yet remaining stuff of life, and the element without that remainder. So, too, when divided into modes, it is threefold--namely, Void, Signless, and Absolute Content.

 

                            MNEMONIC

  

Great Seers, wholly from Vana--lust set free,
 Declare Nibbana such a path to be:--
 Past death, past end (it goes, this blessed way),
 Uncaused, having no beyond, they say.

Thus, as fourfold, Tathagatas
 The ultimate kinds of things we know and feel:--
 Mind first, and next, concomitants of mind,
 Body as third, Nibbana last in kind.

Printed by Hazel, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury, England.

Footnotes

^102:* Upasama implies both the idea of Peace and the idea that there has been a struggle to win it.

^104:* cf. stanza 32: where "near to Nirvana" should probably be rendered "in the very presence of Nirvana." (RHYS DAVIDS.)

^105:* From a more positive point of view we may say that for the Buddhist, Peace is an ideal of equilibrium now and of unconsciousness hereafter: for the Christian, Peace is an ideal of conscious fellowship with God begun now and hereafter consummated.

^105:+ This collection, published by the Pali Text Society, will go far to prove how real and deep was the ethical experience of the early Buddhists.

^106:* In technical phraseology the ethical Nirvana is called Savupadisesanibbanam, or Nirvana, in which the five skandhas or elements of being remain; and the metaphysical Nirvana is called Anupadisesanibbanam, or Nirvana, in which they cease to exist. (See Note at end.)

^108:* Majjhima Nikaya, 32.

    
The Buddha's Way of Virtue, by W.D.C Wagiswara and K.J. Saunders, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

"The following advertisements appeared at the end of the original text. They are included for completeness"

  

THE WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES

Edited by L. CRANMER-BYNG and Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE SERIES AND ITS PURPOSE

THIS Series has a definite object. It is, by means of the best Oriental literature--its wisdom, philosophy, poetry, and ideals--to bring together West and East in a spirit of mutual sympathy, goodwill, and understanding. From India, China, Japan, Persia, Arabia, Palestine, and Egypt these words of wisdom have been gathered.

NEW VOLUMES.

HINDU GODS AND HEROES. Studies in the History of the Religion of India. By LIONEL D. BARNETT. 3/6 net.

BUDDHIST PSALMS. Translated from the Japanese of Shinran Shonin by S. YAMABE and L. ADAM BECK. 3/6 net.

THE SECRET ROSE GARDEN OF SA'D UD DIN MAHMUD SHABISTARI. Rendered from the Persian, with an Introduction, by FLORENCE LEDERER. 3/6 net.

INDIAN

THE RELIGION OF THE SIKHS. By DOROTHY FIELD. 3/6 net.

BUDDHIST SCRIPTURES. A Selection Translated from the Pali with Introduction by E. J. THOMAS, M.A. 3/6 net.

THE HEART OF INDIA. Sketches in the History of Hindu Religion and Morals. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT. D. 3/6 net.

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE: An Outline of the Philosophy of the Vedanta. As set forth by the Upanishads and by Sankara. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D. 3/6 net.

[p. 114]

THE BUDDHA'S "WAY OF VIRTUE." A Translation of the Dhammapada. By W. C. D. WAGISWARA and K. J. SAUNDERS, Members of the Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon branch. 3/6 net.

THE PATH OF LIGHT. Rendered for the first time into English from the Bodhi-charyavatara of Santi-Deva. A Manual of Maha-Yana Buddhism. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D. 3/6 net.

LEGENDS OF INDIAN BUDDHISM. Translated from "L'introduction a l'Histoire du Buddhisme Indien" of Eugene Burnouf, with an Introduction by WINIFRED STEPHENS. 3/6 net.

THE WAY OF THE BUDDHA. Selections from the Buddhist texts, together with the original Pali, with Introduction by HERBERT BAYNES, M.R.A.S. 3/6 net.

IRANIAN (Persian, Pehlvi, Zend, etc.)

THE DIWAN OF ZEB-UN-NISSA. The First Fifty Ghazals. Rendered from the Persian by MAGAN LAL and JESSIE DUNCAN WESTBROOK. With an Introduction and Notes. 3/6 net.

THE RUBA'IYAT OF HAFIZ. Translated with Introduction by SYED ABDUL MAJID, LL.D. Rendered into English Verse by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 2/6 net.

THE SPLENDOUR OF GOD. Being Extracts from the Sacred Writings of the Bahais. With Introduction by ERIC HAMMOND. 3/6 net.

THE TEACHINGS OF ZOROASTER, and the Philosophy of the Parsi Religion. Translated with Introduction by Dr. S. A. KAPADIA, Lecturer, University College, London. 2nd Edition, 3/6 net.

THE PERSIAN MYSTICS.

I. Jalalu'd-din Rumi. By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 3/6 net

II. Jami By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 3/6 net.

THE BUSTAN OF SA'DI. From the Persian. Translated with Introduction by A. HART EDWARDS. 3/6 net.

SA'DI'S SCROLL OF WISDOM. By SHAIKH SA'DI. With Introduction by Sir ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 2/6 net. With Persian Script added. 3/6 net.

THE ROSE GARDEN OF SA'DI. Selected and Rendered from the Persian with Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 2/6 net.

ARABIC

THE POEMS OF MU'TAMID, KING OF SEVILLE. Rendered into English Verse by DULCIE LAWRENCE SMITH. With an Introduction. 2/6 net.

ABU'L ALA, THE SYRIAN. By HENRY BAERLEIN. 3/6 net.

[p. 115]

THE ALCHEMY OF HAPPINESS. By AL GHAZZALI. Rendered into English by CLAUD FIELD. 3/6 net.

THE AWAKENING OF THE SOUL. From the Arabic of IBN TUFAIL. Translated with Introduction by PAUL BRoNNLE, Ph.D. 2/6 net.

THE RELIGION OF THE KORAN. With Introduction by Sir ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 2/6 net.

ARABIAN WISDOM. Selections and Translations from the Arabic by JOHN WORTABET, M.D. 2/6 net.

THE SINGING CARAVAN. Some Echoes of Arabian Poetry. By HENRY BAERLEIN. 3/6 net.

THE DIWAN OF ABU'L-ALA. By HENRY BAERLEIN. 2/6 net.

HEBREW

ANCIENT JEWISH PROVERBS. Compiled and Classified by A. COHEN, late Scholar of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. 3/6 net.

THE WISDOM OF THE APOCRYPHA. With an Introduction by C. E. LAWRENCE, Author of "Pilgrimage," etc. 3/6 net.

CHINESE

THE RHYTHM OF LIFE. Based on the Philosophy of Lao-Tse. By HENRI BOREL. Translated by M. E. REYNOLDS. 3/6 net.

A FEAST OF LANTERNS. Rendered with an Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG, Author of "A Lute of Jade," "The Odes of Confucius," etc. 3/6 net.

YANG CHU'S GARDEN OF PLEASURE. Translated from the Chinese by Professor ANTON FORKE. With an Introduction by H. CRANMER-BYNG. 2/6 net.

TAOIST TEACHINGS. From the Mystical Philosophy of Lieh Tzu. Translated by LIONEL GILES, M.A. 3/6 net.

A LUTE OF JADE. Being Selections from the Classical Poets of China. Rendered with an Introduction by L. Cranmer-Byng. 2nd Edition. 3/6 net.

THE CLASSICS OF CONFUCIUS.

The Book of History (Shu-King). By W. GORN OLD. 2/6 net.

The Book of Odes (Shi-King). By L. CRANMER-BYNG. 2/6 net.

THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS. A new Translation of the greater part of the Confucian Analects, with Introduction and Notes by LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant in the Department of Oriental Books and Manuscripts of the British Museum. 3/6 net.

[p. 116]

THE CONDUCT OF LIFE; or, The Universal Order of Confucius. A translation of one of the four Confucian Books, hitherto known as the Doctrine of the Mean. By KU HUNG MING, M.A. (Edin.). 2/6 net.

THE BOOK OF FILIAL DUTY. Translated from the Chinese of the Hsiao Ching by IVAN CHeN, First Secretary to the Chinese Legation. 2/6 net.

THE SAYINGS OF LAO TZU. From the Chinese. Translated with Introduction by LIONEL GILES, British Museum. 2/6 net.

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC. Selections from the Philosophy of Chuang Tzu. With Introduction by LIONEL GILES, M A, (Oxon.), Assistant at the British Museum. 3/6 net.

THE FLIGHT OF THE DRAGON. An Essay on the Theory and Practice of Art in China and Japan, based on Original Sources. by LAURENCE BINYON. 3/6 net.

JAPANESE

SPIRIT OF JAPANESE ART. By YONE NOGUCHI. 3/6 net.

SPIRIT OF JAPANESE POETRY. By YONE NOGUCHI. 3/6 net.

THE WAY OF CONTENTMENT. Translated from the Japanese of Kaibara Ekken by KEN HOSHINO. 3/6 net.

THE MASTER-SINGERS OF JAPAN. Being Verse Translations from the Japanese Poets. By CLARA WALSH. 3/6 net.

WOMEN AND WISDOM OF JAPAN. With Introduction by S. TAKAISHI. 2/6 net.

EGYPTIAN

ANCIENT EGYPTIAN LEGENDS. By M. A. MURRAY. 3/6 net.

THE BURDEN OF ISIS. Being the Laments of Isis and Nephthys. Translated from the Egyptian with an Introduction by JAMES TEACKLE DENNIS. 2/6 net.

THE INSTRUCTION OF PTAH-HOTEP AND THE INSTRUCTION OF KE'GEMNI. The Oldest Books in the World. Translated from the Egyptian with Introduction and Appendix by BATTISCOMBE GUNN. 2/6 net.

Also by L. CRANMER-BYNG

SALMA. A play in three acts, of which the scene is laid in Cintra a thousand years ago. 3/6 net.

Editorial Communications should be addressed to

             THE EDITORS OF THE WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES,

                                  50A, ALBEMARLE STREET, LONDON, W.1

LONDON: JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

 

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: wsl.txt =====


    
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

A WANDERER IN THE SPIRIT LANDS.

BYFRANCHEZZO.TRANSCRIBED BY A. FARNESE.

W. J. Sinkins, London

[1896]

Oh, Star of Hope, that shines to bless
The Wanderer through Life's Wilderness!
Angels of Love--say are ye come
To lead the Weary Wanderer home?

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

Preface by the Transcriber.

The following narrative was written more than a year ago, and in giving it to the public I do not claim to be its author, since I have only acted the part of an amanuensis and endeavored to write down as truthfully and as carefully as I could, the words given to me by the Spirit Author himself, who is one of several spirits who have desired me to write down for them their experiences in the spirit world.I have had to write the words as fast as my pen could travel over the paper, and many of the experiences described and opinions advanced are quite contrary to what I myself believed to be in accordance with the conditions of life in the world of spirits.The Spirit Author Franchezzo I have frequently seen materialized, and he has been recognized on these occasions by friends who knew him in earth life.Having given the narrative to the public as I received it from the Spirit Author, I must leave with him all responsibility for the opinions expressed and the scenes described.A. FARNESE.
London, 1896

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

Dedication by the Author.

To those who toil still in the mists and darkness of uncertainty which veil the future of their earthly lives, I dedicate this record of the Wanderings of one who has passed from earth life into the hidden mysteries of the Life Beyond, in the hope that through my experiences now given to the world, some may be induced to pause in their downward career and think ere they pass from the mortal life, as I did, with all their unrepented sins thick upon them.It is to those of my brethren who are treading fast upon the downward path, that I would fain hope to speak, with the power which Truth ever has over those who do not blindly seek to shut it out; for if the after consequences of a life spent in dissipation and selfishness are often terrible even during the earth-life, they are doubly so in the Spirit World, where all disguise is stripped from the soul, and it stands forth in all the naked hideousness of its sins, with the scars of the spiritual disease contracted in its earthly life stamped upon its spirit form--never to be effaced but by the healing powers of sincere repentance and the cleansing waters of its own sorrowful tears.I now ask these dwellers upon earth to believe that if these weary travelers of the other life can return to warn their brothers yet on earth, they are eager to do so.  I would have them to understand that spirits who materialize have a higher mission to perform than even the solacing of those who mourn in deep affliction for the beloved they have lost.  I would have them to look and see that now even at the eleventh hour of man's pride and sin, these spirit wanderers are permitted by the Great Supreme to go back and tell them the fate of all who outrage the laws of God and man.  I would have even the idle and frivolous to pause and think whether Spiritualism be not something higher, holier, nobler, than the passing of an idle hour in speculations as to whether there are occult forces which can move a table or rap out the Alphabet, and whether it is not possible that these feeble raps and apparently unmeaning tips and tilts of a table are but the opening doors through which a flood of light is being let in upon the dark places of earth and of the Nether World--faint signs that those who have gone before do now return to earth to warn their brethren.As a warrior who has fought and conquered I look back upon the scenes of those battles and the toils through which I have passed, and I feel that all has been cheaply won--all has been gained for which I hoped and strove, and I seek now but to point out the Better Way to others who are yet in the storm and stress of battle, that they may use the invaluable time given to them upon earth to enter upon and follow with unfaltering step the Shining Path which shall lead them home to Rest and Peace at last.FRANCHEZZO.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

PART I.

Days of Darkness.

CHAPTER I.--My Death.

I have been a Wanderer through a far country, in those lands that have no name--no place--for you of earth, and I would set down as briefly as I can my wanderings, that those whose feet are pointed to that bourn may know what may in their turn await them.On earth and in my life of earth I lived as those do who seek only how the highest point of self gratification can be reached.  If I was not unkind to some--if I was indulgent to those I loved--yet it was ever with the feeling that they in return must minister to my gratification--that from them I might purchase by my gifts and my affection the love and homage which was as my life to me.I was talented, highly gifted both in mind and person, and from my earliest years the praise of others was ever given to me, and was ever my sweetest incense.  No thought ever came to me of that all self-sacrificing love which can sink itself so completely in the love for others that there is no thought, no hope of happiness, but in securing the happiness of the beloved ones.  In all my life, and amongst those women whom I loved (as men of earth too often miscall that which is but a passion too low and base to be dignified by the name of love), amongst all those women who from time to time captivated my fancy, there was not one who ever appealed to my higher nature sufficiently to make me feel this was true love, this the ideal for which in secret I sighed.  In everyone I found something to disappoint me.  They loved me as I loved them--no more, no less.  The passion I gave won but its counterpart from them, and thus I passed on unsatisfied, longing for I knew not what.Mistakes I made--ah! how many.  Sins I committed--not a few; yet the world was often at my feet to praise me and call me good, and noble, and gifted.  I was feted--caressed--the spoilt darling of the dames of fashion.  I had but to woo to win, and when I won all turned to bitter ashes in my teeth.  And then there came a time upon which I shall not dwell, when I made the most fatal mistake of all and spoilt two lives where I had wrecked but one before.  It was not a golden flowery wreath of roses that I wore, but a bitter chain--fetters as of iron that galled and bruised me till at last I snapped them asunder and walked forth free.  Free?--ah, me!  Never again should I be free, for never for one moment can our past errors and mistakes cease to dog our footsteps and clog our wings while we live--aye, and after the life of the body is ended--till one by one we have atoned for them, and thus blotted them from our past.And then it was--when I deemed myself secure from all love--when I thought I had learned all that love could teach--knew all that woman had to give--that I met one woman.  Ah! what shall I call her?  She was more than mortal woman in my eyes, and I called her "The Good Angel of My Life," and from the first moment that I knew her I bowed down at her feet and gave her all the love of my soul--of my higher self--a love that was poor and selfish when compared to what it should have been, but it was all I had to give, and I gave it all.  For the first time in my life I thought of another more than of myself, and though I could not rise to the pure thoughts, the bright fancies that filled her soul, I thank God I never yielded to the temptation to drag her down to me.As so time went on--I sunned myself in her sweet presence--I grew in holy thoughts that I deemed had left me for ever--I dreamed sweet dreams in which I was freed from those chains to my past that held me so cruelly, so hardly, now when I sought for better things.  And from my dreams I ever woke to the fear that another might win her from me--and to the knowledge that I, alas! had not the right to say one word to hold her back.  Ah, me!  The bitterness and the suffering of those days!  I knew it was myself alone who had built that wall between us.  I felt that I was not fit to touch her, soiled as I was in the world's ways.  How could I dare to take that innocent, pure life and link it to my own?   At times hope would whisper it might be so, but reason said ever, "No!"  And though she was so kind, so tender to me that I read the innocent secret of her love, I knew--I felt--that on earth she never would be mine.  Her purity and her truth raised between us a barrier I could never pass.  I tried to leave her.  In vain!  As a magnet is drawn to the pole, so was I ever drawn back to her, till at last I struggled no more.  I strove only to enjoy the happiness that her presence gave--happy that at least the pleasure and the sunshine of her presence was not denied me.And then!  Ah! then there came for me an awful, and unexpected day, when with no warning, no sign to awaken me to my position, I was suddenly snatched from life and plunged into that gulf, that death of the body which awaits us all.And I knew not that I had died.  I passed from some hours of suffering and agony into sleep--deep, dreamless sleep--and when I awoke it was to find myself alone and in total darkness.  I could rise; I could move; surely I was better.  But where was I?  Why this darkness?  Why was no light left with me?  I arose and groped as one does in a dark room, but I could find no light, hear no sound.  There was nothing but the stillness, the darkness of death around me.Then I thought I would walk forward and find the door.  I could move, though slowly and feebly, and I groped on--for how long I know not.  It seemed hours, for in my growing horror and dismay I felt I must find some one--some way out of this place; and to my despair I seemed never to find any door, any wall, anything.  All seemed space and darkness round me.Overcome at last, I called out aloud!  I shrieked, and no voice answered me.  Then again and again I called, and still the silence; still no echo, even from my own voice, came back to cheer me.  I bethought me of her I loved, but something made me shrink from uttering her name there.  Then I thought of all the friends I had known, and I called on them, but none answered me.  Was I in prison?  No.  A prison has walls and this place had none.  Was I mad?  Delirious?  What?  I could feel myself, my body.  It was the same.  Surely the same?  No.  There was some change in me.  I could not tell what, but I felt as though I was shrunken and deformed?  My features, when I passed my hand over them, seemed larger, coarser, distorted surely?  Oh, for a light!  Oh, for anything to tell me even the worst that could be told!  Would no one come?  Was I quite alone?  And she, my angel of light, oh! where was she?  Before my sleep she had been with me--where was she now?  Something seemed to snap in my brain and in my throat and I called wildly to her by name, to come to me, if but for once more.  I felt a terrible sense as if I had lost her, and I called and called to her wildly; and for the first time my voice had a sound and rang back to me through that awful darkness.Before me, far, far away, came a tiny speck of light like a star that grew and grew and came nearer and nearer till at last it appeared before me as a large ball of light, in shape like a star, and in the star I saw my beloved.  Her eyes were closed as of one in sleep, but her arms were held out to me and her gentle voice said in those tones I knew so well, "Oh! my love, my love, where are you now; I cannot see you, I only hear your voice; I only hear you call to me, and my soul answers to yours."I tried to rush to her, but I could not.  Some invisible force held me back, and around her seemed a ring I could not pass through.  In an agony I sank to the ground, calling upon her to leave me no more.  Then she seemed to grow unconscious; her head sank upon her breast, and I saw her float away from me as though some strong arms had borne her.  I sought to rise and follow her, but could not.  It was as if a great chain held me fast, and after some fruitless struggles I sank upon the ground in unconsciousness.

 
     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER II.--Despair.

"Dead! Dead!" I wildly cried.  "Oh, no, surely no!  For the dead feel nothing more; they turn to dust; they moulder to decay, and all is gone, all is lost to them; they have no more consciousness of anything, unless, indeed, my boasted philosophy of life has been all wrong, all false, and the soul of the dead still lives even though the body decays."The priests of my own church had taught me so, but I had scorned them as fools, blind and knavish, who for their own ends taught that men lived again and could only get to heaven through a gate, of which they held the keys, keys that turned only for gold and at the bidding of those who were paid to say masses for the departed soul--priests who made dupes of silly frightened women and weak-minded men, who, yielding to the terror inspired by their awful tales of hell and purgatory, gave themselves, bodies and souls, to purchase the illusive privilege they promised.  I would have none of them.  My knowledge of these priests and the inner hidden lives of many of them had been too great for me to listen to their idle tales, their empty promises of a pardon they could not give, and I had said I would face death when it came, with the courage of those who know only that for them it must mean total extinction; for if these priests were wrong, who was right?  Who could tell us anything of the future, or if there were any God at all?  Not the living, for they but theorize and guess, and not the dead, for none came back from them to tell; and now I stood beside this grave--my own grave--and heard my beloved call me dead and strew flowers upon it.As I looked the solid mound grew transparent before my eyes, and I saw down to the coffin with my own name and the date of my death upon it; and through the coffin I saw the white still form I knew as myself lying within.  I saw to my horror that this body had already begun to decay and become a loathsome thing to look upon.  Its beauty was gone, its features none would recognize; and I stood there, conscious, looking down upon it and then at myself.  I felt each limb, traced out with my hands each familiar feature of my face, and knew I was dead, and yet I lived.  If this were death, then those priests must have been right after all.  The dead lived--but where?  In what state?  Was this darkness hell?  For me they would have found no other place.  I was so lost, so beyond the pale of their church that for me they would not have found a place even in purgatory.I had cast off all ties to their church.  I had so scorned it, deeming that a church which knew of, and yet tolerated, the shameful and ambitious lives of many of its most honored dignitaries had no claim to call itself a spiritual guide for anyone.  There were good men in the church; true, but there was also this mass of shameless evil ones whose lives were common talk, common matter of ridicule; yet the church that claimed to be the example to all men and to hold all truth, did not cast out these men of disgraceful lives.  No, she advanced them to yet higher posts of honor.  None who have lived in my native land and seen the terrible abuses of power in her church will wonder that a nation should rise and seek to cast off such a yoke.  Those who can recall the social and political condition of Italy in the earlier half of this century, and the part the church of Rome played in helping the oppressor to rivet the fetters with which she was bound, and who know how her domestic life was honeycombed with spies--priests as well as laymen--till a man feared to whisper his true sentiments to his nearest and dearest lest she should betray him to the priest and he again to the government--how the dungeons were crowded with unhappy men, yea, even with mere lads guilty of no crime save love of their native land and hatred of its oppressors--those, I say, who know all this will not wonder at the fierce indignation and burning passion which smouldered in the breast of Italia's sons, and burst at last into a conflagration which consumed man's faith in God and in his so-called Vicar upon earth, and like a mountain torrent that has burst its bounds, swept away men's hopes of immortality, if only through submission to the decrees of the church it was to be obtained.  Such, then, had been my attitude of revolt and scorn towards the church in which I had been baptized, and that church could have no place within her pale for me.  If her anathemas could send a soul to hell surely I must be there.And yet as I thought thus I looked again upon my beloved, and I thought she could never have come to hell even to look for me.  She seemed mortal enough, and if she knelt by my grave surely I must be still upon earth.  Did the dead then never leave the earth at all, but hover near the scenes of their earthly lives?  With such and many similar thoughts crowding through my brain I strove to get nearer to her I so loved, but found I could not.  An invisible barrier seemed to surround her and keep me back.  I could move on either side of her as I pleased--nearer or farther--but her I could not touch.  Vain were all my efforts.  Then I spoke; I called to her by name.  I told her that I was there; that I was still conscious, still the same, though I was dead; and she never seemed to hear--she never saw me.  She still wept sadly and silently; still tenderly touched the flowers, murmuring to herself that I had so loved flowers, surely I would know that she had put them there for me.  Again and again I spoke to her as loudly as I could, but she heard me not.  She was deaf to my voice.  She only moved uneasily and passed her hand over her head as one in a dream, and then slowly and sadly she went away.I strove with all my might to follow her.  In vain, I could go but a few yards from the grave and my earthly body, and then I saw why.  A chain as of dark silk thread--it seemed no thicker than a spider's web--held me to my body; no power of mine could break it; as I moved it stretched like elastic, but always drew me back again.  Worst of all I began now to be conscious of feeling the corruption of that decaying body affecting my spirit, as a limb that has become poisoned affects with suffering the whole body on earth, and a fresh horror filled my soul.Then a voice as of some majestic being spoke to me in the darkness, and said:  "You loved that body more than your soul.  Watch it now as it turns to dust and know what it was that you worshipped, and ministered and clung to.  Know how perishable it was, how vile it has become, and look upon your spirit body and see how you have starved and cramped and neglected it for the sake of the enjoyments of the earthly body.  Behold how poor and repulsive and deformed your earthly life has made your soul, which is immortal and divine and to endure forever."And I looked and beheld myself.  As in a mirror held up before me, I saw myself.  Oh, horror!  It was beyond doubt myself, but, oh! so awfully changed, so vile, so full of baseness did I appear; so repulsive in every feature--even my figure was deformed--I shrank back in horror at my appearance, and prayed that the earth might open before my feet and hide me from all eyes for evermore.  Ah! never again would I call upon my love, never more desire that she should see me.  Better, far better, that she should think of me as dead and gone from her forever; better that she should have only the memory of me as I had been in earthly life than ever know how awful was the change, how horrible a thing was my real self.Alas! Alas!  My despair, my anguish was extreme, and I called out wildly and struck myself and tore my hair in wild and passionate horror of myself, and then my passion exhausted me and I sank senseless and unconscious of all once more.

Again I waked, and again it was the presence of my love that awaked me.  She had brought more flowers, and she murmured more soft tender thoughts of me as she laid them on my grave.  But I did not seek now to make her see me.  No, I shrank back and sought to hide myself, and my heart grew hard even to her, and I said:  "Rather let her weep for the one who has gone than know that he still lives," so I let her go.  And as soon as she was gone, I called frantically to her to come back, to come back in any way, to any knowledge of my awful position, rather than leave me in that place to see her no more.  She did not hear, but she felt my call, and afar off I saw her stop and half turn round as though to return, then she passed on again and left me.  Twice, three times she came again, and each time when she came I felt the same shrinking from approaching her, and each time when she left I felt the same wild longing to bring her back and keep her near me.  But I called to her no more for I knew the dead call in vain, the living hear them not.  And to all the world I was dead, and only to myself and to my awful fate was I alive.  Ah! now I knew death was no endless sleep, no calm oblivion.  Better, far better had it been so, and in my despair I prayed that this total oblivion might be granted to me, and as I prayed I knew it never could, for man is an immortal soul, and for good or evil, weal or woe, lives on eternally.  His earthly form decays and turns to dust, but the spirit, which is the true man, knows no decay, no oblivion.Each day--for I felt that days were passing over me--my mind awoke more and more, and I saw clearer and clearer the events of my life pass in a long procession before me--dim at first, then by degrees growing stronger and clearer, and I bowed my head in anguish, helpless, hopeless anguish, for I felt it must be too late now to undo one single act.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER III.--Hope--Wanderings on the Earth Plane--A Door of Spiritual Sight

I know not how long this lasted; it seemed a long, long time to me.  I was sitting wrapped still in my despair when I heard a voice gentle and soft calling to me--the voice of my beloved--and I felt compelled to rise and follow that voice till it should lead me to her; and as I rose to go the thread which had so bound me seemed to stretch and stretch till I scarce felt its pressure, and I was drawn on and on till at last I found myself in a room which, I could dimly see, even in the darkness that always surrounded me, was familiar to my eyes.  It was the home of my beloved one, and in that room I had passed, ah! how many peaceful happy hours in that time which seemed now separated from me by so wide and awful a gulf.  She sat at a little table with a sheet of paper before her and a pencil in her hand.  She kept repeating my name and saying:  "Dearest of friends, if the dead ever return, come back to me, and try if you can make me write a few words from you, even 'yes' or 'no' in answer to my questions."For the first time since I had died I saw her with a faint smile upon her lips and a look of hope and expectation in those dear eyes that were so heavy with weeping for me.  The dear face looked so pale and sad with her grief and I felt--ah! how I felt--the sweetness of the love she had given me, and which now less than ever dare I hope to claim.Then I saw three other forms beside her, but they I knew were spirits, yet how unlike myself.  These spirits were bright, radiant, so that I could not bear to look at them; the sight seemed to scorch my eyes as with a fire.  One was a man, tall, calm, dignified-looking, who bent over her to protect her as her guardian angel might.  Beside him stood two fair young men whom I knew at once to be those brothers whom she had so often spoken of to me.  They had died when youth with all its pleasures was before them, and their memories were shrined in her heart as those who were now angels.  I shrank back, for I felt they saw me, and I sought to cover my disfigured face and form with the dark mantle which I wore.  Then my pride awoke, and I said:  "Has not she herself called me?  I have come, and shall not she be the arbiter of my destiny?  Is it so irrevocable that nothing I can do, no sorrow, no repentance however deep, no deeds however great, no work however hard, can reverse it?  Is there indeed no hope beyond the grave?"And a voice, the voice I had heard before at my own grave, answered me:  "Son of grief, is there no hope on earth for those who sin?  Does not even man forgive the sinner who has wronged him if the sin be repented of and pardon sought?  And shall God be less merciful, less just?  Hast thou repentance even now?  Search thine own heart and see whether it is for thyself or for those thou hast wronged that thou art sorry?"And I knew as he spoke that I did not truly repent.  I only suffered.  I only loved and longed.  then again my beloved spoke and asked me, if I were there and could hear her, to try and write one word through her hand that she might know I still lived, still thought of her.My heart seemed to rise into my throat and choke me, and I drew near to try if I could move her hand, could touch it even.  But the tall spirit came between us, and I was forced to draw back.  Then he spoke and said:  "Give your words to me and I will cause her hand to write them down for you.  I will do this for her sake, and because of the love she has for you."A great wave of joy swept over me at his words, and I would have taken his hand and kissed it but could not.  My hand seemed scorched by his brightness ere I could touch him, and I bowed myself before him for I thought he must be one of the angels.My beloved spoke once more and said:  "Are you here, dearest friend?"I answered, "Yes," and then I saw the spirit put his hand on her, and when he did so her hand wrote the word "yes."  Slowly and unsteadily it moved, like a child's learning to write.  Ah! how she smiled, and again she asked me a question, and as before her own hand traced out my answer.  She asked me if there were anything she could do for me, any wish of mine that she could help me to carry out?  I said:  "No! not now.  I would go away now and torment her no more with my presence.  I would let her forget me now."My heart was so sore as I spoke, so bitter; and ah! how sweet to me was her reply, how it touched my soul to hear her say:  "Do not say that to me, for I would ever be your truest, dearest friend, as I was in the past, and since you died my one thought has been to find you and to speak with you again."And I answered, I called out to her, "It has been my only wish also."She then asked if I would come again, and I said "Yes!"  For where would I not have gone for her?  What would I not have done?  Then the bright spirit said she must write no more that night.  He made her hand write that also and said she should go to rest.I felt myself now drawn away once more back to my grave and to my earthly body in that dark churchyard; but not to the same hopeless sense of misery.  In spite of everything a spark of hope had risen in my heart, and I knew I should see and speak with her again.But now I found I was not alone there.  Those two spirits who were her brothers had followed me, and now spoke.  I shall not state all they said.  Suffice it to say they pointed out to me how wide was now the gulf between their sister and myself, and asked me if I desired to shadow all her young life with my dark presence.  If I left her now, she would, in time, forget me, except as one who had been a dear friend to her.  She could always think tenderly of my memory, and surely if I loved her truly I would not wish to make all her young life lonely and desolate for my sake.I replied that I loved her, and could never bear to leave her, never bear to think of any other, loving her as I had done.Then they spoke of myself and my past, and asked if I dared to think of linking myself with her pure life, even in the misty fashion in which I still hoped to do?  How could I hope that when she died I should meet her?  She belonged to a bright sphere to which I could not hope for a long time to rise, and would it not be better for her, and nobler, more truly loving of me, to leave her to forget me and to find what happiness in life could yet be given to her, rather than seek to keep alive a love that could only bring her sorrow?I said faintly I thought she loved me.  They said: "Yes, she loves you as she herself has idealized your image in her mind, and as she in her innocence has painted your picture.  Do you think if she knew all your story she would love you?  Would she not shrink back in horror from you?  Tell her the truth, give her the choice of freedom from your presence, and you will have acted a nobler part and shown a truer love than in deceiving her and seeking to tie her to a being like yourself.  If you truly love her, think of her and her happiness, and what will bring it--not of yourself alone."Then the hope within me died out, and I bowed my head to the dust in shame and agony, for I knew that I was vile and in no way fit for her, and I saw as in a glass what her life might still be freed from mine.  She might know happiness yet with another more worthy than I had been, while with my love I would only drag her down into sadness with me.  For the first time in my life I put the happiness of another before my own, and because I so loved her and would have had her happy, I said to them:  "Let it be so, then.  Tell her the truth, and let her say but one kind word to me in farewell, and I will go from her and darken her life with the shadow of mine no more."So we went back to her, and I saw her as she slept exhausted with her sorrow for me.  I pleaded that they would let me give her one kiss, the first and last that I would ever give.  But they said no, that was impossible, for my touch would snap forever the thread that held her still to life.Then they awoke her and made her write down their words, while I stood by and heard each word fall as a nail in the coffin where they were burying my last hope forever.  She, as one in a dream, wrote on, till at last the whole shameful story of my life was told, and I had but to tell her myself that all was forever at an end between us, and she was free from my sinful presence and my selfish love.  I said adieu to her.  As drops of blood wrung from my heart were those words, and as ice they fell upon her heart and crushed it.  Then I turned and left her--how, I know not--but as I went I felt the cord that had tied me to my grave and my earthly body snap, and I was free--free to wander where I would--alone in my desolation!And then?  Ah, me!  While I write the words the tears of thankfulness are in my eyes again, and I almost break down in trying to write them; then she whom we had deemed so weak and gentle that we had but to decide for her, she called me back with all the force of a love none dare oppose--called me back to her.  She said she could never give me up so long as I had love for her.  "Let your past be what it might; let you be sunk now even to the lowest depths of hell itself, I will still love you, still seek to follow you and claim my right--the right of my love--to help and comfort and cherish you till God in his mercy shall have pardoned your past and you shall be raised up again."  And then it was that I broke down and wept as only a strong proud man can weep, whose heart has been wrung and bruised and hardened, and then touched by the soft tender touch of a loving hand till the tears must come to his relief.I went back to my love and knelt down beside her, and though they would not let me touch her, that calm beautiful spirit who was her guardian whispered to her that her prayer was answered, and that she should indeed lead me back to the light.  And so I left my darling, and as I passed away I saw a white angel's form hover over her to give her strength and comfort, who was herself my angel of light.  I left her thus with those spirits, and went forth to wander till her voice should call me to her side again.After the short troubled sleep into which those bright spirits had put her, my darling awoke the next day, and went to visit a kind good man whom she had discovered in her efforts to find some way by which she might reach me even beyond the grave.If it might be that what she had been told about those people who were called Spiritualists was really true, she hoped through their aid to speak again with me, and prompted by those who were watching over her, she had searched out this man who was known as a healing medium, and by him she had been told that if she herself tried, she could write messages from the so-called dead.This I did not learn till later.  At the time I only felt myself summoned by the voice of her whose power over me was so great, and in obedience to it I found myself standing in what I could dimly distinguish to be a small room.  I say dimly, because all was still dark to me save only where the light around my darling shone as a star and showed faintly what was near.It was to this good man of whom I speak that she had gone, and it was her voice speaking to him that had drawn me.  She was telling him what had passed the night before, and how much she loved me, and how she would gladly give all her life if by so doing she could comfort and help me.  And that man spoke such kind words to her--from my heart I thanked and still thank him for them.  He gave me so much hope.  He pointed out to my dear love that the ties of the earth body are broken at its death, and I was free to love her and she was free to return that love--that she herself better than any other could in truth help to raise me, for her love would give me comfort and hope as nothing else would do, and would cheer my path of repentant effort.  And she had now the best of rights to give it, my love for her had been so pure and true a passion, while hers for me was stronger than death itself, since it had overcome the barrier of death.  He was so kind, this man--he helped me to speak to her, and to explain many things as I could not have done the night before when my heart was so sore and full of pride.  He helped me to tell what of excuse there had been for me in the past, though I owned that nothing can truly excuse our sins.  He let me tell her that in spite of all the wrong of my past she had been to me as one sacred--loved with a love I had given to none but herself.  He soothed and strengthened her with a kindness for which I blessed him even more than for his help to myself, and when she left him at last I, too, went with her to her home, the light of hope in both our hearts.And when we got there I found that a fresh barrier was raised up by those two spirit brothers and others to whom she was dear; an invisible wall surrounded her through which I could not pass, and though I might follow her about I could not get very near.  Then I said to myself that I would go back to the kind man and see if he would help me.My wish seemed to carry me back, for I soon found myself there again.  He was at once conscious of my presence, and strange as it may seem, I found that he could understand much, although not all, that I said to him.  He gathered the sense of what I wanted to say, and told me many things I shall not set down here since they concerned only myself.  He assured me that if I were only patient all would be well in time, and though the relations might build their spiritual wall around my love, her will would at all times draw me through it to her, and nothing could shut out her love from me; no walls could keep that back.  If I would seek now to learn the things of the spirit, and work to advance myself, the gulf between us would disappear.  Comforted I left him and wandered away again, I knew not where.

I was now beginning to be dimly conscious that there were other beings like myself flitting about near me in the darkness, though I could scarce see them.  I was so lost and lonely that I thought of going back to my grave again, as it was the spot most familiar to me, and my thought seemed to take me back, for soon I was there once more.The flowers that my love had brought me were faded now.  She had not been there for two days; since speaking to me she seemed to forget the body that was laid away in the earth, and this to me was well, and I would have had it so.  It was well for her to forget the dead body and think only of the living spirit.Even these withered flowers spoke of her love, and I tried to pick up one, a white rose, to carry away with me.  I found I could not lift it, could not move it in the least.  My hand passed through it as though it was but the reflection of a rose.I moved round to where there was a white marble cross at the head of the grave, and I saw there the names of my beloved one's two brothers.  Then I knew what she had done in her love for me; she had laid my body to rest beside those she had loved best of all.  My heart was so touched that again I wept, and my tears fell like dew upon my heart and melted away its bitterness.I was so lonely that at last I rose and wandered away again amongst other dark wandering shapes, few of whom even turned to look at me; perhaps like myself they scarcely saw.  Presently, however, three dark forms which seemed like two women and a man passed near me, and then turned and followed.  The man touched my arm and said:  "Where are you bound for?  Surely you are newly come over to this side, or you would not hurry on so; none hurry here because we all know we have eternity to wander in."  Then he laughed a laugh so cold and harsh in tone it made me shudder.  One of the women took my arm on one side and one on the other, saying:  "Come away with us and we will show you how you may enjoy life even though you are dead!  If we have not got bodies to enjoy ourselves through we will borrow them from some mortals for a little.  Come with us and we will show you that all pleasure is not ended yet."In my loneliness I was glad to have some being to speak to, that although they were all three most repulsive looking--the women to my mind even more so than the man--I felt inclined to let them lead me away and see what would happen, and I had even turned to accompany them when afar off in the dim distance, like a picture traced in light on a black sky, I saw the spirit form of my pure sweet love.  Her eyes were closed as I had seen her in my first vision, but as before her hands were stretched out to me and her voice fell like a voice from heaven on my ears, saying:  "Oh! take care! take care! go not with them; they are not good, and their road leads only to destruction."  Then the vision was gone, and as one waking from a dream I shook those three persons from me and hurried away again in the darkness.  How long and how far I wandered I know not.  I kept hurrying on to get away from the memories that haunted me and I seemed to have all space to wander in.At last I sat down on the ground to rest--for there seemed to be ground solid enough to rest upon--and while I sat there I saw glimmering through the darkness a light.  As I drew near it I saw a great haze of light radiating from a room which I could see, but it was so bright it hurt my eyes to look upon it as would looking at the noon-day sun on earth have done.  I could not bear it and would have turned away, when a voice said:  "Stay, weary wanderer!  Here are only kind hearts and helping hands for you.  And if you would see your love, come in, for she is here and you may speak with her."  Then I felt a hand--for I could see no one--draw my mantle over my head to shut out the brightness of the light, and then lead me into the room and seat me in a large chair.  I was so weary, so weary, and so glad to rest.  And in this room there was such peace, it seemed to me that I had found my way to heaven.After a little I looked up and saw two gentle, kindly women who were like angels to my eyes, and I said to myself, "I have come near to heaven surely?"  Again I looked, and by this time my eyes seemed strengthened, for beyond those two fair good women--and at first I could scarce believe it, so great was my joy--I saw my beloved herself smiling sadly but tenderly at where I sat.  She smiled, but I knew she did not really see me; one of the ladies did though, and she was describing me to my darling in a low quiet voice.  My darling seemed so pleased, for it confirmed to her what the man had told her.  She had been telling these ladies what a remarkable experience she had had, and how it seemed to her like a strange dream.  I could have cried out to her then that I was truly there, that I still lived, still loved her, and was trusting in her love for me, but I could not move, some spell was over me, some power I could dimly feel was holding me back.And then those two kind ladies spoke and I knew they were not angels yet, for they were still in their earthly bodies and she could see and speak to them.  They said much of what the kind good man had done, as to the hope there was for sinners like me.The same voice which had bidden me to enter, now asked would I like one of the ladies to write a message for me.  I said, "Yes! a thousand times yes!"Then I spoke my words and the spirit caused the lady to write them down.  I said to my beloved that I still lived, still loved her.  I bid her never to forget me, never to cease to think of me, for I required all her love and help to sustain me--I was ever the same to her though now I was weak and helpless and could not make her see me.  And she, ah! she gave me such sweet words in return I cannot write them down; they are too sacred to me, and still rest in my heart for evermore.

The period that followed this interview was one of deep sleep for me.  I was so exhausted that when I left that room I wandered on a little way and then sank down upon the ground in deep dreamless unconsciousness.  What did it matter where I rested when all was as night around me?How long my sleep lasted I know not.  At that period I had no means of counting time save by the amount of suffering and misery through which I passed.  From my slumbers I awoke refreshed in a measure, and with all my senses stronger in me than before.  I could move more rapidly; my limbs felt stronger and freer, and I was now conscious of a desire to eat I had not felt before.  My longing grew so great that I went in search of food, and for a long time could find none anywhere.  At last I found what looked like hard dry bread--a few crusts only, but I was glad to eat them, whereupon I felt more satisfied.  Here I may say that spirits do eat the spiritual counterpart of your food, do feel both hunger and thirst, as keen to them as your apetites are to you on earth, although neither our food nor our drink would be any more visible to your material sight than our spiritual bodies are, and yet for us they possess objective reality.  Had I been a drunkard or a lover of the pleasures of the table in my earthly body I should much sooner have felt the cravings of appetite.  As it was, nature with me had ever been easily satisfied, and though at first I turned from those dry crusts in disgust a little reflection told me that I had now no way of procuring anything, I was like a beggar and had better content myself with a beggar's fare.My thoughts had now turned to my beloved again, and the thoughts carried my spirit with them, so that I found myself entering once more the room where I had last seen her and the two ladies.  This time I seemed to pass in at once, and was received by two spirit men whom I could but very faintly see.  A veil seemed to hang between us, through which I saw those two spirit men, the ladies and my beloved.  I was told that I might again give a message to her through the lady who had written my words before.  I was so anxious to try if I could not make my darling write down my words herself as I had seen her guardian spirit do, that I was allowed to try.  To my disappointment I found I could not do it; she was deaf to all I said, and I had to give up that idea and let the lady write for me as before.  After I had given my message I rested for a short time and watched my beloved one's sweet face, as I had been wont to do in other happier days.  My musings were interrupted by one of those spirit men--a grave, handsome young man he seemed to be so far as I could see him.  He spoke to me in a quiet kindly voice, and said that if I truly desired to write my own words through my darling herself, it would be well for me to join a brotherhood of penitents who like myself desired to follow out the better way, and with them I should learn many things of which I was yet ignorant, and which would help me to fit myself to control her mind as well as give me the privilege I sought of being with her at times while she dwelt on earth.  This way of repentance was hard, he said--very hard--the steps many, the toil and suffering great, but it led to a fair and happy land at last where I should rest in happiness such as I could not dream of now.  He assured me (even as the kind earthly man had done) that my deformed body, which I was still so anxious to hide from my beloved one's eyes, would change as my spirit changed, till I should be once more fair to look upon, such as she would no longer grieve to see.  Were I to remain upon the earth plane as I now was, I should most likely be drawn back into my former haunts of so-called pleasure, and in that atmosphere of spiritual degradation I should soon lose the power to be near my darling at all.  For her own sake those who guarded her would be obliged to exclude me.  On the other hand, were I to join this brotherhood (which was one of hope and endeavor), I should be so helped, so strengthened, and so taught, that when in due course my time came to return to the earth plane, I should have acquired a strength and an armor that could resist its temptations.I listened to the words of this grave, courteous spirit with wonder and a growing desire to know more of this brotherhood of whom he spoke, and begged he would take me to them.  This he assured me he would do, and he also explained that I should be there of my own free will and choice only.  Did I desire at any time to leave I could at once do so.  "All are free in the Spirit world," he said.  "All must follow only where their own wishes and desires lead them.  If you study to cultivate the higher desires, means will be given you to attain them, and you will be strengthened with such help and strength as you may need.  You are one who has never learned the power of prayer.  You will learn it now, for all things come by earnest prayer, whether you are conscious that you pray or not.  For good or for evil your desires are as prayers and call around you good or evil powers to answer them for you."As I was again growing weary and exhausted, he suggested that I should bid adieu to my darling for a time.  He explained that I should gain more strength as well as permit her to do so if I left her for the time I was to remain in this place of which he spoke.  It would also be well that she should not try to write for three months, as her mediumistic powers had been greatly tried, and if she did not rest them she would be much impaired, while I would require all that time to learn even the simple lessons needful before I could control her.Ah! me, how hard it seemed to us both to make this promise, but she set me the example, and I could but follow it.  If she would try to be strong and patient so should I, and I registered a vow that if the God I had so long forgotten would remember and pardon me now, I would give all my life and all my powers to undo the wrongs that I had done; and so it was that I left for a time the troubled earth plane of the spirit world of which I had as yet seen so little, but in which I was yet to see and suffer so much.  As I left the room to go with my new guide I turned to my love and waved my hand in farewell, and asked that the good angels and the God I dare not pray to for myself might bless her and keep her safe for evermore, and the last thing I saw was her tender eyes following me with that look of love and hope which was to sustain me through many a weary, painful hour.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER IV.--The Brotherhood of Hope.

In the spirit world there are many strange places, many wondrous sights, and many organizations for helping repentant souls, but I have never seen anything more strange in its way than this Home of Help, conducted by the Brotherhood of Hope, to which I was now conducted.   In the then feeble condition of all my spiritual faculties I was not able to see what the place was like.  I was almost like one who is deaf, dumb and blind.  When I was with others I could scarcely see or hear them, or make them hear me, and although I could see a little, it was more as though I was in a perfectly dark room with only one small feeble glimmer of light to show me where I went.  On the earth plane I had not felt this so much, for though all was darkness I could both see and hear enough to be conscious of those near me.  It was in ascending even to the little distance at which this place was above the earth that I felt the absence of all but the most material developments of my spirit.That time of darkness was so awful to me that even now I scarce like to recall it, I had so loved the sunshine and the light.  I came from a land where all is sunshine and brightness, where the colors are so rich, the sky so clear, the flowers and the scenery so beautiful, and I so loved light and warmth and melody; and here as elsewhere since my death I had found only darkness and coldness and gloom; an apalling, enshrouding gloom, that wrapped me round like a mantle of night from which I could in no way free myself; and this awful gloom crushed my spirit as nothing else could have done.  I had been proud and haughty on earth.  I came of a race that knew not what it was to bow before anyone.  In my veins ran the blood of its haughty nobles.  Through my mother I was allied to the great ones of earth whose ambitions had moved kingdoms to their will; and now the lowest, humblest, poorest beggar of my native streets was greater, happier than I, for he at least had the sunshine and the free air, and I was as the lowest, most degraded prisoner in the dungeon cell.Had it not been for my one star of hope, my angel of light, and the hopes she had given me through her love, I must have sunk into the apathy of despair.  But when I thought of her waiting, as she had vowed she would do all her life for me, when I recalled her sweet and tender smile and the loving words she had spoken to me, my heart and my courage revived again, and I strove to endure, to be patient, to be strong.  And I had need of all to help me, for from now began a period of suffering and conflict I shall in vain seek to make anyone fully realize.This place where I was now I could barely see in all its details.  It was like a huge prison--dim and misty in its outlines.  Later on I saw it was a great building of dark grey stone (as solid to my eyes as earthly stone) with many long passages, some long large halls or rooms, but mostly composed of innumerable little cells with scarcely any light and only the barest of furniture.  Each spirit had only what he had earned by his earthly life, and some had nothing but the little couch whereon they lay and suffered.  For all suffered there.  It was the House of Sorrow, yet it was also a House of Hope, for all there were striving upwards to the light, and for each had begun the time of hope.  Each had his foot planted upon the lowest rung of the ladder of hope by which he should in time mount even to heaven itself.In my own little cell there was but my bed, a table and a chair--nothing more.  I spent my time in resting or meditating in my cell, and going with those who, like myself, soon grew strong enough to hear the lectures which were delivered to us in the great hall.  Very impressive those lectures were; told in the form of a story, but always so as to bring home to the mind of each of us those things wherein we had done wrong.  Great pains were taken to make us understand, from the point of view of an impartial spectator, the full consequences to ourselves and others of each of our actions, and where we had for our own selfish gratifications wronged or dragged down another soul.  So many things which we had done because all men did them, or because we thought that we as men had a right to do them, were now shown to us from the other side of the picture, from those who had in a measure been our victims, or where we personally were not directly responsible for their fall, the victims of a social system invented and upheld to gratify us and our selfish passions.  I cannot more fully describe these lectures, but those amongst you who know what are the corruptions of the great cities of earth will easily supply for yourselves the subjects.  From such lectures, such pictures of ourselves as we were, stripped of all the social disguises of earth life, we could but return in shame and sorrow of heart to our cells to reflect over our past and to strive to atone for it in our future.And in this there was great help given to us, for with the error and its consequences we were always shown the way to correct and overcome the evil desire in ourselves, and how we might atone for our own sins by timely efforts to save another from the evil into which we had fallen, all these lessons being intended to fit us for the next stage of our progression, in which we would be sent back to earth to help, unseen and unknown, mortals who were struggling with earth's temptations.When we were not attending the lectures we were free to go where we might wish; that is, such of us as were strong enough to move about freely.  Some who had left dear friends on earth would go to visit them, that, unseen themselves, they might yet see those they loved.  We were always warned, however, not to linger in the temptations of the earth plane, since many of us would find it difficult to resist them.Those who were strongest amongst us and who possessed the needful qualities and the desire to use them, were employed in magnetising those who were weakest, and who, by reason of the excessive dissipations of their earthly lives, were in such terrible condition of exhaustion and suffering that the only thing which could be done with them was to allow them to lie helpless in their cells while others gave them a little relief by magnetising them; and here I must describe to you a very wonderful system of healing those poor spirits which was practiced in this House of Hope.  Some advanced spirits, whose natural desires and tastes made them doctors and healers, with the help of other spirits of different degrees of advancement under them, would attend upon these poorest and most suffering ones--where indeed all were sufferers--and by means of magnetism and the use of others' powers which they could control, they would put these poor spirits into temporary forgetfulness of their pain; and though they awoke again to a renewal of their sufferings, yet in these intervals their spirits gained strength and insensibly grew more able to endure, till at last their sufferings were mitigated with time and the growing development of the spirit body, and they in turn would, when fit to do so, be employed to magnetise others who were still suffering.It is impossible for me to give you a very clear picture of this place and those in it, for although the resemblance to an earthly hospital was very great, there were many little points in which it resembled nothing which you have yet on earth, though as knowledge on earth advances the resemblance will become closer.  All was so dark in this place, because the unfortunate spirits who dwelt there had none of the brightness of happy spirits to give into the atmosphere, and it is the state of the spirit itself in the spiritual world that makes the lightness or darkness of its surroundings.  The sense of darkness was also due to the almost total blindness of these poor spirits, whose spiritual senses never having been developed on earth made them alike insensible to all around them, just as those born on earth in a state of blindness, deafness and dumbness would be unconscious of the things which were apparent to those fully endowed with senses.  In visiting the atmosphere of the earthly plane, which was a degree more suited to their state of development, these poor spirits would still be in darkness, though it would not be so complete, and they would possess the power of seeing those beings like themselves with whom they could come into direct contact, and also such mortals as were in a sufficiently low spiritual degree of development.  The higher and more spiritualized mortals, and still more the disembodied spirits in advance of them would be only very dimly discernible, or even totally invisible.The "working" Brothers of Hope, as they were called, were each provided with a tiny little light like a star, whose rays illuminated the darkness of the cells they visited and carried the light of hope wherever the brothers went.  I myself at first was so great a sufferer that I used simply to lie in my cell in a state of almost apathetic misery, watching for this spark to come glimmering down the long corridor to my door, and wondering how long it would be in earth time ere it would come again.  But it was not long that I lay thus utterly prostrate.  Unlike many of the poor spirits who had added a love of drink to their other vices, my mind was too clear and my desire to improve too strong to leave me long inactive, and as soon as I found myself able to move again I petitioned to be allowed to do something, however humble, which might be of use.  I was therefore, as being myself possessed of strong magnetic powers, set to help an unfortunate young man who was utterly unable to move, and who used to lie moaning and sighing all the time.  Poor fellow, he was only thirty years old when he left the earth body, but in his short life he had contrived to plunge into such dissipations that he had prematurely killed himself, and was now suffering such agonies from the reaction upon the spirit of those powers he had abused, that it was often more than I could bear to witness them.  My task was to make soothing passes over him, by which means he would obtain a little relief, till at stated times a more advanced spirit than myself would come and put him into a state of unconsciousness.  And all this time I was myself suffering keenly both in mind and in my spirit body, for in the lower spheres the spirit is conscious of bodily sufferings.  As it grows more advanced the suffering becomes more purely mental--the less material envelope of the higher spirits making them at last insensible to anything like material pain.As my strength grew so did my desires revive and cause me so much torment that I was often tempted to do what many poor spirits did--go back to earth in search of the means to satisfy them through the material bodies of those yet on earth.  My bodily sufferings grew very great, for the strength I had been so proud of and had used to so bad a purpose made me suffer more than one who had been weak.  As the muscles of an athlete who has used them to excess begin after a time to contract and cause him excruciating pain, so those powers and that strength which I had abused in my earthly life now began, through its inevitable reaction on my spirit body, to cause me the most intense suffering.  And then as I grew stronger and stronger and able to enjoy what had seemed enjoyment in my earth life, the desire for those pleasures grew and grew till I could scarce refrain from returning to the earth plane there to enjoy, through the organism of those yet in the flesh, whose sordid lives and low desires placed them on a level with the spirits of the earth plane, those pleasures of the senses which had still so great a temptation for us.  Many and many of those who were in the House of Hope with me would yield to the temptation and go back for a time to haunt the earth, whence they would return after a longer or shorter period, exhausted and degraded even below their former state.  All were free to go or to stay as they desired.  All could return when they wished, for the doors of Hope's castle were never shut upon anyone, however unthankful or unworthy they might be, and I have often wondered at the infinite patience and tenderness which were ever shown for our weaknesses and our sins.  It was indeed only possible to pity these poor unfortunates, who had made such utter slaves of themselves to their base desires that they could not resist them and were drawn back time after time till at last, satiated and exhausted, they could move no more and were like the unfortunate young man whom I tended.For myself, I might also have yielded to the temptation had it not been for the thoughts of my pure love, and the hopes she had given me, the purer desires she had inspired, and I at least could not condemn these poor erring souls who had no such blessings granted them.  I went to earth very often, but it was to where my beloved one dwelt, and her love drew me ever to her side, away from all temptations, into the pure atmosphere of her home, and though I could never approach near enough to touch her, by reason of this icy invisible wall which I have described, I used to stand outside of it, looking at her as she sat and worked or read or slept.  When I was there she would always be in a dim way conscious of my presence, and would whisper my name or turn to where I was with one of her sad sweet smiles that I would carry away the recollection of and comfort myself with in my lonely hours.  She looked so sad, so very sad, my poor love, and so pale and delicate, it made my heart ache even while it comforted me to see her.  I could tell that in spite of all her efforts to be brave and patient, and to hope, the strain was almost too great for her, and each day she grew more delicate looking.  She had many other things to try her at this time; there were family troubles and the doubts and fears suggested by the strangeness of her intercourse with the world of spirits.  At times she would wonder if it were not all a wild delusion, a dream from which she would awake to find there was after all no communication between the dead and the living, no means by which she could reach me again, and then a dull despair would seize upon her and upon me also as I stood beside her and read her feeling, helpless and powerless to make her realize my actual presence beside her, and I would pray to be allowed in some way to make her know that I was there.One night when I had watched her sink into sleep after a weary time of weeping, I, who could have wept, too, in my grief for us both, was suddenly touched upon the shoulder, and looking up beheld her guardian spirit who had first helped me speak with her.  He asked me if I would be very quiet and self-restrained if he allowed me to kiss her as she slept, and I, wild with this new joy, most eagerly promised.  Taking my hand in his we passed together through the transparent icy wall that was to me so impervious.  Bending over her the guide made some strange motions with his hand, and then taking one of my hands in his for a few moments he bade me touch her very gently.  She was lying quietly asleep, with the tears still on her eyelashes and her sweet lips slightly parted as though she was speaking in her dreams.  One hand rested against her cheek and I took it in mine, so gently, so tenderly--not to awaken her.  Her hand closed half consciously upon mine and a look of such joy came into her face that I feared she would awake.  But no!  The bright spirit smiled at us both and said, "Kiss her now."  And I--ah!  I stooped over her and touched her at last and gave her the first kiss I had ever given.  I kissed her not once but half a dozen times, so passionately that she awoke and the bright spirit drew me away in haste.  She looked round and asked softly:  "Do I dream, or was that indeed my beloved one?"  I answered, "Yes," and she seemed to hear, for she smiled so sweet a smile--ah! so sweet! and again and again she repeated my name softly to herself.Not for long after that would they allow me to touch her again, but I was often near, and the joy of that one meeting dwelt in our hearts for many an hour.  I could see how real had been my kiss to her, and for me it was as an anchor of hope encouraging me to believe that in time I should indeed be able to make her feel my touch and hold communication with her.  

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER V.--Spirits of the Earth Plane.

The time came at last for me to leave the House of Hope and go forth, strong in the lessons I had learned there, to work out my atonement on the earth plane and in those lower spheres to which my earthly life had sunk meEight or nine months had elapsed since I had died, and I had grown strong and vigorous once more.  I could move freely over the great sphere of the earth plane.  My sight and my other senses were so far developed that I could see and hear and speak clearly.  The light around me now was that of a faint twilight or when the night first begins to dawn into the day.  To my eyes so long accustomed to the darkness, this dull light was very welcome, though after a time I grew so to long for the true day to dawn that this dull twilight was most monotonous and oppressive.  Those countries which are situated in this, the third circle of the earth plane or first sphere, are called "The Twilight Lands," and it is thither that those spirits pass whose lives have been too selfish and material to allow their souls to reach any higher state of development.  Even these Twilight Lands, however, are a degree above those "Haunting" spirits of the earth plane who are literally earthbound to their former habitations.My work was to be begun upon the earth itself, and in those haunts which men of the world call the haunts of pleasure, though no pleasure is so fleeting, no degradation so sure, as that which they produce even during the earthly life.  And now I found the value of the teachings and the experience I had gained during my stay in the House of Hope.  Temptations that might once have seemed such to me were such no longer.  I knew the satisfaction such pleasures give, and the cost at which alone they can be bought, and thus in controlling a mortal, as I often had to do, I was proof against the temptation such control offered of using his body for my own gratification.Few people yet in their earthly envelopes understand that spirits can, and very often do, take such complete possession of the bodies of mortal men and women that, for the time, it is as though that earth body belonged to the disembodied and not the embodied spirit.  Many cases of so-called temporary madness are due to the controlling power of very low spirits of evil desires or frivolous minds, who are, through the weakness of will or other causes, put into complete rapport with the embodied spirit whose body they seek to use.  Amongst many ancient races this fact was acknowledged and studied as well as many branches of the occult sciences which we of the nineteenth century have grown too wise, forsooth, to look into, even to discover, if we can, those germs of truth with which all ages have been blessed and which are worth disinterring from the mass of rubbish in which succeeding generations of men have buried them.The work upon which I was now engaged will seem no less strange to you than it did at first to me.  The great Brotherhood of Hope was only one of a countless variety of societies which exist in the spirit world for the purpose of giving help to all who are in need.  Their operations are carried on everywhere and in all spheres, and their members are to be found from the very lowest and darkest spheres to the very highest which surround the earth, and even extend into the spheres of the solar systems.  They are like immense chains of spirits, the lowest and humblest being always helped and protected by those above.A message would be sent to the Brotherhood that help was required to assist some struggling mortal or unhappy spirit, and such one of the brothers as was thought to be most fit would be sent to help.  Such a one of us would be sent as had in his own earth life yielded to a similar temptation, and had suffered all the bitter consequences and remorse for his sin.  Often the man or woman to be helped had unconsciously sent out an aspiration for help and strength to resist temptation, and that of itself was a prayer, which would be heard in the spirit world as a cry from earth's children that appealed to all in the spirit world who had been themselves earth's sons and daughters; or it might be that some spirit to whom the struggling one was very dear would seek for help on their behalf and would thus appeal to us to come to their aid.  Our task would be to follow and control the one we desired to help till the temptation had been overcome.  We would identify ourselves so closely with the mortal that for a time we actually shared his life, his thoughts, everything, and during this dual state of existence we ourselves often suffered most keenly both from our anxiety for the man whose thoughts became almost as our own, and from the fact that his anxieties were as ours, while in thus going over again a chapter in our past lives we endured all the sorrow, remorse and bitterness of the past time.  He on his side felt, though not in so keen a degree, the sorrowful state of our mind, and where the control was very complete and the mortal highly sensitive, he would often fancy that things which we had done must have been done by himself, either in some former forgotten stage of existence, or else seen in some vivid dream they could scarcely recall.This controlling or overshadowing of a mortal by an immortal is used in many ways, and those who foolishly make themselves liable to it either by a careless evil life, or by seeking in a frivolous spirit of mere curiousity to search out mysteries too deep for their shallow minds to fathom, often find to their cost that the low spirits who haunt the earth plane, and even those from much lower spheres, can often obtain so great a hold over a mortal that at last he becomes a mere puppet in their hands, whose body they can use at will.  Many a weak-willed man and woman who in pure surroundings would lead only good and pure lives, are drawn by evil surroundings into sins for which they are but partly responsible--sins for which indeed those controlling spirits who have thus made use of these weak mortals, will be held responsible as well as the mortal sinner himself.  For thus tempting and using another's organism those evil spirits will have to render a terrible account, since they have been doubly guilty.  In sinning, themselves, and in dragging down another soul with them, they sink themselves to a depth from which many years, and in come instances many centuries of suffering cannot free them.In my work I have had to act the part of controlling spirit many times, but I was sent to do so only in order that I might impress the mortal with a sense of the terrible consequences of yielding to sin, and also that I might, when not actually controlling the mortal myself, act as guard and watchman to protect him from the control of the wandering tempting spirits of the earth plane.  My work was to raise the barrier of my strong will-force against theirs, and keep them back so that they could not come sufficiently en rapport with my charge to control him.If, however, he had allowed himself to be already controlled by these lower spirits, they would still be able to project their thoughts and suggestions to him, though they did so with difficulty.Although I did not know it at the time, and believed that upon myself would rest the responsibility of keeping safe those I was sent to guard, I was only the last link in a long chain of spirits who were all helping at the same time.  Each spirit was a step in advance of the one below him, and each had to strengthen and help the one below him should he faint or fail in his task.  My part was also intended to be a lesson to myself in self-denial and the sacrifice of my own comfort that I might help another.  My condition as a spirit on the earth plane made me of use, seeing that I could oppose a material force of will against those tempting spirits in an atmosphere where a more refined spirit would have been unable to penetrate, and I as one of the earth-bound myself could come en rapport with the mortal more closely than a more advanced spirit would have been able to do.  I had, by means of dreams when he slept and constant haunting thoughts while he waked, to impress upon the mind of the man I controlled what my experience had been, to make him feel all the terrible sufferings of remorse and fear, all the loathing of himself through which I had passed, and through which I passed again in bitter agony of soul while thus recalling them.  All my feelings were transferred to his mind till he might truly have said he was haunted by all the terrible possibilities of his meditated sins.Over this particular phase of my experiences I shall not dwell longer now, since it is one familiar to many on this side of life.  I will but say that I returned from my mission with a consciousness that I had saved many others from the pitfalls into which I had fallen, and thereby had atoned in part for my own sins.  Several times was I sent upon such missions and each time returned successful; and here I must pause to say that if my progress in the spirit world has been so rapid as to surprise most who knew of my first condition on entering it, and if I again and again resisted all the temptations that befell me, the credit is not so much due to myself as to the wonderful help and comfort that was given to me by the constant and unvarying love of her who was indeed my good angel, and whose image ever came between me and all harm.  When all others might have pleaded to me in vain, I ever hearkened to her voice and turned aside.When I was not helping someone yet in the earth body, I was sent to work amongst the unhappy spirits of the earth plane who were still wandering in its darkness even as I had at first done.  And to them I went as one of the great Brotherhood of Hope, bearing in my hand the tiny starlike light which is the symbol of that order.  Its rays would dispel the darkness around me, and I would see poor unhappy spirits crouching on the ground two or three together, or sunk in helpless misery in some corner by themselves, too hopeless, too unhappy to heed anything.To them it was my work to point out how they could either be taken to such a House of Hope as the one in which I had been, or in other cases how they might, by trying to help others around them, help themselves and earn the gratitude of those who were even more hopeless than themselves.  To each poor suffering soul a different balm of healing would be given, for each had known a different experience and each had had a different cause for his sins.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER VI.--Twilight Lands--Love's Gifts--The Valley of Selfishness--The Country of Unrest--The Miser's Land--The Gambler's Land.

When my period of work in any place was finished, I used to return to the Twilight Land to rest in another large building which belonged to our brotherhood.  It was somewhat like the other place in appearance only not quite so dark, nor so dismal, nor so bare, and in the little room which belonged to each there were such things as we had earned as the rewards of our labors.  For instance, in my room, which was still somewhat bare-looking, I had one great treasure.  This was a picture of my love.  It seemed more like a reflection of her in a mirror than a mere painted image, for when I looked intently at her she would smile back at me in answer, as though her spirit was conscious of my gaze, and when I wished very much to know what she was doing, my picture would change and show me.  This was regarded by all my companions as a great and wonderful privilege, and I was told it was as much the result of her love and constant thought for me as of my own efforts to improve.  Since then I have been shown how this living image was thrown upon the light of the astral plane and then projected into its frame in my room, but I cannot explain it more fully in this book.  Another gift from my darling was a white rose-bud, which I had in a small vase and which never seemed to fade or wither, but remained fresh and fragrant and ever an emblem of her love, so that I called her my white rose.I had so longed for a flower.  I had so loved flowers on earth and I had seen none since I saw those my darling put upon my grave.  In this land there were no flowers, not even a leaf or blade of grass, not a tree or a shrub  however stunted--for the dry arid soil of our selfishness had no blossom or green thing to give to any one of us; and it was when I told her this during one of the brief visits I used to pay her, and when through her own hand I was able to write short messages--it was, I say, when I told her that there was not one fair thing for me to look upon save only the picture of herself, that she asked that I might be given a flower from her, and this white rosebud was brought to my room by a spirit friend and left for me to find when I returned from earth and her.  Ah! you who have so many flowers that you do not value them enough and leave them to wither unseen, you can scarce realize what joy this blossom brought to me nor how I have so treasured it and her picture and some loving words she once wrote to me, that I have carried them with me from sphere to sphere as I have risen, and shall, I hope, treasure them evermore.

From this Twilight Land I took many journeys and saw many strange and different countries, but all bore the same stamp of coldness and desolation.One place was a great valley of grey stones, with dim, cold, grey hills shutting it in on every side, and this twilight sky overhead.  Here again not a blade of grass, not one poor stunted shrub was to be seen, not one touch of color or brightness anywhere, only this dull desolation of grey stones.  Those who dwelt in this valley had centered their lives and their affections in themselves and had shut up their hearts against all the warmth and beauty of unselfish love.  They had lived only for themselves, their own gratification, their own ambitions, and now they saw nothing but themselves and the grey desolation of their hard selfish lives around them.  There were a great many beings flitting uneasily about in this valley, but strange to say they had been so centered in themselves that they had lost the power to see anyone else.These unhappy beings were invisible to each other until such time as the thought of another and the desire to do something for some one besides themselves should awaken, when they would become conscious of those near to them, and through their efforts to lighten another's lot they would improve their own, till at last their stunted affections would expand and the hazy valley of selfishness would hold them in its chains no more.

Beyond this valley I came upon a great, dry, sandy-looking tract of country where there was a scanty straggling vegetation, and where the inhabitants had begun in some places to make small attempts at gardens near their habitations.  In some places these habitations were clustered so thickly together that they formed small towns and cities.  But all bore that desolate ugly look which came from the spiritual poverty of the inhabitants.  This also was a land of selfishness and greed, although not of such complete indifference to others' feelings as in the grey valley, and therefore they sought for a certain amount of companionship even with those around them.  Many had come from the grey valley, but most were direct from the earth life and were now, poor souls, struggling to rise a little higher, and wherever this was the case and an effort was made to overcome their own selfishness, then the dry soil around their homes would begin to put forth tiny blades of grass and little stunted shoots of shrubs.Such miserable hovels as were in this land!  such ragged, repulsive, wretched-looking people, like tramps or beggars, yet many had been amongst earth's wealthiest and most eminent in fashionable life, and had enjoyed all that luxury could give!  But because they had used their wealth only for themselves and their own enjoyments, giving to others but the paltry crumbs that they could spare from their own wealth and hardly notice that they had given them--because of this, I say, they were now here in this Twilight Land, poor as beggars in the true spiritual wealth of the soul which may be earned in the earthly life alike by the richest king or the poorest beggar, and without which those who come over to the spirit land--be they of earth's greatest or humblest--must come here to dwell where all are alike poor in spiritual things.Here some of the people would wrangle and quarrel and complain that they had not been fairly treated in being in such a place, seeing what had been their positions in earth life.  They would blame others as being more culpable than themselves in the matter, and wake a thousand excuses, a thousand pretences, to anyone who would listen to them and the story of what they would call their wrongs.  Others would still be trying to follow out the schemes of their earthly lives and would try to make their hearers believe that they had found means (at the expense of someone else) of ending all this weary life of discomfort, and would plot and plan and try to carry out their own schemes, and spoil those of others as being likely to interfere with theirs, and so on would go the weary round of life in this Land of Unrest.To all whom I found willing to listen to me I gave some word of hope, some thought of encouragement or help to find the true way out of this country, and so passed on through it and journeyed into the Land of Misers--a land given over to them alone, for few have sympathy with true misers save those who also share their all-absorbing desire to hoard simply for the pleasure of hoarding.In this country were dark crooked-looking beings with long claw-like fingers, who were scratching in the black soil like birds of prey in search of stray grains of gold that here and there rewarded their toil; and when they had found any they would wrap them up in little wallets they carried and thrust them into their bosoms that they might lie next to their hearts, as the thing of all things most dear to them.  As a rule they were lonely, solitary beings, who avoided each other by instinct lest they should be robbed of their cherished treasure.Here I found nothing that I could do.  Only one solitary man listened for a brief moment to what I had to say ere he returned to his hunt in the earth for treasure, furtively watching me till I was gone lest I should learn what he had already got.  The others were all so absorbed in their search for treasure they could not even be made conscious of my presence, and I soon passed on from that bleak land.

From the Misers' Country I passed downwards into a dark sphere, which was really below the earth in the sense of being even lower in its spiritual inhabitants than parts of the earth plane.Here it was very much like the Land of Unrest, only that the spirits who dwelt here were worse and more degraded looking.  There was no attempt made at cultivation, and the sky overhead was almost dark like night, the light being only such as enabled them to see each other and the objects near them.  Whereas in the Land of Unrest there were but wranglings and discontent and jealousy, here there were fierce fights and bitter quarrels.  Here were gamblers and drunkards.  Betting men, card sharpers, commercial swindlers, profligates, and thieves of every kind, from the thief of the slums to his well-educated counterpart in the higher circles of earth life.  All whose instincts were roguish or dissipated, all who were selfish and degraded in their tastes were here, as well as many who would have been in a higher condition of spiritual life had not constant association on earth with this class of men deteriorated and degraded them to the level of their companions, so that at death they had gravitated to this dark sphere, drawn down by ties of association.  It was to this last class that I was sent, for amongst them there was hope that all sense of goodness and right was not quenched, and that the voice of one crying to them in the wilderness of their despair might be heard and lead them back to a better land.The wretched houses or dwellings of this dark Land of Misery were many of them large spacious places, but all stamped with the same apalling look of uncleanness, foulness and decay.  They resembled large houses to be seen in some of our slums, once handsome mansions and fine palaces, the abodes of luxury, which have become the haunts of the lowest denizens of vice and crime.  Here and there would be great lonely tracts of country with a few scattered wretched houses, mere hovels, and in other places the buildings and the people were huddled together in great gloomy degraded-looking copies of your large cities of earth.  Everywhere squalor and dirt and wretchedness reigned; nowhere was there one single bright or beautiful or gracious thing for the eye to rest upon in all this scene of desolation, made thus by the spiritual emanations from the dark beings who dwelt there.Amongst these wretched inhabitants I wandered with my little star of pure light, so small that it was but a bright spark flickering about in the darkness as I moved, yet around me it shed a soft pale light as from a star of hope that shone for those not too blinded by their own selfish evil passions to behold it.  Here and there I would come upon some crouched in a doorway or against a wall, or in some miserable room, who would arouse themselves sufficiently to look at me with my light and listen to the words I spoke to them, and would begin to seek for the better way, the returning path to those upper spheres from which they had fallen by their sins.  Some I would be able to induce to join me in my work of helping others, but as a rule they could only think of their own miseries, and long for something higher than their present surroundings, and even this, small as it seems, was one step, and the next one of thinking how to help others forward as well would soon follow.One day in my wanderings through this country I came to the outskirts of a large city in the middle of a wide desolate plain.  The soil was black and arid, more like those great cinder heaps that are seen near your iron works than anything I can liken it to.  I was amongst a few dilapidated, tumble-down little cottages that formed a sort of fringe between the unhappy city and the desolate plain, when my ears caught the sound of quarreling and shouting coming from one of them, and curiosity made me draw near to see what the dispute might be about and if even here there might not be someone whom I could help.It was more like a barn than a house.  A great rough table ran the length of the room, and round it upon coarse little wooden stools were seated about a dozen or so of men.  Such men!  It is almost an insult to manhood to give them the name.  They were more like orangutangs, with the varieties of pigs and wolves and birds of prey expressed in their coarse bloated distorted features.  Such faces, such misshapen bodies, such distorted limbs, I can in no way describe them!  They were clothed in various grotesque and ragged semblances of their former earthly finery, some in the fashion of centuries ago, others in more modern garb, yet all alike ragged, dirty, and unkempt, the hair disheveled, the eyes wild and staring and glowing now with the fierce light of passion, now with the sullen fire of despair and vindictive malice.  To me, then, it seemed that I had reached the lowest pit of hell, but since then I have seen a region lower still--far blacker, far more horrible, inhabited by beings so much fiercer, so much lower, that beside them these were tame and human.  Later on I shall describe more fully these lowest beings, when I come to that part of my wanderings which took me into their kingdoms in the lowest hell, but the spirits whom I now saw fighting in this cottage were quarreling over a bag of coins which lay on the table.  It had been found by one of them and then given to be gambled for by the whole party.  The dispute seemed to be because each wanted to take possession of it himself without regard to the rights of anyone else at all.  It was simply a question of the strongest, and already they were menacing each other in a violent fashion.  The finder of the money, or rather the spiritual counterpart of our earthly money, was a young man, under thirty I should say, who still possessed the remains of good looks, and but for the marks that dissipation had planted on his face would have seemed unfit for his present surroundings and degraded associates.  He was arguing that the money was his, and though he had given it to be played for fairly he objected to be robbed of it by anyone.  I felt I had no business there, and amidst a wild chorus of indignant cries and protestations that they "supposed they were as well able to say what was honest as he was," I turned and left them.  I had proceeded but a short way, and was almost opposite another deserted little hovel when the whole wild crew came struggling and fighting out of the cottage, wrestling with each other to get near the young man with the bag of money whom the foremost of them were beating and kicking and trying to deprive of it.  This one of them succeeded in doing, whereupon they all set upon him, while the young man broke away from them and began running towards me.  In a moment there was a wild yell set up to catch him and beat him for an imposter and a cheat, since the bag was empty of gold and had only stones in it, the money, like the fairy gold in the stories, having turned, not into withered leaves, but into hard stones.Almost before I realized it the wretched young man was clutching hold of me and crying out to me to save him from those devils; and the whole lot were coming down upon us in hot pursuit of their victim.  Quick as thought I sprang into the empty hovel which gave us the only hope of asylum, dragging the unfortunate young man with me, and slamming the door I planted my back against it to keep our pursuers out.  My Goodness! how they did yell and stamp and storm and try to batter in that door; and how I did brace myself up and exert all the force of mind and body to keep them out!  I did not know it then, but I know now that unseen powers helped me and held fast that door till, baffled and angry that they could not move it, they went off at last to seek for some fresh quarrel or excitement elsewhere.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER VII.--The Story of Raoul.

When they had gone I turned to my companion who sat huddled in a heap, and almost stunned, in one corner of the hut, and, helping him to rise, I suggested that if he could make shift to walk a little, it would be well for us both to leave the place in case those men should think fit to return.  With much pain and trouble I got him up and helped him slowly to a place of safety on the dark plain where, if we were without shelter, we were at least free from the danger of being surrounded.  Then I did my best to relieve his sufferings by methods I had learned during my stay in the House of Hope, and after a time the poor fellow was able to speak and tell about himself and how he came to be in that dark country.  He was, it seemed, but recently from earth life, having been shot by a man who was jealous of his attentions to his wife, and not without reason.  The one redeemeing feature about this poor spirit's story was that he, poor soul, did not feel any anger or desire for revenge upon the man who had hurried him out of life, but only sorrow and shame for it all.  What had hurt him most and had opened his eyes to his degradation, was the discovery that the woman for whose love it had all been done, was so callous, so selfish, so devoid of all true sense of love for either of them, that she was only occupied in thinking how it would affect herself and her social position in the world of fashion, and not one thought, save of anger and annoyance, had she given to either her unhappy husband or the victim of his jealous anger."When," said the young man, whom I shall call Raoul, "when I knew that I was truly dead and yet possessed the power to return to earth again, my first thought was to fly to her and console her if possible, or at least make her feel that the dead yet lived, and that even in death I thought of her.  And how do you think I found her?  Weeping for me?  Sorrowing for him?  No! not one atom.  Only thinking of herself and wishing she had never seen us, or that she could blot us both out from her life by one coup-de-main, and begin life again with someone else higher in the social scale than either of us had been.  The scales fell from my eyes, and I knew she had never loved me one particle.  But I was rich, I was of the noblesse, and through my help she had hoped to climb another rung of the social ladder, and had willingly sunk herself into an adulturess, not for love of me, but to gain the petty triumph of queening it over some rival woman.  I was nothing but a poor blind fool, and my life had paid the penalty of my folly.  To her I was but an unpleasant memory of the bitter shame and scandal that had fallen upon her.  Then I fled from earth in my bitterness, anywhere, I cared not where it was.  I said I would believe no more in goodness or truth of any kind, and my wild thoughts and desires drew me down to this dark spot and these degraded revellers, amongst whom I found kindred spirits to those who had been my parasites and flatterers on earth, and amongst whom I had wasted my substance and lost my soul.""And now, oh! unhappy friend," I said, "would you not even now seek the path of repentance that would lead you back to brighter lands and help you to regain the lost inheritance of your manhood and your higher self?""Now, alas! it is too late," said Raoul.  "In hell, and surely this is hell, there is no longer hope for any.""No hope for any?" I answered.  "Say not so, my friend; those words are heard all too often from the lips of unhappy souls, for I can testify that even in the darkest despair there is ever given hope.  I, too, have known a sorrow and bitterness as deep as yours; yet I had ever hope, for she whom I loved was as the pure angels, and her hands were ever stretched out to give me love and hope, and for her sake I work to give to others the hope given to myself.  Come, let me lead you and I will guide you to that better land.""And who art thou, oh! friend, with the kind words and still kinder deeds to whom in truth I might say I owed my life; but had I not learned that in this place, alas! one cannot die--one can suffer to the point of death and even all its pains, yet death comes not to any, for we have passed beyond it, and it would seem must live through an eternity of suffering?  Tell me who you are and how you come to be here, speaking words of hope with such confidence.  I might fancy you an angel sent down to help me, but that you resemble myself too much for that."Then I told him my history, and how I was working myself upwards even as he might do, and also spoke of the great hope I had always before me, that in time I should be fit to join my sweet love in a land where we should be no more parted."And she?" he said, "is content, you think, to wait for you?  She will spend all her life lonely on earth that she may join you in heaven when you shall get there?  Bah! mon ami, you deceive yourself.  It is a mirage that you pursue.  Unless she is either old or very plain, no woman will dream of living forever alone for your sake.  She will for a time, I grant you, if she is romantic, or if no one come to woo her, but unless she is an angel she will console herself by and by, believe me.  If your hopes are no more well founded than that I shall feel only sorry for you."I confess his words angered me somewhat; they echoed the doubts that always haunted me, and were like a cold shower bath upon all the warmth of romance with which I had buoyed myself up.  It was partly to satisfy my own doubts as well as his that I said, with some heat:"If I take you to earth and we find her mourning only for me, thinking only of me, will you believe then that I know what I speak about and am under no delusion?  Will you admit that your experience of life and of women may not apply to all, and that there is something that even you can learn on this as on other matters?""My good friend, believe me that I ask your pardon with all my soul if my unbelief has pained you.  I admire your faith and would I could have but a little of it myself.  By all means let us go and see her."I took his hand and then "willing" intently that we should go to my beloved, we began to rise and rush through space with the speed of thought almost, till we found ourselves upon earth and standing in a room.  I saw her guardian spirit watching over my beloved, and the dim outline of the room and its furniture, but my friend Raoul saw nothing but the form of my darling seated in her chair, and looking like some of the saints from the brightness of her spirit and the pale soft aureole of light that surrounded her, a spiritual light invisible to you of earth but seen by those on the spiritual side of life around those whose lives are good and pure, just as a dark mist surrounds those who are not good."Mon Dieu!" cried Raoul, sinking upon his knees at her feet.  "It is an angel, a saint you have brought me to see, not a woman.  She is not of earth at all."Then I spoke to her by name, and she heard my voice and her face brightened and the sadness vanished from it, and she said softly:  "My dearest, are you indeed there?  I was longing for you to come again.  I can think and dream of nothing but you.  Can you touch me yet?"  She put out her hand and for one brief moment mine rested in it, but even that moment made her shiver as though an icy wind had struck her."See, my darling one, I have brought an unhappy friend to ask your prayers.  And I would have him to know that there are some faithful women on earth--some true love to bless us with were we but fit to enjoy it."She had not heard clearly all that I said, but her mind caught its sense, and she smiled, so radiant a smile, and said:  "Oh! yes, I am ever faithful to you, my beloved, as you are to me, and some day we shall be so very, very happy."Then Raoul who was still kneeling before her, held out his hands and tried to touch hers, but the invisible wall kept him away as it had done me, and he drew back, crying out to her:  "If your heart is so full of love and pity, spare some to me who am indeed unhappy and need your prayers.  Pray that I, too, may be helped, and I shall know your prayers are heard where mine were not worthy to be, and I shall hope that even for me pardon may yet be possible."My darling heard the words of this unhappy man, and kneeling down beside her chair offered up a little simple prayer for help and comfort to us all.  And Raoul was so touched, so softened, that he broke down completely, and I had to take him by the hand and lead him back to the spirit land, though not now to a region devoid of hope.From that time Raoul and I worked together for a little in the dark land he had now ceased to dwell in, and from day to day he grew more hopeful.  By nature he was most vivacious and buoyant, a true Frenchman, full of airy graceful lightness of heart which even the awful surroundings of that gloomy spot could not wholly extinguish.  We became great friends, and our work was pleasanter from being shared.  Our companionship was, however, not destined to last long then, but we have since met and worked together many times, like comrades in different regiments whom the chances of war may bring together or separate at any time.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER VIII.--Temptation.

I was again called upon to go to earth upon a mission of help, and to leave for a time my wanderings in the spirit spheres; and now it was that the greatest and most terrible temptation of my life came to me.  In the course of my work I was brought across one still in the earth body, whose influence over my earthly life had done more than aught else to wreck and spoil it, and though I also had not been blameless--far indeed from it--yet I could not but feel an intense bitterness and thirst for revenge whenever I thought of this person and all the wrongs that I had suffered--wrongs brooded over till at times I felt as if my feelings must have vent in some wild burst of passionate resentment.In my wanderings upon the earth plane I had learned many ways in which a spirit can still work mischief to those he hates who are yet in the flesh.  Far more power is ours than you would dream of, but I feel it is wiser to let the veil rest still upon the possibilities the world holds even after death for the revengeful spirit.  I could detail many terrible cases I know of as having actually taken place--mysterious murders and strange crimes committed, none knew why or how, by those on earth whose brains were so disordered that they were not themselves responsible for their actions, and were but the tools of a possessing spirit.  These and many kindred things are known to us in the spirit spheres where circumstances often wear a very different aspect from the one shown to you.  The old beliefs in demoniacal possession were not so visionary after all, only these demons or devils had themselves been once the denizens of earth.It so happened to me then, that when I came once more, after long years of absence, across this person whom I so hated, all my old feelings of suffering and anger revived, but with tenfold more force than is possible in earth life, for a spirit has far, far greater capabilities of suffering or enjoyments, of pleasure or pain, love or hate, than one whose senses are still veiled and deadened by the earthly envelope, and thus all the senses of a dismbodied spirit are tenfold more acute.Thus when I once more found myself beside this person, the desire for my long-suspended revenge woke again, and with the desire a most devilish plan for its accomplishment suggested itself to me.  For my desire of vengeance drew up to me from their haunts in the lowest hell, spirits of so black a hue, so awful a type, that never before had I seen such beings or dreamed that out of some nightmare fable they could exist.  These beings cannot live upon the earth plane nor even in the lower spheres surrounding it, unless there be congenial mortals or some strong magnetic attraction to hold them there for a time, and though they often rise in response to an intensely evil desire upon the part of either a mortal or spirit on the earth plane, yet they cannot remain long, and the moment the attracting force becomes weakened, like a rope that breaks, they lose their hold and sink down again to their own dark abodes.  At times of great popular indignation and anger, as in some great revolt of an oppressed people in whom all sense but that of suffering and anger has been crushed out, the bitter wrath and thirst for revenge felt by the oppressed will draw around them such a cloud of these dark beings, that horrors similar to those witnessed in the great French Revolution and kindred revolts of down-trodden people, will take place, and the maddened populace are for a time completely under the control of those spirits who are truly as devils.In my case these horrible beings crowded round me with delight, whispered in my ears and pointed out a way of revenge so simple, so easy, and yet so horrible, so apalling in its wickedness, that I shall not venture to write it down lest the idea of it might be given to some other desperate one, and like seed falling into a fruitful soil bring forth its baleful blossoms.At any other time I should have shrunk back in horror from these beings and their foul suggestions.  Now in my mad passion I welcomed them and was about to invoke their aid to help me to accomplish my vengeance, when like the tones of a silver bell there fell upon my ears the voice of my beloved, to whose pleadings I was never deaf and whose tones could move me as none else could  The voice summoned me to come to her by all that we both held sacred, by all the vows we had made and all the hopes we had cherished, and though I could not so instantly abandon my revenge, yet I was drawn as by a rope to the one I loved from the one I hated.And the whole wild crew of black devils came with me, clinging to me and trying to hold me back, yet with an ever feebler hold as the voice of love and purity and truth penetrated more and more deeply to my heart.And then I saw my beloved standing in her room, her arms stretched out to draw me to her, and two strong bright spirit guardians by her side, while around her was drawn a circle of flaming silver light as though a wall of lightning encircled her; yet at her call I passed through it and stood at her side.The dark crowd sought to follow, but were kept back by the flaming ring.  One of the boldest made a rush at me as I passed through, and tried to catch hold, but his hand and arm were caught by the flame of light and shriveled up as though thrust into a furnace.  With a yell of pain and rage he drew back amidst a wild howl of derisive laughter from the rest.With all the power of her love my darling pleaded with me that I should give up this terrible idea, and promise her nevermore to yield to so base a thought.  She asked me if I loved my revenge so much better than I loved her, that to gratify it I would raise up between us the insurmountable barrier of my meditated crime?  Was her love indeed so little to me after all?At first I would not, could not yield, but at last she began to weep, and then my heart melted as though her tears had been warm dropsof her heart's blood falling on it to thaw its ice, and in bitter anguish of soul that I should have caused her to shed tears I knelt at her feet and prayed to be forgiven my wicked thought--prayed that I might still be left with her love to cheer me, still with her for my one thought, one hope, my all.  And as I prayed the circle of dark spirits, who had been fighting to get in and beckoning to me and trying to draw me out, broke like a cloud of black mist when the wind scatters it, and they sank away down to their own abode again, while I sank exhausted at my darling's feet.At times after this I saw the dark spirits draw near to me, though never again could they come close, for I had an armor in my darling's love and my promise to her which was proof against all their attacks.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER IX.--The Frozen Land--The Caverns of Slumber.

I was next sent to visit what will indeed seem a strange country to exist in the spirit world.  The Land of Ice and Snow--the Frozen Land--in which lived all those who had been cold and selfishly calculating in their earthly lives.  Those who had crushed out and chilled and frozen from their own lives and the lives of others, all those warm sweet impulses and affections which make the life of heart and soul.  Love had been so crushed and killed by them that its sun could not shine where they were, and only the frost of life remained.Great statesmen were amongst those whom I saw dwelling in this land, but they were those who had not loved their country nor sought its good.  Only their own ambitions, their own aggrandizement had been their aim, and to me they now appeared to dwell in great palaces of ice and on the lofty frozen pinnacles of their own ambitions.  Others more humble and in different paths in life I saw, but all alike were chilled and frozen by the awful coldness and barrenness of a life from which all warmth, all passion, was shut out.  I had learned the evils of an excess of emotion and of passion, now I saw the evils of their entire absence.  Thank God this land had far fewer inhabitants than the other, for terrible as are the effects of mis-used love, they are not so hard to overcome as the absence of all the tender feelings of the human heart.There were men here who had been prominent members of every religious faith and every nationality on your earth.  Roman Catholic cardinals and priests of austere and pious but cold and selfish lives, Puritan preachers, Methodist ministers, Presbyterian divines, Church of England bishops and clergymen, missionaries, Brahmin priests, Parsees, Egyptians, Mohammedans--in short all sorts and all nationalities were to be found in the Frozen Land, yet in scarcely one was there enough warmth of feeling to thaw the ice around themselves even in a small degree.  When there was even a little tiny drop of warmth, such as one tear of sorrow, then the ice began to melt and there was hope for that poor soul.There was one man whom I saw who appeared to be enclosed in a cage of ice; the bars were of ice, yet they were as bars of polished steel for strength.  This man had been one of the Grand Inquisitors of the Inquisition in Venice, and had been one of those whose very names sent terror to the heart of any unfortunate who fell into their clutches; a most celebrated name in history, yet in all the records of his life and acts there was not one instance where one shade of pity for his victims had touched his heart and caused him to turn aside, even for one brief moment, from his awful determination in torturing and killing those whom the Inquisition got into its toils.  A man known for his own hard austere life, which had no more indulgence for himself than for others.  Cold and pitiless, he knew not what it was to feel one answering throb awake in his heart for another's sufferings.  His face was a type of cold unemotional cruelty; the long thin high nose, the pointed sharp chin, the high and rather wide cheek bones, the thin straight cruel lips like a thin line across the face, the head somewhat flat and wide over the ears, while the deep-set penetrating eyes glittered from their penthouse brows with the cold steely glitter of a wild beast's.Like a procession of spectres I saw the wraiths of some of this man's many victims glide past him, maimed and crushed, torn and bleeding from their tortures--pallid ghosts, wandering astral shades, from which the souls had departed forever, but which yet clung around this man, unable to decay into the elements whilst his magnetism attached them, like a chain, to him.  The souls and all the higher elements had forever left those--which were true astral shells--yet they possessed a certain amount of vitality--only it was all drawn from this man, not from the released spirits which had once inhabited them.  They were such things as those ghosts are made of which are seen haunting the spot where some one too good and innocent to be so chained to earth, has been murdered.  They seem to their murderers and others to live and haunt them, yet the life of such astrals (or ghosts) is but a reflected one, and ceases as soon as remorse and repentance have sufficed to sever the tie that links them to their murderers.Other spirits I saw haunting this man, and taunting him with his own helplessness and their past sufferings, but these were very different looking; they were more solid in appearance and possessed a power and strength and intelligence wanting in those other misty-looking shades.  These were spirits whose astral forms still held the immortal souls imprisoned in them, though they had been so crushed and tortured that only the fierce desire of revenge remained.  These spirits were incessant in their endeavor to get at their former oppressor and tear him to pieces, and the icy cage seemed to be regarded by him as being as much a protection from them as a prison for himself.  One more clever than the rest had constructed a long, sharp-pointed pole which he thrust through the bars to prod at the man within, and wonderful was the activity he displayed in trying to avoid its sharp point.  Others had sharp short javelins which they hurled through the bars at him.  Others again squirted foul, slimy water, and at times the whole crowd would combine in trying to hurl themselves en masse upon the sheltering bars to break through, but in vain.  The wretched man within, whom long experience had taught the impregnability of his cage, would taunt them in return with a cold crafty enjoyment of their fruitless efforts.To my mental query as to whether this man was ever released, an answer was given to me by that majestic spirit whose voice I had heard at rare times speaking to me, from the time when I heard it first at my own grave.  On various occasions when I had asked for help or knowledge, this spirit had spoken to me, as now, from a distance, his voice sounding to me as the voice spoken of by the prophets of old when they thought the Lord spoke to them in the thunder.  This voice rang in my ears with its full deep tones, yet neither the imprisoned spirit nor those haunting him heard it; their ears were deaf so that they could not hear, and their eyes blind so that they could not see.And to me the voice said:  "Son, behold the thoughts of this man for one brief moment--see how he would use liberty were it his."And I saw, as one sees images reflected in a mirror, the mind of this man.  First the thought that he could get free, and when once free he could force himself back to earth and the earth plane, and once there he could find some still in the flesh whose aspirations and ambitions were like his own, and through their help he would forge a still stronger yoke as of iron to rivet upon men's necks, and found a still crueller tyranny--a still more pitiless Inquisition, if that were possible, which should crush out the last remnant of liberty left to its oppressed victims.  He knew he would sway a power far greater than his earthly power, since he would work with hands and brain freed from all earthly fetters, and would be able to call up around him kindred spirits, fellow workers with souls as cold and cruel as his own.  He seemed to revel in the thought of the fresh oppressions he could plan, and took pride to himself in the recollection that he had ever listened unmoved to the shrieks and groans and prayers of the victims he had tortured to death.  From the love of oppression and for his own relentless ambition had he worked, making the aggrandizement of his order but the pretext for his actions, and in no single atom of his hard soul was there awakened one spark of pity or remorse.  Such a man set free to return to earth would be a source of danger far more deadly than the most fierce wild beast, since his powers would be far less limited.  He did not know that his vaunted Inquisition, which he still sought to strengthen in all its deadly powers, had become a thing of the past, swept away from the face of God's earth by a power far mightier than any he could wield; and that, like the dark and terrible age in which it had sprung up like a noisome growth, it had gone nevermore to return--thank God!--never again to disgrace humanity by the crimes committed in the name of him who came only to preach peace and love on earth--gone, with its traces and its scars left yet upon the human mind in its shaken and broken trust in a God and an immortality.  The recoil of that movement which at last swept away the Inquisition is yet felt on earth, and long years must pass before all which was good and pure and true and had survived throughout even those dark ages shall reassert its power and lead men back to their faith in a God of Love, not a God of Horrors, as those oppressors painted him.From this Frozen Land I turned away chilled and saddened.  I did not care to linger there or explore its secrets, though it may be that again at some future time I may visit it.  I felt that there was nothing I could do in that land, none I could understand, and they but froze and revolted me without my doing them any good.

On my way back from the Frozen Land to the Land of Twilight, I passed a number of vast caverns called the "Caverns of Slumber," wherein lay a great multitude of spirits in a state of complete stupor, unconscious of all around them.  These, I learned, were the spirits of mortals who had killed themselves with opium eating and smoking, and whose spirits had thus been deprived of all chance of development, and so had retrograded instead of advancing and growing--just as a limb tied up and deprived of motion withers away--and now they were feebler than an unborn infant, and as little able to possess conscious life.In many cases their sleep would last for centuries; in others, where the indulgence in the drug had been less, it might only last for twenty, fifty, or a hundred years.  These spirits lived, and that was all, their senses being little more developed than those of some fungus growth which exists without one spark of intelligence; yet in them the soul germ had lingered, imprisoned like a tiny seed in the wrapping of some Egyptian mummy, which, long as it may lie thus, is yet alive, and will in a kindly soil sprout forth at last.  These caverns, in which kind spirit hands had laid them, were full of life-giving magnetism, and a number of attendant spirits who had themselves passed through a similar state from opium poisoning in their own earth lives, were engaged in giving what life they could pour into those comatose spirit bodies which lay like rows of dead people all over the floor.By slow degrees, according as the spirit had been more or less injured by the drug taken in the earthly life, these wretched beings would awake to consciousness and all the sufferings experienced by the opium eater when deprived of his deadly drug.  By long and slow degrees the poor spirits would awaken, sense by sense, till at last like feeble suffering children they would become fit for instruction, when they would be sent to institutions like your idiot asylums, where the dawning intellect would be trained and helped to develop, and those faculties recovered which had been all but destroyed in the earth life.These poor souls would only learn very slowly, because they had to try to learn now, without the aids of the earthly life, those lessons which it had been designed to teach.  Like drunkards (only more completely) they had paralyzed brain and senses and had avoided, not learned, the lessons of the earthly life and its development of the spirit.To me these Caves of Slumber were inexpressibly sad to behold--not less so that those wretched slumberers were unconscious for so long of the valuable time they lost in their dreamless, hopeless sleep of stagnation.Like the hare in the fable, while they slept others less swift won the race, and these poor souls might try in vain through countless ages to recover the time which they had lost.When these slumberers shall at last awake, to what a fate do they not waken, through what an awful path must they not climb to reach again that point in the earth life from which they have fallen!  Does it not fill our souls with horror to think that there are those on earth who live, and pile up wealth through the profits made from that dreadful trade in opium, which not alone destroys the body, but would seem to desroy even more fatally the soul, till one would despondently ask if there be indeed hope for these its victims?These awful caves--these terrible stupified spirits--can any words point a fate more fearful than theirs?  To awaken at last with the intellects of idiots, to grow, through hundreds of years, back at last to the possession of the mental powers of children--not of grown men and women.  Slow, slow, must be their development even then, for unlike ordinary children they have almost lost the power to grow, and take many generations of time to learn what one generation on earth could have taught them.  I have heard it said that many of the unhappy beings when they have attained at last to the development of infants, are sent back to earth to be reincarnated in an earthly body, that they may enjoy again the advantages they have misused before.  But of this I only know by hearsay, and cannot give any opinion of my own upon its truth.  I only know that I should be glad to think of any such possibility for them which could shorten the process of development or help them to regain all that they had lost.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER X.--My House in the Twilight Lands--Communion Between the Living and the Dead.

In my home in the Twilight Land I rested now for a time, studying to learn more of myself and the powers I had within me, and seeking to apply the lessons I had learned in my wanderings.  My chief instructor at this time was a man like myself in many respects, who had lived a similar life on earth and had passed through the lower spheres, as I was now doing, and who had become a dweller in a bright land of sunshine from which he came constantly to teach and help those of the Brotherhood who, like myself, were his pupils.There was likewise another teacher or guide whom I sometimes saw, whose influence over me was even greater, and from whom I learned many strange things, but as he was in a much more advanced sphere than the other, it was but seldom that I could see him as a distinct personality.  His teachings came to me more as mental suggestions or inspirational discourses in answer to some questioning thought on my part.  This spirit I shall not now describe to you, as at this time of my sojourn in the Twilight Land I saw him but very dimly, and only clearly when my progression had carried me into a brighter state.Though this man was not fully visible to me I was often conscious of his presence and his aid, and when later on I learned that he had been my principal guardian spirit during my earthly life, I could easily trace many thoughts and suggestions, many of my higher aspirations, to his influence; and it was his voice that had so often spoke to me in warning or in comfort when I struggled on almost overwhelmed with my terrible position on first entering the spirit world.  In the days of darkness I had been faintly conscious of his form flitting in and out of my little cell, and soothing my terrible sufferings with his magnetism and his wonderful knowledge and power.On returning to the Twilight Land from the darker spheres I had visited, I felt almost like returning to a home, for, bare and shabby as my room looked, and small and narrow as it was, it yet held all my greatest treasures:  my picture mirror in which I could see my beloved, and the rose, and the letter she had sent to me.  Moreover I had friends there, companions in misfortune like myself, and though we were as a rule much alone, meditating upon our past mistakes and their lessons, yet at times it was very pleasant to have one friend or another come in to see you, and since we were all alike men who had disgraced ourselves by our earthly lives and were now seeking to follow the better way, there was even in that a bond of sympathy.  Our life, could I make you fully realize it, would indeed seem strange to you.  It was like and yet unlike an earthly life.  For instance, we ate at times a simple sort of food provided for us, it would seem, by magic whenever we felt hungry, but often for a week at a time we would not think of food, unless indeed it was one of us who had been fond of good eating on earth, and in that case the desire would be much more frequent and troublesome to satisfy.  For myself my tastes had been somewhat simple, and neither eating nor drinking had in themselves possessed special attractions for me.There was always around us this twilight, which was never varied with dark night or bright day, and which was most especially trying to me in its monotony.  I so love light and sunshine.  To me it was ever as a life-giving bath.  I had been born in a land of earth where all is sunshine and flowers.Then although we usually walked about this building and the surrounding country much as you do, we could float a little at will, though not so well as more advanced spirits do, and if we were in a great hurry to go anywhere our wills seemed to carry us there with the speed almost of thought.As for sleep, we could spend long intervals without feeling its need, or, again, we could lie and sleep for weeks at a time, sometimes semi-conscious of all that passed, at others in the most complete of slumbers.  Another strange thing was our dress--which never seemed to wear out and renewed itself in some mysterious fashion.  All through this period of my wanderings and while I was in this abode it was of a dark--a very dark--blue color, with a yellow girdle round the waist, and an anchor worked in yellow on the left sleeve, with the words, "Hope is Eternal," below it.  There were close-fitting undergarments of the same dark color.  The robe was long and such as you see penitent brotherhoods or monks wear on earth, with a hood hung from the shoulders, which could be used to cover the head and face of any who desired to screen their features from view; and indeed there were often times when we wished to do so, for suffering and remorse had made such changes in us that we were often glad to hide our faces from the gaze of those we loved.  The hollow eyes, sunken cheeks, wasted and bent forms, and deep lines suffering had traced upon each face told their own story but too well, and such of us as had dear friends on earth or in the spirit land still grieving for our loss, sought often at times to hide from their eyes our disfigured forms and faces.Our lives had somewhat of monotony about them in the regular order in which our studies and our lectures followed each other like clockwork.  At certain stages--for they did not count time by days or weeks, but only as advance was made in the development of each spirit--when a lesson had been learned, in a longer or shorter time according to the spiritual and intellectual development, the spirit was advanced to a higher branch of the subject studied.Some remain a very long time before they can grasp the meaning of the lesson shown to them; if so, the spirit is in no way hurried or pressed on as is done in earth education, where life seems all too short for learning.  As a spirit a man has all eternity before him and can stand still or go on as he pleases, or he may remain where he is till he has thought out and grasped clearly what has been shown, and then he is ready for the next step, and so on.  There is no hurrying anyone faster than he chooses to go; no interference with his liberty to live on in the same state of undevelopment if he wishes, so long as he interferes with the liberty of no one else and conforms to the simple rule which governs that great Brotherhood, the rule of freedom and sympathy for all.  None were urged to learn, and none were kept back from doing so; it was all voluntary, and did anyone seek (as many did) to leave this place, he was free to go where he would, and to return again if he wished; the doors were closed to none, either in going or returning, and none ever sought to reproach another with his faults or shortcomings, for each felt the full depth of his own.Some had been years there, I learned, for to them the lessons were hard and slow to be learned.  Others, again, had broken away and gone back to the life of the earth plane so many times that they had descended to the lowest sphere at last, and gone through a course of purification in that other House of Hope where I had first been.  They had appeared to go back instead of forward, yet even this had not been in truth a retrogression, but only a needful lesson, since they were thus cured of the desire to try the pleasures of the earth plane again.  A few, like myself, who had a strong and powerful motive to rise, made rapid progress, and soon passed on from step to step, but there were, alas! too many who required all the hope and all the help that could be given to sustain and comfort them through all their trials; and it was my lot to be able, out of the storehouse of my own hopefulness, to give a share to others less fortunate who were not blessed, as I was, with a stream of love and sympathy flowing ever to me from my beloved on earth, cheering me on to fresh efforts with its promise of joy and peace at last.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XI.--Ahrinziman.

To these meetings for materialization I was always accompanied by that majestic spirit of whom I have already spoken, and whom I now knew by his name, Ahrinziman, "the Eastern Guide."  As I was now beginning to see him more clearly I will describe him to you.He was a tall, majestic-looking man with long flowing white garments bordered with yellow, and a yellow girdle around his waist.  His complexion was that of an Eastern, of a pale dusky tint.  The features were straight and beautifully molded, as one sees them in the statues of Apollo, though their peculiar Eastern cast caused them to vary a little from the perfect Grecian type.  His eyes were large, dark, soft and tender as a woman's, yet with a latent fire and force of passion in their depths which, though subdued and controlled by his strong will, yet gave a warmth and intensity to his looks and manner, from which I could easily believe that in his earth life he had known all the sweetness and all the passion of violent love and hate.  Now his passions were purified from all earthly dross, and served but as links of sympathy between him and those who, like myself, were still struggling to subdue their lower natures, and conquer their passions.  A short silky black beard covered his cheeks and chin, and his soft wavy black hair hung somewhat long upon his shoulders.  His figure, though tall and powerful, had all the litheness and supple grace of his Eastern race, for so marked are the types of each race that even the spirit bears still the impress of its earthly nationality, and although centuries had passed since Ahrinziman had left the earthly body he retained all the peculiarities which distinguished the Eastern from the Western people.  The spirit was strangely like an earthly mortal man, and yet so unlike in that peculiar dazzling brightness of form and feature which no words can ever paint, nor pen describe, that strange and wonderful ethereality, and yet distinct tangibility, which only those who have seen a spirit of the higher spheres can truly understand.  In his earth life he had been a deep student of the occult sciences, and since his entry into the spirit world he had expanded and increased his knowledge till to me it seemed there was no limit to his powers.  Like myself, of a warm and passionate nature, he had learned during long years of spirit life to overcome and subdue all his passions, till now he stood upon a pinnacle of power whence he stooped down ever to draw up strugglers like myself, whom his sympathy and ready understanding of our weaknesses made ready to receive his help, while one who had never himself fallen would have spoken to us in vain.  With all his gentleness and ready sympathy, however, he had also a power of will against which, when he chose to exert it, one sought in vain to fight, and I have beheld on more than one occasion some of the wild passionate beings amongst whom he worked, brought to a stop in something they were about to do which would have harmed themselves or others.  They would be spellbound and unable to move a limb, yet he had never touched them.  It was but by his own powerful will, which was so much stronger than theirs that for the time they were paralyzed.  Then he would argue the matter with them, kindly and frankly, and show to them in some of his wonderful ways the full consequences to themselves and others of what they were about to do, and when he had done so he would lift from them the spell of his will and leave them free to act as they desired, free to commit the meditated sin now that they knew its consequences; and seldom have I known any who, after so solemn a warning, would still persist in following their own path.  I myself have always been considered one whose will was strong, and who could not readily give it up to any other's, but beside this spirit I have felt myself a child, and have bowed more than once to the force of his decisions.  And here let me say that in all things in the spirit world man is free--free as air--to follow his own inclinations and desires if he wishes, and does not choose to take the advice offered to him.  The limitations to a man's own indulgence and the extent to which he can infringe upon the rights of others, are regulated by the amount of law and order existing in the sphere to which he belongs.For example, in the lowest sphere of all, where no law prevails but the law of the strongest oppressor, you may do what you please; you may injure or oppress another to the very last limits of his endurance, and those who are stronger than you will do the same to you.  The most oppressed slaves on earth are less unhappy than those whom I have seen in the lowest sphere of all, where no law prevails and where only those spirits are to be found who have defied all laws of God or man and have been a law to themselves, exercising the most boundless oppression and wrong towards their neighbors.  In those spheres which I shall shortly describe, it seems that strong, cruel and oppressive as a spirit may be, there is always found someone still stronger to oppress him, some one still crueller, still wickeder, still more oppressive, till at last you arrive at those who may truly be said to reign in hell--Kings and Emperors of Evil!  And it goes on till at last the very excess of evil will work its own cure.  The worst and most tyrannical will long for some other state of things, some laws to restrain, some power to control; and that feeling will be the first step, the first desire for a better life, which will give the Brothers of Hope sent to work in those dark spheres, the little loophole through which to give the idea of improvement, and the hope that it is still possible for them.  As the spirit progresses upwards there will be found in each circle of the ladder of progress an increased degree of law and order prevailing, to which he will be ready to conform himself, as he expects others to conform where the laws affect him.  The perfect observance of the highest moral laws is found only in the highest spheres, but there are many degrees of observance, and he who respects the rights of others will find his rights respected, while he who tramples upon his neighbor will in turn be trampled upon by the stronger ones.In all respects man in the spirit world is free to work or to be idle, to do good or to do evil, to win a blessing or a curse.  Such as he is, such will be his surroundings, and the sphere for which he is fitted must ever be the highest to which he can attain till his own efforts fit him to become a dweller in one higher.  Thus the good need no protection against the evil in the spirit world.  Their own different states place an insurmountable barrier between them.  Those above can always descend at will to visit or help those below them, but between them and the lower spirits there is a great gulf which the lower ones cannot pass.  Only upon your earth and on other planets where material life exists, can there be the mixture of good and evil influences with almost equal power.  I say almost equal, since even on earth the good have the greater power, unless man shuts himself out from their aid by the indulgence of his lower passions.In days of old when men's hearts were simple as little children's, the spirit world lay close at their doors and they knew it not, but now men have drifted far from it, and are like mariners upon a raft, who are seeking now again through fog and mist to find it.  Kind pilots of the spirit world are striving to guide and help them to reach that radiant land that they may bring back a bright store of hope and light for the weary strugglers upon earth.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XII.--My Second Death.

The meetings for materialization were held once a fortnight, and from the number of them I judged that about three months had passed, when I was told by Ahrinziman to prepare myself for a great change which was about to take place in myself and my surroundings, and which would mean my passing into a higher sphere.  I have heard the spheres divided differently by different spirit teachers, and it is not very important that they should be all divided by the same standard, since these divisions are very similar to mapping out a country where the boundaries melt so imperceptibly into one another that it is not very essential to have the limits defined with perfect exactitude, since the changes in the countries and the people will of themselves mark their different states as you progress on your journey.  Thus, then, some will tell you there are seven spheres and that the seventh means the heaven spoken of in the Bible; others say there are twelve spheres; others again extend the number.  Each sphere is, however, divided into circles, usually twelve to a sphere, though here again some spirits will reckon them differently, just as your standards of measurement on earth differ in different countries, yet the thing they measure remains the same.  For myself, I have been used to count that there are seven spheres above the earth and seven below it--using the terms above and below as signifying the nearness to, or distance from, the great central sun of our solar system, the nearest point of attraction towards that sun being considered to be our highest point of attainment (while in the limits of the earth spheres), and the farthest away being regarded as our lowest or most degraded sphere.  Each sphere, then, being subdivided into twelve circles, which are blended so closely into each other that you appear to pass almost insensibly from one to the other.  I had hitherto been in what is called the earth plane, which like a great broad belt circles around the earth and permeates its atmosphere.  This earth plane may be said to comprehend within its bounds the first of the seven spheres above and the first of those below the earth, and is used commonly in describing the habitations of those spirits who are said to be earth-bound in a greater or less degree because they are not able to sink below the earth attractions nor to free themselves from its influences.I was now told that I had so far freed myself from the earth's attractions and overcome my desires for earthly things, that I was able to pass into the second sphere.  The passing from the body of a lower sphere into that of a higher one is often, though not invariably, accomplished during a deep sleep which closely resembles the death-sleep of the spirit in leaving the earthly body.  As a spirit grows more elevated, more etherealized, this change is accompanied by a greater degree of consciousness, till at last the passing from one high sphere to another is simply like changing one garb for another a little finer, discarding one spiritual envelope for a more ethereal one.  Thus the soul passes onward, growing less and less earthly (or material) in its envelopment, till it passes beyond the limits of our earth spheres into those of the solar systems.It happened, then, that upon my return from one of my visits to the earth, I felt overpowered by a strange unusual sense of drowsiness, which was more like paralysis of the brain than sleep.I retired to my little room in the Twilight Land, and throwing myself upon my couch, sank at once into a profound dreamless slumber like unto the unconscious sleep of death.In this state of unconsciousness I lay for about two weeks of earthly time, and during it my soul passed from the disfigured astral body and came forth like a newborn child, clothed in a brighter, purer spiritual envelope, which my efforts at overcoming the evil in myself had created for it.  Only I was not born as an infant but as a full grown man, even as my experience and knowledge had been those of a mature spirit.  There are some mortals whose knowledge of life is so limited, whose minds have been so little cultivated, and whose natures are so simple and childlike, that they are born into the spirit world as mere children, however many years of earth life they may have known, but it was not so with me, and in assuming my new condition I also possessed the development in age which my earth life had given me.In a state of perfect unconsciousness my newborn soul was borne by the attendant spirit friends into the second sphere, where I lay sleeping my dreamless sleep till the time came for my awakening.The discarded astral envelope I had left was by the power of attendant spirits dissolved into the elements of the earth plane, even as my earthly body left at my first death would decay into the earthly material from which it had been taken,--dust returning unto dust again, while the immortal soul passed on to a higher state.Thus did I pass through my second death and awake to the resurrection of my higher self.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

PART II.

The Dawn of Light.

CHAPTER XIII.--Welcome in the Land of Dawn--My New Home There.

On my awakening for the second time from a sleep of death to consciousness in the spirit world, I found that I was in much pleasanter surroundings.  There was daylight at last, though it was as that of a dull day without sun, yet what a blessed change from the dismal twilight and the dark night!I was in a neat little room quite like an earthly one, lying upon a little bed of soft white down.  Before me was a long window looking out upon a wide stretch of hills and undulating country.  There were no trees or shrubs to be seen, and hardly any flowers, save here and there some little simple ones like flowering weeds, yet even these were refreshing to the eyes, and there were ferns and grass clothing the ground with a carpet of verdure instead of the hard bare soil of the Twilight Land.This region was called the "Land of Dawn," and truly the light was as the day appears before the sun has arisen to warm it.  The sky was of a pale blue grey, and white cloudlets seemed to chase each other across it and float in quiet masses on the horizon.  You who think that there are no clouds and no sunshine in the spirit lands hardly know how beautiful a thing you would shut out, unless you have spent, as I did, a long monotonous time without seeing either of them.The room I was in, though by no means luxurious, was yet fairly comfortable in appearance, and reminded me of some cottage interior upon earth.  It held all that was needful to comfort, if nothing that was specially beautiful, and it had not that bare prison-like look of my former dwellings.  There were a few pictures of scenes of my earth life which had been pleasant, and the recollections they called up gave me a fresh pleasure; there were also some pictures of spirit life and oh! joy, there was my picture mirror, and my rose, and the letter--all my treasures!  I stopped my explorations to look into that mirror and see what my beloved was doing.  She was asleep, and on her face was a happy smile as if even in her dreams she knew some good had befallen me.  Then I went to the window and looked out over the country and those long rolling hills, treeless and somewhat bare, save for their covering of grass and ferns.  I looked long upon this scene, it was so like and yet so unlike earth, so strangely bare and yet so peaceful.  My eyes, long wearied with those lower spheres, rested in joy and peace upon this new scene, and the thought that I had thus risen to a new life filled me with a thankfulness of heart unspeakable.At last I turned from the window, and seeing what was like a small mirror near me, I looked to see what change there might be in myself.  I started back with an exclamation of joy and surprise.  Was it possible?  Could this be as I appeared now?  I gazed and gazed again.  This myself?  Why, I was young again!  I looked a man of about thirty or thirty-five, not more certainly, and I beheld myself as I had been in my prime on earth!  I had looked so old, so haggard, so miserable in that Twilight Land that I had avoided to look at myself.  I had looked twenty times worse than I could ever have looked on earth, had I lived to be a hundred years old.  And now, why, I was young!  I held out my hand, it was firm and fresh-looking like my face.  A closer inspection of myself pleased me still more.  I was in all respects a young man again in my prime of vigor, yet not quite as I had been; no! there was a sadness in my look, a certain something more in the eyes than anywhere else that showed the suffering through which I had passed.  I knew that never again could I feel the heedless buoyant ecstasy of youth, for never again could I go back and be quite as I had been.  The bitter past of my life rose up before me and checked my buoyant thoughts.  The remorse for my past sins was with me yet, and cast still its shadow over even the joy of this awakening.  Never, ah! never can we undo all the past life of earth, so that no trace of it will cling to the risen spirit, and I have heard that even those who have progressed far beyond what I have even yet done, bear still the scars of their past sins and sorrows, scars that will slowly, very slowly, wear away at last in the great ages of eternity.  For me there had come joy, great joy, wonderful fulfillment of my hope, yet there clung to me the shadow of the past, and its dark mantle clouded even the happiness of this hour.While I yet mused upon the change which had passed over me, the door opened and a spirit glided in, dressed (as I now was) in a long robe of a dark blue color with yellow borderings, and the symbol of our order on the sleeve.  He had come to invite me to a banquet which was to be given to myself and others who were newly arrived from the lower sphere.  "All is simple here," said he, "even our festivals, yet there will be the salt of friendship to season it and the wine of love to refresh you all.  Today you are our honored guests, and we all wait to welcome you as those who have fought a good fight and gained a worthy victory."Then he took me by the hand and led me into a long hall, with many windows looking out upon more hills and a great peaceful quiet lake.  Here there were long tables spread for the banquet, and seats placed round for us all.  There were about five or six hundred brothers newly arrived, like myself, and about a thousand more who had been there for some time and who were going about from one to another introducing themselves and welcoming the new-comers cordially.  Here and there someone would recognize an old friend or comrade, or one who had either assisted them or been assisted by them in the lower spheres.  They were all awaiting the arrival of the presiding spirit of the order in this sphere, who was called "The Grand Master."Presently the large doors at one end of the hall were seen to glide apart of themselves, and a procession entered.  First came a most majestic, handsome spirit in robes of that rich blue color one sees in the pictures of the Virgin Mary.  These robes were lined with white and bordered with yellow, while a hood of yellow lined with white hung from the shoulders, and on the sleeve was embroidered the symbol of the Order of Hope.  Behind this man were about a hundred or so of youths, all in white and blue robes, who bore in their hands wreaths of laurel.  At the upper end of the hall there was a handsome chair of state, with a white, blue and yellow canopy over it, and after saluting us all the Grand Master seated himself in it, while the youths ranged themselves in a semicircle behind him.  After a short prayer of thanksgiving to Almighty God for us all he addressed us in these terms:"My Brethren, you who are assembled to welcome these wanderers who are to find for a time rest and peace, sympathy and love, in this our House of Hope, and you our wandering brothers, whom we are all assembled to welcome and to honor as conquerers in the great battle against selfishness and sin, to you we give our heartiest greeting, and bid you accept, as members of our great brotherhood, these tributes of our respect and honor, which we offer and which you have fairly won.  And from the increased happiness of your own lives we bid you stretch forth your hands in brotherly love to all the sorrowing ones whom you have left still toiling in the darkness of the earth life and in the spheres of the earth plane, and as you shall yourselves know yet more perfect triumphs, yet nobler conquests, so seek ye to give to others yet more and more of the perfect love of our great brotherhood, whose highest and most glorious masters are in the heavens, and whose humblest members are yet struggling sinners in the dark earth plane.  In one long and unbroken chain our great order shall stretch from the heavens to the earth while this planet shall support material life, and each and every one of you must ever remember that you are links of that great chain, fellow workers with the angels, brother workers with the most oppressed.  I summon you now, each in your turn, to receive and to cherish as a symbol of the honor you have won, these wreaths of fadeless laurel which shall crown the victors' brows.  In the name of the Great Supreme Ruler of the Universe, in the name of all Angels and of our Brotherhood, I crown each one and dedicate you to the cause of Light and Hope and Truth."Then at a signal we, the new arrivals, many of us almost overcome by these kindly words and this mark of honor, drew near, and, kneeling down before the Grand Master, had placed upon our heads these laurel crowns which the youths handed to the Master, and with which he crowned us with his own hands.When the last one had received his crown, such a shout of joy went up from the assembled Brothers, such cheers, and then they sang a most beautiful song of praise, with so lovely a melody and such poetical words that I would I could reproduce it all for you.  When this was over we were each led to a seat by an attendant brother and the banquet began.You will wonder how such a banquet could be in the spirit world, but do you think that even on earth your all of enjoyment at such a scene is in the food you eat, the wine you drink, and do you imagine that a spirit has no need for food of any kind?  If so, you are in error.  We need, and we eat, food, though not of so material a substance as is yours.  There is no animal food of any sort, nor anything like it, save only in the lowest spheres of earth-bound spirits, where they enjoy through others yet in the flesh the satisfaction of the animal apetites.But there are in this second sphere the most delicious fruits, almost transparent to look at, which melt in your mouth as you eat them.  There is wine like sparkling nectar, which does not intoxicate or create a thirst for more.  There are none of those things which would gratify coarse apetites, but there are delicate cakes and a sort of light bread.  Of such fare and such wine did this banquet consist, and I for one confess I never enjoyed anything more than the lovely fruits, which were the first I had seen in the spirit world, and which I was told were truly the fruits of our own labors grown in the spirit land by our efforts to help others.After the banquet was over there was another speech, and a grand chorus of thanks in which we all joined.  Then we dispersed, some of us to see our friends upon earth and try to make them feel that some happy event had befallen us.  Many of us, alas! were being mourned as among the lost souls who had died in sin, and it was a great grief to us that these earthly friends could not be made conscious how great were now our hopes.  Others of the Brothers turned to converse with newly-found spirit friends, while for my part I went straight to earth to tell the good news to my beloved.  I found her about to attend one of those meetings for materialization, and, trembling with joy and eagerness, I followed her there, for now I knew there was no longer any reason why I should not show my face to her who had been so faithful and so patient in waiting for me--no longer would the sight of me give pain or shock her.Ah, what a happy night that was!  I stood beside her all the time.  I touched her again and again.  I stood there, no more the dark shrouded figure hiding his face from all eyes.  No!  I was there in my new dress with my new hopes, my risen body, and the ashes of my dead past were there no more to give me such shame and sorrow of heart as I had known.  And then--oh! crowning joy to that most joyful day--I showed myself to her wondering eyes, and they gazed into my own.  But she did not know me at once; she was looking for me as she had seen me last on earth, with face of care and wrinkled brow, and the young man's face looked strange to her.  Yet not quite strange, she smiled and looked with a puzzled wondering look which, could I but have held the material particles of my form together for but a few more minutes, must have changed to recognition.  But, alas! all too soon I felt my material form melting from me like soft wax, and I had to turn and go as it faded away.  But as I went I heard her say:  "It was so like, so very like what my dear friend must have been in youth.  It was so like and yet so unlike him, I hardly know what to think."Then I went behind her and whispered in her ear that it was I myself, and no other.  And she heard my whisper and laughed and smiled, and said she had felt sure it must be so.  Then indeed the cup of my joy was full, then indeed was the crown of my day complete.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XIV.--A Father's Love.

After this there came for me a time of happiness, a season of rest and refreshment upon which I shall not dwell; its memories are all too sacred to me, for those days were spent near to her I loved, and I had the happiness of knowing that she was conscious of much, though not all, I said to her, and I spent so much of my time on earth that I had none to explore the wonders of that Land of Dawn of which I had become an inhabitant.And now a fresh surprise awaited me.  In all my wanderings since my death I had never once seen any of my relatives nor the friends who had passed before me into the spirit land.  But one day when I came as usual to see my beloved, I found her full of some mysterious message she had received, and which she was to give me herself.  After a little she told me that it was from a spirit who had come to visit her, and who said he was my father and that he wished her to give his message to me.  I was so overcome when she said this that I could scarcely speak--scarcely ask what his message was.  I had so loved my father upon earth, for my mother had died when I was so young that she was but a faint tender memory to me.  But my father! he had been everything to me.  He had had such pride and joy in all my successes, such hopes for my future; and, then, when I had made shipwreck of my life, I knew that I had broken his heart.  He did not long survive the crushing of all his hopes, and since his death I had only thought of him with pain and shame of heart.  And now when I heard that from beyond the gates of Death he had come to my beloved and spoken to her of me, I feared lest his words might be but a lament over his buried hopes, his degraded son, and I cried out that I could not dare to meet him, yet I longed to hear what he had said, and to know if there was in it a word of forgiveness for me, his son, who had so deeply sinned.How shall I tell what his words had been?  How say what I felt to hear them?  They fell upon my heart as dew upon a thirsty land, those words of his, and are far, far too precious to be given to the world, but surely the father in the parable must have welcomed back his prodigal son in some such words as these!  Ah! how I cried out to my beloved when I heard those words, and how I longed to see that father again and be taken once more to his heart as when I was a boy!  And as I turned away I beheld his spirit standing by us, just as I had seen him last in life, only with a glory of the spirit world upon him such as no mortal eyes have ever seen.  My father--so long parted from me, and to meet again thus!  We had no words to greet each other with but "My father" and "My son," but we clasped each other to the heart in a joy that required no words.When our feelings had calmed down again we began to speak of many things, and not least of her whose love had led me so far upon my upward path, and then I learned that this beloved father had helped, watched over, and protected us both; that he had followed me during all my wanderings both on earth and in the spirit land, and had protected and comforted me in my struggles.  Unseen himself he had yet been near, and unceasing in his efforts and his love.  All this time when I had so shrunk from the thought of meeting him he had been there, only waiting an opportunity to make himself known, and he had come at last through her who had so much of my love, in order that he might thereby link us all three more closely together in the joy of this reunion.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XV.--A New Expedition Proposed.

When I returned to the spirit land, my father went with me and we spent a long time together.  In the course of our conversation he told me that an expedition was about to be sent from this sphere to work as "Rescuers" in the lowest sphere of all, a sphere below any I had yet seen and which was in truth the hell believed in by the church.  How long the expedition would be absent was not known, but a certain work had to be accomplished, and like an invading army we would remain till we had attained our object.My Eastern guide advised me to join this band of workers, and as my father had in earth life sent his sons forth to fight for their beloved country, so did he now wish me to go forth with this army of soldiers in the cause of Truth and Light and Hope.  To fight successfully against these powers of evil, it was necessary to be beyond the temptations of the earth plane and lower spheres, and to help the unhappy ones by a visible help which they could see and take hold of; one must not belong to the higher spheres, for spirits more advanced than the Brothers of Hope in this, the first circle of the second sphere, would be quite invisible to the unhappy ones who could neither see nor hear them.  Also in entering these lowest spheres we would, in order to be visible, have to clothe ourselves in a certain portion of their material elements, and this a more advanced spirit could not do.  So that although unseen helpers from the higher spheres would accompany the expedition to protect and assist us, they would be invisible alike to ourselves and those we had come to help.Those who were to go upon this expedition with me were similar to myself in disposition, and it was felt that we would all learn much from seeing to what our passionate feelings would have sunk us, had we indulged in them.  At the same time we would be able to rescue from those dark spheres many poor repentant souls.  Those whom we rescued would be taken to where I had been on my first passing over from earth life, where there were numerous institutions specially set apart for such poor spirits, presided over and attended by spirits who had themselves been rescued from the Kingdoms of Hell and who were therefore best fitted to aid these poor wanderers.Besides the Brothers of Hope from the Land of Dawn, there were other similar bands from other brotherhoods always being sent down to the dark spheres, such expeditions being, in fact, part of the great system of help for sinners ever being carried on in the name of the Eternal Father of all, who dooms none of his children to an eternity of misery.A number of friends would accompany us a part of our journey, and our expedition would be commanded by a leader who had himself been rescued from the dark spheres and who knew their especial dangers.As we would pass through the earth plane and lower spheres we would see them in a way we had not done before, and my Eastern guide said he would send one of his pupils to accompany me as far as the lowest sphere, in order that he might explain to me and make visible some of the mysteries of the astral plane which we would see as we passed.  Hassein (as the student was named) was studying those mysteries of nature which have been classed under the name of magic and as such deemed evil, whereas it is their abuse only which is evil.  A more extended intelligent knowledge of them would tend to prevent many existing evils and counteract some of those evil powers brought to bear upon man, often very injuriously, in his present ignorance.  This student spirit had been a Persian and a follower of Zoroaster in his earth life, as Ahrinziman himself had been, and they belonged still to that school of thought of which Zoroaster was the great exponent."In the spirit world," said Ahrinziman, "there are a great number of different schools of thought, all containing the great fundamental eternal truths of nature, but each differing in many minor details, and also as to how these great truths should be applied for the advancement of the soul; they likewise differ as to how their respective theories will work out, and the conclusions to be drawn from the undoubted knowledge they possess, when it is applied to subjects upon which they have no certain knowledge and which are still with them as with those on earth, the subject of speculation, theory, and discussion.  It is a mistake to suppose that in the spirit world of our planet there is any absolute knowledge which can explain all the great mysteries of Creation, the why and wherefore of our being, the existence of so much evil mixed with the good, or the nature of the soul and how it comes from God."The waves of truth are continually flowing from the great thought centers of the Universe, and are transmitted to earth through chains of spirit intelligences, but each spirit can only transmit such portions of truth as his development has enabled him to understand, and each mortal can only receive as much knowledge as his intellectual faculties are able to assimilate and comprehend."Neither spirits nor mortals can know everything, and spirits can only give you what are the teachings which their own particular schools of thought and advanced teachers give as their explanations.  Beyond this they cannot go, for beyond this they do not themselves know; there is no more absolute certainty in the spirit world than on earth, and those who assert that they have the true and only explanation of these great mysteries are giving you merely what they have been taught by more advanced spirits, who, with all due deference to them, are no more entitled to speak absolutely than the most advanced teachers of some other school.  I assert with knowledge not my own, but from another who is indeed regarded in the spirit world as a leader of most advanced thought, that it is in no way possible to give a final answer to or explanation of subjects which are beyond the powers of any spirit of our entire solar system to solve, and still more beyond those of the spirits of our earth spheres.  In these subjects and their explanation are involved and required a knowledge of the limits of the universe itself which has no limits, and the nature of that Supreme Being of whom no man or spirit can know the nature, save in so far as we can grasp the great truth that he is Infinite Spirit, limitless in all senses, Unknowable and Unknown."Let men and spirits, then, argue or explain, they can only teach you to the limits of their own knowledge and beyond that again are limits none can reach.  How can any pretend to show you the ultimate end of that which has no end, or sound the great depths of an infinite thought which has no bottom?  Thought is as eternal as life and as fathomless.  Spirit is infinite and all-pervading.  God is in all and over and above all, yet none know his nature nor what manner of essense he is of, save that he is in everything and everywhere.  The mind of man must pause on the very threshold of his inquiries, appalled by the sense of his own littleness, and the most he can do is to learn humbly and study cautiously, that each step be assured before he essays again to climb.  The most lofty, the most daring minds cannot grasp all at once, and can man on earth hope that all can be explained to him with his limited range of vision, when the most advanced minds in the spirit world are ever being checked in their explorations after truth by the sense of their limited powers?"
     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XVI.--Clairvoyance--The Journey Begun.

The friend whom Ahrinziman sent to accompany and instruct me, appeared to my eyes as a youth of about five-and-twenty to thirty years of age, judging by earth's standard in such matters, but he told me he had lived to upwards of sixty years on earth.  His present appearance was that of his spiritual development, which alone constitutes the age of a spirit.  As a spirit grows more highly developed in his intellectual powers, the appearance becomes more matured, till at last he assumes that of a sage, without, however, the wrinkles and defects of age in earth life, only its dignity, its power, and its experience.  Thus, when a spirit has attained to the highest possible development of the earth (or any other planet's) spheres he would possess the appearance of one of its patriarchs, and would then pass into the higher and more extended spheres of the solar system of that planet, beginning there as a youth again since his development compared to that of the advanced spirits of those higher spheres would be but that of a youth.Hassein told me that he was at present studying the various powers and forms of nature in those stages which were below soul life, and would be able to make visible and explain to me many curious things we should see upon our journey."Many spirits," he said, "pass through the sphere of the astral plane without being conscious of its spectral inhabitants, by reason of the fact that their senses are not developed in such a way as to enable them to become conscious of their surroundings in all their entirety, just as in earth life there are many persons quite unable to see the spirits around them, although to others again they are perfectly visible.  There are upon earth persons who can see not alone the spirits of human beings but also these astral and elementary beings who are not truly 'spirits,' since that word should be used to denote only those which possess within them the soul germ.  Now many of these beings which we shall see never possessed any soul, and others again are only the empty shells from which the soul germ has departed.  To distinguish between the soul spirit and the soulless astral one must possess a double power of soul-sight or clairvoyance as it is termed, and many who possess only an imperfect degree of this double power will be able to see elementals and astrals, but without being able to distinguish them clearly from the soul-enveloping spirit forms.  Hence much confusion and many mistakes have arisen amongst these imperfect clairvoyants as to the nature and attributes of these classes of beings.  There are seven degrees of the soul-sight found in persons yet in the earth life; and in the next stage of life the spiritual part or soul being freed from the gross elements of material life, there will be found seven more expansions of this gift, and so on in progressive succession as the soul casts off one by one the envelopes of matter--first the most gross or earthly matter, then succeeding degrees of refined or sublimated matter, for we hold that there can be no such thing as entire severance between soul and matter--that is so long as it is conscious of existence in any of our solar systems.  Beyond these limits we have no knowledge to guide us, and it is a matter of pure speculation.  It is only a question of the degree and quality of the matter which is more or less refined and etherealized as the soul is in a higher or lower state of development.  It is of the first stage of earthly conscious soul life that I shall now speak in speaking of the clairvoyant sight, leaving till another time the theories and beliefs involved in the study of what has passed before man's present conscious stage of existence and what may happen when he passes beyond the limits of our present knowledge."We find, then, in the earthly stage of life persons--most often women or very young boys--who are endowed with some or all of these seven degrees of soul-sight.  The first three degrees are very often found, the fourth and fifth more rarely, while the sixth and seventh are hardly ever met with except in persons endowed with certain peculiarities of organization, due to those astrological influences under which they are born--particularly to those prevailing at the exact moment the child sees the light of earth life.  So rare are these perfect sixth and seventh degrees that very few possess them, though some are found with an imperfect sixth and none of the seventh, in which case they can never attain to the perfection of soul-sight, and as with imperfect glasses, the defect in their sight will cause them to have an imperfect vision of celestial things, and although they will see into the sixth sphere in a sense, yet their defective power will greatly impair the value of what they see."Those, however, who have the perfect sixth and seventh degrees can be taken in spirit into the seventh sphere itself, which is the highest, or heaven of the earth spheres, and like St. John of old they shall see unspeakable things.  To do this the soul requires to be freed from all ties to the material body, save only the slender thread without which connecting link, body and soul would part forever.  Thus they may be said to be out of the body at such times, and so difficult and dangerous is it to thus take the soul into the seventh sphere, that only with exceptional persons and under very exceptional circumstances can it be done even where the power exists.  Of the clairvoyants of the lower degrees of power the same may be said, except that the less celestial their powers, the more safely and easily may they be used, each clairvoyant being able to see into that sphere which corresponds to the degree of power which they possess.  It is, however, a curious fact that many clairvoyants possess one or more perfect degrees of soul-sight with at the same time an imperfect form of a degree still higher, and when this is so it will be found that the medium mixes the visions seen and is not reliable, since the defective degree (if used) will act like a defective eye and cause that which is beheld by both eyes at the same time to partake of its imperfections.  It is, therefore, far better to have the entire absence of a degree than to possess an imperfect form of it, since the imperfect one only causes confusion in using the perfect ones, unless indeed you do with these powers as you might do with the defective eye, and close it altogether in order that the vision, though limited, may be correct.  Thus the ancients when they found the highest amount of perfect vision of one or more degrees in their pupils, arrested their further development at that degree before the imperfect sight of a higher one could in any way impair the value of those they possessed.  In this way they were able to train as reliable clairvoyants of moderate powers many who by a further effort at development would have lost far more than they could gain.  In olden days seers were divided into classes even as they still are amongst certain schools of prophets in the East, though now the art is not studied to the perfection it once was when the Eastern nations were a power upon earth."Each class underwent a special training adapted to their special degrees of power and class of gifts, and there was not the present curious mixture of great gifts and entire ignorance of how to use them wisely, which in many instances results in so many inaccuracies and so much harm both to mediums and to those who go to them for spiritual knowledge.  As well might a trainer of young gymnasts think that he could overtax and strain the growing muscles without lasting harm to them, as those who make an ignorant, unlimited, and indiscriminate use and development of the mediumistic powers.  A young fledgling cast from the nest too soon flutters and falls to the ground, while if left till the wings are strong enough to bear its flight it will soar to heaven itself.  With more extended knowledge upon earth there will be given to certain sensitives endowed with the needful mediumistic powers the knowledge by which under the guidance of those higher intelligences who are directing the great spiritual movement, they can judge between the spirits of low and degraded states and those of a higher degree of advancement, and thus much of the confusion and danger which still hampers the movement will be gradually eliminated from it."On the spirit side of life are many teachers who for centuries have made a study of these subjects--of all forms of life--and of the mediumistic powers of those who are incarnated upon earth, and they are even now seeking on all sides for open doors through which to impart such knowledge as may be of use to man.  Much which they know could not yet be imparted, but there are things which could, and with this subject as with all others the minds upon earth will expand and develop as knowledge is given."I thanked my new friend for his information and promised help, and as the expedition was soon to start I went to earth to bid adieu for a time to my beloved.  Upon our parting I shall not dwell, nor say how much we both felt we should miss our constant little intercourse; for even restricted as it was by the barrier between us, it had been been a great joy to both.I found on my return that the preparations for our journey were now complete, and I was summoned to bid my father and others adieu, and to join my companions in the great hall where they were now assembled to receive the farewell benediction of our Grand Master.After this our band started amidst the cheers and good wishes of all the assembled Brotherhood.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XVII.--The Astral Plane and Its Inhabitants--Spooks, Elves, Vampires, etc.

I can hardly give you a better idea of the course of our journey than by asking you to imagine a vast spiral or corkscrew winding upwards and downwards in circling rings.  A tiny speck no bigger than a pin's head in the middle of a large cart-wheel might represent the earth in the centre of these circling rings, an equal number of which are above and below the earth, all winding in a connected series from the lowest to the highest around this speck, and the head of the spiral pointing towards our central sun--this being regarded as the highest point of the most advanced sphere.This will give you a faint idea of the earth and its attendant spirit spheres, and help you to understand how in our journey we passed from the second into the lowest sphere, and in doing so passed through the earth plane.  As we entered it I perceived many spirits of mortals hurrying to and fro just as I had been wont to see them, but now for the first time I also saw that mingling with them were many floating spectral shapes similar to those wraiths I had seen haunting the spirit in the icy cage in the Frozen Land.  These wraiths seemed to be floating to and fro like driftweed upon a seashore, borne here and there by the different astral currents which revolve and circle round the earth.Some were very distinct and life-like till a closer inspection revealed to me that the light of intelligence was wanting in their eyes and expressions, and there was a helpless collapsed look about them like wax dolls from which the stuffing has run out.  For the life of me I can think of nothing that will so well express their appearance.In my former wanderings through the earth plane I had not been conscious of any of these beings, and on asking Hassein the reason of this he answered:  "First, because you were so much absorbed in your work, and secondly, your powers of sight were not sufficiently developed.  Now look," he added, pointing to a strange little group of beings like elves which were approaching us hand in hand, gamboling like children.  "Look at those; they are the mental and bodily emanations cast off from the minds and bodies of children which consolidate into these queer, harmless little elementals when brought into contact with any of the great life currents that circle around the earth, and which bear upon their waves the living emanations cast off from men, women and children.  These curious little beings have no real separate intelligent life such as a soul would give, and they are so evanescent and ethereal that they take their shapes and change them, as you will observe, like the clouds on a summer sky.  See how they are all dissolving and forming again afresh."As I looked I saw the whole little cloud of figures shift into a new form of grotesque likeness, and whereas they had looked like tiny fairies in caps and gowns made from flowers, they now took wings, becoming like a species of half butterflies, half imps, with human bodies, animal's heads, and butterflies' wings.  Then as a fresh strong wave of magnetism swept over them, lo! they were all broken up and carried away to form fresh groups elsewhere with other particles.I was so astonished at this, the real living appearance and the unreal disappearance, that I suppose Hassein read my puzzled state of mind, for he said, "What you have now beheld is only an ethereal form of elemental life, which is not material enough for a long continued existence on the earth plane, and is like the foam of the sea thrown up by the wave motions of pure earthly lives and thoughts.  See now how much stronger on the astral plan can be the consistency of that which is not pure."I beheld approaching us a great mass of aerial forms, dark, misshapen, human, yet inhuman, in appearance.  "These," said he, "are the beings which haunt the delirium of the drunkard, which gather round him, drawn by his corrupted magnetism and unable to be repelled by one who has lost the will-force needful to protect him from such creatures which cling like barnacles to him, and like leeches suck his animal vitality with a strange ghoulish intelligence akin to that of some noisome plant which has fastened itself upon a tree.  For such a one as the unfortunate drunkard the best help which can be given is by obtaining some one upon the earth side of life who possesses a strong will and mesmeric powers, and let him place the drunkard under the protection of his will and the strong influence of his magnetism, till the last of these phantoms drops off from inability to hold on longer under the stream of healthy magnetism poured upon them and the unlucky man upon whom they have fastened.  The healthy magnetism acts like a poison upon these creatures, and kills them so that they drop off, and their bodies, unable to hold together, decay into immaterial dust.  Should these beings, however, not encounter such a strong dose of healthy magnetism they will go on for years floating about and drawing away the animal vitality of one human being after another, till at last they become endowed with a certain amount of independent animal life of their own.  At this stage they can be used by higher, more intelligent beings to carry out such work as their peculiar organizations fit them for, and it is these soulless creatures, though created and earth-nourished, whom a certain class of practitioners of the so-called black magic made use of in some of their experiments, as well as for carrying out their evil designs against any one who had offended them.  But like deadly weeds at the bottom of a dark pool, these astrals draw down and destroy in their soulless clutches those who venture to meddle with them unprotected by the higher powers.""And now tell me, friend Hassein," said I, "if these astrals, when they fasten upon a drunkard, can or do influence him to drink more, as is the case when the earth-bound spirit of a departed drunkard controls one still in the flesh.""No!  These beings do not derive any pleasure from the drink a man swallows, except in so far as by corrupting his magnetism it makes him such that they can more readily feed upon him.  It is his animal or earthly life-force they desire.  It means existence for them and is much the same as water to a plant, and beyond the fact that by draining the victim of his vitality they cause a sense of exhaustion which makes him fly to stimulants for relief, they do not affect the question of his continuing to drink.  They are mere parasites, and possess no intelligence of their own except of so rudimentary a character that we can scarcely give it that name."To originate a thought or to impress your thoughts upon another requires the possession of an intelligent soul germ or spark of the divine essence, and once this has been given the being becomes possessed of an independent individuality it can never again lose.  It may cast off envelope after envelope, or it may sink into grosser and still grosser forms of matter, but once endowed with soul-life it can never cease to exist, and in existing must retain the individuality of its nature and the responsibility of its actions.  This is alike true of the human soul and the intelligent soul-principle as manifested in the animals or lower types of soul existence.  Whenever you see the power to reason and to act upon such reasoning manifested either in man, the highest type, or in animals, the lower type, you may know that a soul exists, and it is only a question of degree of purity of soul essence.  We see in man and in the brute creation alike a power of reasoning intelligence differing only in degree, and from this fact the school of thought to which I belong draws the inference that both alike have a conscious individual immortality, differing, however, in the type and degree of soul essence, animals as well as men having an immortal future for development before them.  What are the limits of the action of this law we cannot pretend to say, but we draw our conclusions from the existence in the spirit world of animals as well as men who have alike lived on earth, and both of whom are found in a more advanced state of development than they were in their earth existences."It is impossible for the soulless parasite to influence the mind of any mortal; and it is therefore undoubtedly the souls which have been incarnated in earthly bodies and have so indulged their lower passions in that state that they are not able to free themselves from the fetters of their astral envelopes, that haunt the earth and incite those yet in the flesh to indulgence in drink and similar vices.  They, as you know, can control man in many ways, either partially or completely, and the most common way is for the spirit to partly envelop the man he controls with his spirit body until a link has been formed between them, somewhat after the nature of that uniting some twin children who possess distinct bodies, but are so joined to each other and interblended that all which one feels is felt by the other.  In this fashion what is swallowed by the mortal is enjoyed by the spirit who controls the unfortunate man, and who urges him to drink as much as possible, and when he can no longer do so the spirit will then try to free himself and go elsewhere in search of some other weak-willed man or woman of depraved tastes.  Not always, however, can either the spirit or the mortal free themselves from the strange link woven between them by the indulgence of their joint desires.  After a long-continued connection of this sort it becomes very difficult for them to separate, and the spirit and the man may go on for years sick of each other yet unable to break the tie without help from the higher powers, who are always ready to assist those who call upon their aid.  Should a spirit continue to control men for the purpose of self-gratification as I have described, he sinks lower and lower, and drags his victims down with him into the depths of hell itself, from which they will both have a bitter and weary task to climb when at last the desire for better things shall awaken.  To a soul alone belongs the power to think and to will, and those other soulless creatures but obey the laws of attraction and repulsion, which are felt likewise by all the material atoms of which the universe is composed, and even when these astral parasites have, by long feeding upon the vital force of men or women, attained to a certain amount of independent life, they have no intelligence to direct their own or others' movements; they float about like fever germs generated in a foul atmosphere, attracted to one person more readily than to another, and like such germs may be said to possess a very low form of life."Another class of elemental astrals are those of the earth, air, fire, and water, whose bodies are formed from the material life germs in each element.  Some are in appearance like the gnomes and elves who are said to inhabit mines and mountain caverns which have never been exposed to the light of day.  Such, too, are the fairies whom men have seen in lonely and secluded places amongst primitive races of men.  Such, with the variations caused by the different natures of the elements from which they are formed, are the water sprites and the mermaids of ancient fable, and the spirits of the fire and the spirits of the air."All these beings possess life, but as yet no souls, for their lives are drawn from and sustained by the lives of earthly men and women, and they are but reflections of the men amongst whom they dwell.  Some of these beings are of a very low order of life, almost like the higher orders of plants, except that they possess an independent power of motion.  Others are very lively and full of grotesque unmeaning tricks, with the power of very rapid flight from place to place.  Some are perfectly harmless, while others again are more malignant in their instincts as the human beings from whom their life is drawn are of a more savage race. These curious earth elementals cannot exist long amongst nations where the more intellectual stage of development has been reached, because then the life germs thrown off by man contain too little of the lower or animal life to sustain them, and they die and their bodies decay into the atmosphere.  Thus as nations advance and grow more spiritual, these lower forms of life die out from the astral plane of that earth's sphere, and succeeding generations begin at first to doubt and then to deny that they ever had an existence.  Only amongst those ancient religions of the East who have kept still unbroken the threads of record, are there to be found accounts of these intermediate dependent races of beings and the causes of their existence."These soulless elementals of earth, air, fire and water, are a class distinct from those others which I have drawn you as emanating from the debased intelligence of man's mind and the evil actions of his body.  Behold now, oh! man of a Western nation, the knowledge which your philosophers and learned men have shut out and locked away as being harmful fables, till man, shut into the narrow bounds of what he can with his physical senses alone see, hear, and feel, has begun to doubt if he has any soul at all; any higher, purer, nobler self than is sustained by the sordid life of earth.  See now the multitudinous beings that surround man on every side, and ask yourself if it would not be well that he should have the knowledge which could help to keep him safe from the many pitfalls over which he walks in blind ignorance and unconsciousness of his danger.  In the primitive ages of the earth man was content to look like a child for help and succor to his Heavenly Father, and God sent his angels and ministering spirits to protect his earthly children.  In these latter ages man, like a full-grown troublesome youth, seeks in his self-conceit no higher help than his own, and rushes into danger with his eyes bandaged by his pride and ignorance.  He scoffs at those things which he is too limited in his powers to understand, and turns aside from those who would instruct him.  Because he cannot see his soul, cannot weigh it and analyze it, he says, forsooth, that man has no soul and had better enjoy this earthly life as one who shall some day die and turn to dust again, consciousness, individuality, all forever blotted out."Or, again, in abject fear of the unknown fate before him, man takes refuge in the vague superstitions, the shadowy creeds of those who profess to act as guides upon the pathway to the Unknown Land, with little more certain knowledge than man has himself."Thus, then, it is in pity to his wandering, struggling children that God has in these later days opened once more--and wider than ever before--the doors of communion between the two worlds.  He is sending out again messengers to warn man, ambassadors, to tell him of the better way, the truer path to the happiness of a higher life, and to show him that knowledge and that power which shall yet be of right his inheritance.  As the prophets of old spake, so speak these messengers now, and if they speak with clearer voice, with less veiled metaphor, it is because man is no longer in his infancy and needs now that he should be shown the reason and the science upon which his beliefs and hopes must be founded."Listen, then, unto this voice that calls, oh! ye toilers of the earth!" cried Hassein, turning and stretching out his hands towards a small dark ball that seemed to float far away on the horizon of our sight--a small dark globe that we knew to be the sorrowful planet called Earth.  "Listen to the voices that call to you and turn not a deaf ear, and realize ere it be too late that God is not a God of the dead but of the living, for all things are alive for evermore.  Life is everywhere and in everything; even the dull earth and the hard rocks are composed of living germs, each living according to its own degree.  The very air we breathe and the boundless ether of universal space are full of life, and there is not one thought we think but lives for good or ill, not one act whose image shall not live to torture or to solace the soul in the days of its release from its incarnation in an earthly form.  Life is in all things, and God is the central Life of All."Hassein paused, then in a calmer voice he said to me:  "Look yonder!  What would you say those things were?"He pointed to what seemed to me at first a mass of spirit forms which came sweeping towards us as though blown by a strong wind.  As they came near I saw they were evidently soulless astral envelopes, but unlike those floating wraiths I had seen haunting the man in the icy cage, these were solid, and to my spiritual sight life-like and full of animal vigor; yet they were like automatons and did not seem to possess any intelligence.  They were drifting and bobbing about like buoys at sea to which boats are anchored.  As they drifted close to us my friend put forth his will-force and captured one, which then remained floating in mid air."Now look," said he, "you will observe this is somewhat like a great living doll.  It is the result of countless little living germs which man is continually throwing off from his earthly body, emanations solely of his animal or lower life, material enough when brought into contact with the magnetic forces of the astral plane, to form into these imitations of earthly men and women, and immaterial enough to be invisible to man's purely material sight, although a very small degree of clairvoyant power would enable him to see them.  A stronger and higher degree of clairvoyant power would enable him to see, as you do, that this is not a true spirit envelope, since the soul principle is wanting; and a yet higher degree of clairvoyant power would show that a soul has never been in this form, and that it has never had a conscious existence as a soul's astral envelope."Amongst ordinary clairvoyants the subject of astral spirits is not studied sufficiently to develop these degrees of soul-sight, therefore few clairvoyants in your earthly country could tell you whether this was a true soul-enveloping astral form or one from which the soul had departed, or yet again one in which the soul had never been present at all.  Presently I shall show you an experiment with this astral form, but first observe that being such as it is, it is fresh and full of the animal life of the earth plane, and has not the collapsed appearance of those you saw before, which had once contained a soul and which were there in a state of rapid decay yet.  And mark this carefully:  this fresh looking astral will decay far faster than the others, for it has none of the higher principle of life clinging to it, which, in the case of an astral that has once contained a soul, often remains for a long time animating and keeping it from perfect decay.  Astral forms must draw their life from a higher source (from soul germs in fact), or they soon cease to exist and crumble away.""But," I asked, "how do they assume the shapes of men and women?""By the action of the spiritualized magnetic currents which flow through all the ether space continually, as the currents flow in the ocean.  These magnetic life currents are of a more etherealized degree than those known to scientific mortals, being in fact their spiritual counterpart, and as such they act upon these cloud masses of human atoms in the same way that electricity acts upon the freezing moisture upon a window pane, forming them into the semblance of men and women as the electricity forms the freezing moisture into a likeness of trees, plants, etc."It is an acknowledged fact that electricity is an active agent in the formation of the shapes of leaves and trees, etc., in vegetable life, but few know that this refined form of magnetism has a similar share in the formation of human forms and animal life.  I say animal life as applied to those types which are lower than man.""Are there, then, also the astral forms of animals?""Certainly, and very queer, grotesque combinations some of them are.  I cannot show them to you now, because your powers of sight are not yet fully developed, and also because we are traveling too rapidly to enable me to develop them for you, but some day I shall show you these, as well as many other curious things relating to the astral plane.  I may tell you that atoms may be classed under different heads, and that each class will have a special attraction for others of its own kind; thus vegetable atoms will be attracted together to form astral trees and plants, while animal atoms will form into the semblance of beasts, birds, etc., and human atoms into men and women's forms.  In some cases, where the human beings from whom the atoms come are very low in the scale of humanity and nearly akin to animals, their atoms will blend with those of the lower forms of life and create grotesque horrible creatures which resemble at once animals and men, and having been seen by clairvoyants in a semi-trance condition are described as nightmare visions.  In the earth spheres an immense amount of these living atoms are thrown off continually from man's lower or animal life, and these sustain and renew the astral forms, but were we to transport one of these shells to a planet whose spheres had been spiritualized beyond the stage of material life, or in other words freed from all these lower germs, the astrals could not exist, they would become like a noxious vapor and be blown away.  These astrals being, as I have said, created from the cloud masses of human atoms, and never having been the envelope of any soul, are very little more permanent in their nature than the frost flowers on a window pane, unless the power of some higher intelligence acts upon them to intensify their vitality and prolong their existence.  They are, as you will see, expressionless and like wax dolls in appearance, and readily lend themselves to receive any individuality stamped upon them, hence their use in ancient times by magicians and others.  Astral atoms, whether of trees, plants, animals, or human beings, must not be confounded with the true spirit or soul-clothing atoms which constitute the real spirit world and its inhabitants.  Astrals of every kind are the intermediate degree of materiality between the gross matter of earth and the more etherealized matter of the spirit world, and we talk of a soul clothed in its astral envelope to express that earth-bound condition in which it is too refined or immaterial for earth existence, and too grossly clad to ascend into the spirit world of the higher spheres, or to descend to those of the lower.""Then you mean that a spirit even in the lowest sphere is more spiritualized as regards its body than an earth-bound spirit?""Certainly I do.  The astral plane extends like a belt around each planet and is, as I said, formed of the matter which is too fine for reabsorption by the planet, and too coarse to escape from the attraction of the planet's mass and pass into the spheres of the spirit world to form either matter in the course of disintegration or change from one form to another, and it is only the vitalizing power of such soul magnetism as it retains which enables it to cling together in any shape at all."In the case of human astral forms which have possessed individualized life as a soul's envelope, the astral atoms have absorbed a greater or less degree of the soul's magnetism, or true life essence, according as the earthly existence of the soul has been good or evil, elevated or degraded, and this soul magnetism animates it for a longer or shorter period, and forms a link between it and the soul which has animated it.  In the case of a soul whose desires are all for higher things, the link is soon severed and the astral envelope soon decays, while with a soul of evil desires the tie may last for centuries and chain the soul to earth, making it in fact earth-bound.  In some cases the astral of a soul of very evil life will have absorbed the lower or higher spheres.  Astral matter is practically so much of the soul's vitality that after the soul itself has sunk into the lowest sphere of all, the empty shell will still float about the earth like a fading image of its departed owner.  Such are sometimes seen by clairvoyants hanging about the places where they once lived, and are truly 'spooks.'  They have no intelligence of their own, since the soul has fled, and they can neither influence mediums nor move tables, nor do any other thing except as mechanical agents of some higher intelligence, whether that intelligence be good or evil."The astral before us now has no soul magnetism in it; it never possessed any, therefore it will soon decay and its atoms be absorbed by others.  But see to what use it can be turned when acted upon by my will power and animated for the time being by my individuality."I looked as he spoke and saw the astral doll become suddenly animated and intelligent, and then glide to one of the Brotherhood whom Hassein had selected and touch him upon the shoulder, seeming to say, "Friend, Hassein Bey salutes you."  Then bowing to the amused and wondering brother, it glided back to us as though Hassein had held it by a string like a performing monkey."Now you see," he said, "how if I chose I might use this astral as a messenger to execute some work I wished done at a distance from myself, and you will understand one of the means made use of by the old magicians to carry out some work at a great distance from themselves and without their appearing to take any share in it.  These astrals, however, are only capable of being made use of upon the astral plane.  They could not move any material object, although they would be visible to material sight at the will of the mortal using them.  There are other astrals more material in substance who could be used to penetrate into the earth itself and to bring forth its hidden treasures, the precious metals and the gems deeply buried from the eyes of men.  It would not, however, be lawful or right for me to explain to you the power by which this could be done, and those magicians who have discovered and made use of such powers have sooner or later fallen victims to those powers they could summon to their aid but rarely continue to control.""Then were this astral to become animated by an evil intelligence it would be an actual danger to man?" I said."Yes, without doubt it might; and you will also observe that although I should not care to descend to clothe myself in this astral form, yet a spirit more ignorant than myself could easily do so in order to make himself felt and seen upon the earth in a more palpable form than possible to any spirit who has left the earth plane; but in doing so he would run a danger of creating a link between himself and the astral envelope not easily broken, and which might thus tie him to the astral plane  for a considerable time.  You will, therefore, see how the idea has arisen that men on earth, in seeking to see their departed friends, draw the spirits back into earthly conditions and do them harm.  Many an ignorant spirit who is good and pure himself, has committed the mistake of reclothing himself in one of these fresh astral shells when he would have turned away from those which he knew to have been left by another spirit, and has found to his cost that he has thereby made of himself a prisoner upon the earth plane, till a higher intelligence comes to his aid and releases him."In a like manner spirits of a low type can clothe themselves in these empty astral garments, but in their case the very grossness of the spirit (or soul) prevents them from retaining possession long, the dense magnetism of the low spirit's own body acting as a strong noxious vapor or gas would do upon a covering made, say, of a spider's web of fine gossamer, and rending it into a thousand pieces.  To a spirit above the astral plane an astral envelope appears almost as solid as iron, but to one below it these fragile shells are like a cloud or vapor.  The lower the soul the stronger is its envelope and the more firmly does it hold the soul, limiting its powers and preventing it from rising into a more advanced sphere.""You mean, then, that spirits sometimes use these astral shells as they do earthly mediums, and either control them independently or actually enter into the form?""Yes, certainly.  A spirit above the earth plane, anxious to show himself to a clairvoyant of the lowest or first degree of power, will sometimes enter one of these shells which he at once stamps with his identity, and in that way the clairvoyant will truly see and describe him.  The danger lies in the fact that when the good spirit of limited knowledge seeks to leave again the astral shell, he finds he cannot do so; he has animated it and its strong life holds him prisoner, and it is often difficult to release him.  In similar manner the too complete, too long continued control of an earthly medium by a spirit, has been found to create a link between them which becomes at last a chain.  To a spirit of the lowest spheres an astral envelope is but a convenient, all too evanescent cloak with which to hide his own degraded spirit body, and thus impose upon clairvoyants unable to see the vile spirit underneath; but to a good and pure spirit the astral envelope is as a suit of iron capable of imprisoning him.""Then in the case of what are called personations by one spirit of another at seances upon earth, are these astrals made use of?""Very often they are, where the mischief-making spirit is of too low a type himself to come into direct contact with the medium.  You must know by this time how wonderfully the thoughts of mortal men and women are mirrored upon the atmosphere of the astral plane, and as pictures they can be read and answered by spirits possessing the knowledge of how to read them.  All spirits have not the power, just as all men and women on earth are not able to read a newspaper or a letter.  It requires intellect and education with us as with those on earth.  The spirits, then, of which men should most beware are not so much the poor ignorant half developed spirits of the earth plane and lower spheres, whose degraded lives have made them what they are and who are often glad of a helping hand to raise them, but it is of the intellectually evil, those who have great powers alike of mind and body and who have only used them for wrong purposes.  These are the real dangers to guard against, and it is only by the increase of knowledge amongst the mediums incarnated in the earthly body that it will be successfully done, for then mortals and spirit workers will labor in unison, and mutually protect the spiritual movement from fraud and from the mistakes of the well meaning but half-ignorant spirits and mortals who are doing good work in directing the attention of mankind to the matter, but who often do harm both to themselves and others.  They are like ignorant chemists and liable to bring destruction and harm upon others as well as on themselves in their experiments in search of knowledge.""You do not think, then, that the purity of their motives will suffice to protect them?""Would purity of motive save a child from being burnt if it thrust its hands into a blazing furnace?  No!  then the only way is to keep the child as far from the fire as possible.  This good and wise spirit guardians do in a great measure, but if the children are continually hovering near the danger, and try at all sorts of odd times and fashions to get just another peep at the dangerous thing, it is impossible but that some of them will get scorched.""Then you would not advise the indiscriminate cultivation of mediumistic powers by all mortals?""Certainly not.  I would have all men use the powers of those who have been carefully developed under wise guardians, and I would have all assisted to cultivate them who are truly anxious to develop their powers as a means of doing good to others.  But when you consider how manifold and how selfish may be the motives of those mediumistically endowed, you will see how exceedingly difficult it would be to protect them.  Perhaps my ideas are colored by the circumstances of race and my earthly education, but I confess I should wish to limit the practice of mediumship to those who have proved their readiness to give up more material advantages for its sake.  I would, in fact, rather see them set apart as a body who have no share in the ambitions of mankind.  But enough of our discussion.  I am now about to let this astral shell go and draw your attention to another type of the same class."As he spoke he made a swift upward motion with his hands over it and uttered some words in an unknown language, whereupon the astral--which had hitherto floated on beside us--stopped and seemed to waver about for a few seconds until an advancing current of magnetism caught it, and it was swept away from us like a piece of driftwood upon the waves.  As I turned from watching it I saw a small cluster of dark, weird, horrible looking forms approaching us.  These were astral shells which had never known soul life, but, unlike the pleasant waxy looking astral from which we had just parted, these were in all respects repulsive."These," said Hassein, "are the emanations thrown off by men and women of a low intellectual type and evil, sensual lives.  They are from the slums of the earth life--not alone the social slums, but also from a higher grade of society where there are moral slums quite as degraded.  Such beings as these, when animated by an evil intelligence can be used for the very worst purposes.  Being so very material, they can even be used to affect material matter upon earth, and have been so used in the practice of what is known as Black Magic and witchcraft, and they are also (but very rarely) used by higher intelligences to effect physical phenomena at seances.  Where wise and good intelligences control them no harm will be done, but under the direction of the evil or ignorant they become a danger beyond my power fully to express.  To these astrals, and to those of a similar class in which the soul germ yet lingers as in a prison, are due those rough and dangerous manifestations sometimes seen in spirit circles (seances), where men of bad lives, and others too ignorant to protect themselves, are assembled from motives of curiosity or mere amusement.""And amongst what class of spirits do you place those ghouls and vampires so firmly believed in, in many parts of the world?""Vampire spirits are those who have themselves known earth life, but have so misused it that their souls are still imprisoned in the astral envelope.  Their object in sucking away the animal life principle of men and women is in order to retain thereby their hold upon the life of the earth plane, and so save themselves from sinking to far lower spheres.  They are anxious to cling to their astral envelope and to prolong its life, just as men of very evil lives upon earth cling to the life of the earthly body because they fear that when they are separated from it they will sink into some unknown depths of darkness and horror.  The constant renewal of the animal and astral life often enables these vampire spirits to hang about the earth for centuries.""Is it possible for a vampire spirit to possess itself of a sufficient amount of materiality to appear in mortal form and mingle with men as described in many of the tales told of such creatures?""If you mean to ask if the vampire can make to itself a material body, I say no, but it can and does sometimes take complete possession of one belonging to a mortal, just as other spirits do, and can cause its acquired body to act in accordance with its will.  Thus it is quite possible for a vampire spirit clothed in the mortal body of another to so change its expression as to make it bear some resemblance to the vampire's own former earthly appearance, and through the power obtained by the possession of a material body he (or she, for the vampires are of both sexes) might really lead the curious double life ascribed to them in those weird tales current and believed in in many countries.  By far the larger number of vampire spirits, however, are not in possession of an earthly body, and they hover about the earth in their own astral envelope, sucking away the earthly life of mediumistic persons whose peculiar organization makes them liable to become the prey of such influences, while they are themselves quite ignorant that such beings as these astrals exist.  The poor mortals suffer from a constant sense of exhaustion and languor without suspecting to what it is to be attributed.""But cannot spirit guardians protect mortals from these beings?""Not always.  In a great measure they do protect them, but only as one may protect a person from infectious fevers, by showing them the danger and warning them to avoid spots where, owing to the associations with their earthly lives, the vampire spirits are specially attracted.  This the guardian spirit does by instilling into the mind of the mortal an instinctive dread of the places where crimes have been committed, or persons of evil lives have lived.  But since man is and must be in all respects a free agent, it is not possible to do more.  He cannot be directed in all things like a puppet, and must in a great measure gather his own experience for himself, however bitter may prove its fruits.  Knowledge, guidance and help will always be given, but only in such a manner as will not interfere with man's free will, and only such knowledge as he himself desires; nothing will ever be forced upon him by the spirit world."

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XVIII.--The Approach to Hell.

I would have liked to ask Hassein a great many more questions about the astral plane and its many curious forms of life, but we were now fast leaving it behind, and passing downwards through those lower spheres which I had partly explored before.  We were traveling through space at a wonderful velocity, not quite with the rapidity of thought but at a speed difficult for the mind of mortal to conceive.  Onward and still onward we swept, sinking ever lower and lower away from the bright spheres, and as we sank a certain sense of awe and expectancy crept over our souls and hushed our talk.  We seemed to feel in advance the horrors of that awful land and the sorrows of its inhabitants.And now I beheld afar off great masses of inky black smoke which seemed to hang like a pall of gloom over the land to which we were approaching.  As we still floated on and down, these great black clouds became tinged with lurid sulphurous-looking flames as from myriads of gigantic volcanoes.  The air was so oppressive we could scarcely breathe, while a sense of exhaustion, such as I had never experienced before, seemed to paralyze my every limb.  At last our leader gave the order for us to halt, and we descended on the top of a great black mountain which seemed to jut out into a lake of ink, and from which we saw on the horizon that awful lurid country.Here we were to rest for a time, and here, too, we were to part from our friends who had so far escorted us upon our journey.  After a simple repast consisting of various sustaining spiritual fruits and food which we had brought with us, our leader on behalf of the whole company offered up a short prayer for protection and strength, and then we all lay down upon that bleak mountain top to rest.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

PART III.

The Kingdom of Hell.

CHAPTER XIX.

The companion who was assigned to me in this expedition was a spirit who had been in this sphere before, and who was, therefore, well fitted to act as my guide on entering this Land of Horrors.  After a short time we were to separate, he told me, and each to follow his own path--but at any time either of us could, if needful, summon the other to his aid in case of extremity.As we drew near the great bank of smoke and flame I remarked to my companion upon the strangely material appearance they presented.  I was accustomed in the spirit world to the realism and solidity of all our surroundings which mortals are apt to imagine must be of some ethereal and intangible nature, since they are not visible to ordinary eyesight,--still these thick clouds of smoke, these leaping tongues of flame, were contrary to what I had pictured Hell as being like.  I had seen dark and dreary countries and unhappy spirits in my wanderings, but I had seen no flames, no fire of any sort, and I had totally disbelieved in material flames in a palpable form, and had deemed the fires of Hell to be merely a figure of speech to express a mental state.  Many have taught that it is so, and that the torments of Hell are mental and subjective, not objective at all.  I said something of this to my companion, and he replied:"Both ideas are in a sense right.  These flames and this smoke are created by the spiritual emanations of the unhappy beings who dwell within that fiery wall, and material as they seem to your eyes, opened to the sight of spiritual things, they would be invisible to a mortal's sight, could one still in the body of flesh by any miracle visit this spot.  They have, in fact, no earthly material in them, yet they are none the less material in the sense that all things earthly or spiritual are clothed in matter of some kind.  The number and variety of degrees of solidity in matter are infinite, as without a certain covering of etherealized matter even spiritual buildings and spiritual bodies would be invisible to you, and these flames being the coarse emanations of these degraded spirits, possess for your eyes an appearance even more dense and solid than for the inhabitants themselves."My companion's spirit name was "Faithful Friend," a name given him in memory of his devotion to a friend who abused his friendship and finally betrayed him, and whom he had even then forgiven and helped in the hour when shame and humiliation overtook the betrayer, and when reproach and contempt or even revenge might have seemed amply justifiable to many minds.  This truly noble spirit had been a man of by no means perfectly noble character in his earthly life, and had therefore passed at death into the lower spheres near the earth plane, but he had risen rapidly, and at the time I met him he was one of the Brotherhood in the second sphere, to which I had so recently been admitted, and had been once before through the Kingdoms of Hell.We now drew near what appeared like the crater of a vast volcano--ten thousand Vesuviuses in one!  Above us the sky was black as night, and but for the lurid glare of the flames we should have been in total darkness.  Now that we have reached the mass of fire I saw that it was like a fiery wall surrounding the country, through which all who sought to enter or leave it must pass."See now, Franchezzo," said Faithful Friend, "we are about to pass through this wall of fire, but do not let that alarm you, for so long as your courage and your will do not fail, and you exert all your will-power to repel these fiery particles, they cannot come in actual contact with your body.  Like the waters of the Red Sea they will fall apart on either side and we shall pass through unscathed."Were any one of weak will and timid soul to attempt this they would fail, and be driven back by the force of these flames which are propelled outwards by a current of strong will-force set in motion by the fierce and powerful beings who reign here, and who thus, as they imagine, protect themselves from intrusions from the higher spheres.  To us, however, with our more spiritualized bodies, these flames and the walls and rocks you will find in this land, are no more impenetrable than is the solid material of earthly doors and walls, and as we can pass at will through them, so can we pass through these, which are none the less sufficiently solid to imprison the spirits who dwell in this country.  The more ethereal a spirit is the less can it be bound by matter, and at the same time the less direct power can it have in the moving of matter, without the aid of the physical material supplied by the aura of certain mediums.  Here, as on earth, we would, in order to move  material substances, require to use the aura of some of the mediumistic spirits of this sphere.  At the same time we shall find that our higher spiritual powers have become muffled, so to say, because in order to enter this sphere and make ourselves visible to its inhabitants, we have had to clothe ourselves in its conditions, and thus we are more liable to be affected by its temptations.  Our lower natures will be appealed to in every form, and we shall have to direct our efforts to prevent them from again dominating us.My friend now took my hand firmly in his and we "willed" ourselves to pass through the wall of fire.  I confess that a momentary sense of fear passed over me as we began to enter it, but I felt we were "in for it," so exerting all my powers and concentrating my thoughts I soon found that we were floating through--the flames forming a fiery arch below and above us through which as through a tunnel we passed.  Thinking of it now I should say it must have been about a quarter to half a mile thick, judging as one would by earthly measurements, but at the time I did not take sufficient note to be very exact, all my energies being directed to the repelling of the fiery particles from myself.As we emerged we found ourselves in a land of night.  It might have seemed like the bottomless pit of desolation had we not stood upon solid enough ground, while above us was this canopy of black smoke.  How far this country extended it was impossible to form any idea, since the heavy atmosphere like a black fog shut in our vision on every side.  I was told that it extended through the whole of this vast and dreadful sphere.  In some parts there were great tumbled jagged mountains of black rocks, in others long and dreary wastes of desert plains, while yet others were mighty swamps of black oozing mud, full of the most noisome crawling creatures, slimy monsters, and huge bats.  Again there were dense black forests of gigantic, repulsive-looking trees, almost human in their power and tenacity, encircling and imprisoning those who ventured amongst them.  Ere I left this awful land I had seen these and other dreadful regions, but truly neither I nor anyone else could ever really describe them in all their loathsomeness and foulness.As we stood looking at this country my sight, gradually becoming used to the darkness, enabled me to perceive the surrounding objects dimly, and I saw that before us there was a highway marked by the passage of many spirit feet across the black plain on which we stood.  A plain covered with dust and ashes, as though all the blighted hopes, the dead ashes of misused earthly lives had been scattered there.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XX.--The Imperial City.

We were now traversing a wide causeway of black marble, on either side of which were deep, dark chasms of which it was impossible to see the bottom from the great clouds of heavy vapor that hung over them.  Passing and repassing us upon this highway were a great many dark spirits, some bearing great heavy loads upon their backs, others almost crawling along on all fours like beasts.  Great gangs of slaves passed us, wearing heavy iron collars on their necks and linked together by a heavy chain.  They were coming from the second or inner gate of what was evidently a large fortified city whose dark buildings loomed through the dense masses of dark fog in front of us.  The causeway, the style of buildings, and the appearance of many of the spirits made me feel as though we were entering some ancient fortified city of the old Roman Empire, only here everything gave one the sense of being foul and horrible, in spite of the fine architecture and the magnificent buildings whose outlines we could dimly trace.  The second gateway was finer in appearance than the first, and the gates being open we passed in with the stream of spirits hurrying through it, and as before we seemed to pass unseen."You will perceive," said Faithful Friend, "that here there is a life in no way different from the earthly life of such a city at the time when the one of which this is the spiritual reflection, was in the full zenith of its power, and when the particles of which this is formed were thrown off from its material life and drawn down by the force of attraction to form this city and these buildings, fit dwellings for its spiritual inhabitants; and you will see in the more modern appearance of many of the buildings and inhabitants how it has been added to from time to time by the same process which is going on continuously.  You will notice that most of the spirits here fancy themselves still in the earthly counterpart and wonder why all looks so dark and foul and dingy.  In like manner this same city has its spiritual prototype in the higher spheres to which all that was fair and good and noble in its life has been attracted, and where those spirits who were good and true have gone to dwell; for in the lives of cities as of men the spiritual emanations are attracted upwards or downwards according as there is good or evil in the deeds done in them.  And as the deeds done in this city have in evil far exceeded those which were good, so this city is far larger, far more thickly peopled in this sphere than in those above.  In the ages to come when the spirits who are here now shall have progressed, that heavenly counterpart will be fully finished and fully peopled, and then will this place we gaze at now have crumbled into dust--faded from this sphere."We were now in a narrow street, such as it must have been in the earthly city, and a short distance farther brought us into a large square surrounded with magnificent palaces, while before us towered one more splendid in design than all the others.  A great wide flight of marble steps led up to its massive portico, and looming through the dark cloudy atmosphere we could trace its many wings and buildings.  All was truly on a magnificent scale, yet all to my eyes appeared dark, stained with great splashes of blood, and covered with slimy fungus growth which disfigured the magnificence and hung in great repulsive-looking festoons, like twisted snakes, from all the pillars and cope-stones of the buildings.  Black slimy mud oozed up through the crevices of the marble pavement, as though the city floated upon a foul swamp, and noisome vapors curled up from the ground and floated above and around us in fantastic and horrible smoke wreaths like the huge phantoms of past crimes.  Everywhere were dark spirits crawling across the great square and in and out of the palace doors, driven onward by other stronger dark spirits with lash or spear.  Such cries of execration as broke forth from time to time, such fearful oaths, such curses and imprecations, it was truly the pandemonium of the lost souls in the Infernal regions!  And over all hung those black night clouds of sorrow and suffering and wrong.Far away to the earth my thoughts traveled, back to the days of the Roman Empire, and I saw reflected as in a glass this city in all the splendor of her power, in all the iniquities of her tyranny and her crimes, weaving down below, from the loom of fate, this other place of retribution for all those men and women who disgraced her beauties by their sins; I saw this great city of Hell building atom by atom till it should become a great prison for all the evil spirits of that wicked time.We went up the wide flight of steps through the lofty doorway and found ourselves in the outer court of the Emperor's Palace.  No one spoke to us or seemed aware of our presence, and we passed on through several smaller halls till we reached the door of the Presence Chamber.  Her my companion stopped and said:"I cannot enter with you, friend, because I have already visited the dark spirit who reigns here, and therefore my presence would at once excite his suspicions and defeat the object of your visit, which is that you may rescue an unhappy spirit whose repentant prayers have reached the higher spheres, and will be answered by the help you are sent to give him.  You will find the person you seek without any difficulty.  His desire for help has already drawn us thus near to him and will draw you still closer.  I must now for a time part from you because I have my own path of work to follow, but we shall meet again ere long, and if you but keep a stout heart and a strong will and do not forget the warnings given you, no harm can befall you.  Adieu, my friend, and know that I also shall need all my powers."Thus, then, I parted from Faithful Friend and passed out alone into the Council Chamber, which I found thronged with spirits, both men and women, and furnished with all the barbaric splendor of the days of the Emperors; yet to my sight there was over everything the same stamp of foul loathsomeness which had struck me in the exterior of the palace.  The men and women, haughty patricians in their lives, no doubt, appeared to be eaten up with a loathsome disease like lepers, only they were even more horrible to look upon.  The walls and floors seemed stained with dark pools of blood and hung with evil thoughts for drapery.  Worm-eaten and corrupting were the stately robes these haughty spirits wore, and saturated with the disease germs from their corrupted bodies.On a great throne sat the Emperor himself, the most foul and awful example of degraded intellect and manhood in all that vast crowd of degraded spirits, while stamped upon his features was such a look of cruelty and vice that beside him the others sank into insignificance by comparison.  I could not but admire, even while it revolted me, the majestic power of this man's intellect and will.  The kingly sense of power over even such a motley crew as these, the feeling that even in Hell he reigned as by a right, seemed to minister to his pride and love of dominion even in the midst of his awful surroundings.Looking at him I beheld him for one brief moment, not as I saw him and as he saw these disgusting creatures round him, but as he still appeared in his own eyes, which even after all these centuries were not opened to his true state, his real self.  I saw him as a haughty handsome man, with cruel clear-cut features, hard expression, and eyes like a wild vulture, yet withal possessing a certain beauty of form, a certain power to charm.  All that was repulsive and vile was hidden by the earthly envelope, not revealed as now in all the nakedness of the spirit.I saw his court and his companions change back to the likeness of their earthly lives, and I knew that to each and all they appeared just the same in their own eyes, all were alike unconscious of the horrible change in themselves, yet perfectly conscious of the change in each of their companions.Were all unconscious?  No! not quite all.  There was one man crouching in a corner, his mantle drawn over his disfigured face, whom I perceived to be fully conscious of his own vileness as well as the vileness of all who surrounded him.And in this man's heart there had sprung up a desire, hopeless, as it seemed to himself, for better things, for a path to open before him which, however hard and thorny, might lead him from this night of Hell and give him even at this eleventh hour the hope of a life removed from the horrors of this place and these associates; and as I looked I knew it was to this man that I was sent, though how I was to help him I knew not, I could not guess.  I only felt that the power which had led me so far would open up my path and show me the way.While I had stood thus gazing around me the dark spirits and their Ruler became conscious of my presence, and a look of anger and ferocity passed over his face, while in a voice thick and hoarse with passion he demanded who I was and how I dared to enter his presence.I answered:  "I am a stranger only lately come to this dark sphere and I am still lost in wonder at finding such a place in the spirit world."A wild ferocious laugh broke from the spirit, and he cried out that they would soon enlighten me as to many things in the spirit world.  "But since you are a stranger," he continued, "and because we always receive strangers right royally here, I pray you to be seated and partake with us of our feast."He pointed to a vacant seat at the long table in front of him at which many of the spirits were seated, and which was spread with what bore the semblance of a great feast, such as might have been given in the days of his earthly grandeur.  Everything looked real enough, but I had been warned that it was all more or less illusionary, that the food never satisfied the awful cravings of hunger which these former gluttons felt, and that the wine was a fiery liquid which scorched the throat and rendered a thousand times worse the thirst which consumed these drunkards.  I had been told to neither eat nor drink anything offered me in these regions, nor to accept any invitation to rest myself given by these beings; for to do so would mean the subjugation of my higher powers to the senses once more, and would at once put me more on a level with these dark beings and into their power.  I answered:  "While I fully appreciate the motives which prompt you to offer me the hospitality of your place, I must still decline it, as I have no desire to either eat or drink anything."At this rebuff his eyes shot gleams of living fire at me and a deeper shade of anger crossed his brow, but he still maintained a pretense of graciousness and signed to me to approach yet nearer to him.  Meanwhile the man whom I had come to help, aroused from his bitter meditations by my arrival and the Emperor's speech with me, had drawn near in wonder at my boldness and alarmed for my safety, for he knew no more of me than that I seemed some unlucky new arrival who had not yet learned the dangers of this horrible place.  His anxiety for me and a certain sense of pity created a link between us, which, unknown to either, was to be the means whereby I would be able to draw him away with me.When I advanced a few steps towards the Emperor's throne, this repentant spirit followed me, and, coming close, whispered:"Do not be beguiled by him.  Turn and fly from this place while there is yet time, and I will draw their attention from you for the moment."I thanked the spirit but said:  "I shall not fly from any man, be he whom he may, and will take care not to fall into any trap."Our hurried speech had not been unnoticed by the Emperor, for he became most impatient, and striking his sword upon the ground he cried out to me:"Approach, stranger!  Have you no manners that you keep an Emperor waiting?  Behold my chair of state, my throne, seat yourself in it and try for a moment how it feels to be in an Emperor's place."I looked at the throne as he pointed, and saw it was like a great chair with a canopy over it.  Two immense winged figures in bronze stood at the back of the seat, each with six long arms extended to form the back and sides, while upon the heads of these figures the canopy rested as upon pillars.  I had no thought to sit in such a place; its late occupant was too repulsive to me to desire to go any nearer to him, but had even curiosity made me wish to examine the chair the sight I saw would have effectually prevented me.  The chair seemed suddenly to become endowed with life, and before my eyes I beheld a vision of an unhappy spirit struggling in the embraces of those awful arms which encircled it and crushed its body into a mangled writhing mass.  And I knew that such was the fate of all those whom the Emperor induced to try the comforts of his chair.  Only for one brief instant the vision lasted and then I turned to the Emperor and, bowing, said to him:"I have no desire to place myself upon your level, and must again decline the honor you would do me."Then he broke into a tempest of rage, and cried out to his guards to seize me and thrust me into that chair and pour the food and the wine down my throat till they choked me.Immediately there was a rush made towards me, the man I had come to save throwing himself before me to protect me, and in a moment we were surrounded by a seething, fighting mass of spirits, and for that moment, I confess my heart sank within me and my courage began to fail.  They looked so horrible, so fiendish, so like a pack of wild beasts let loose and all setting upon me at once.  Only for a moment, however, for the conflict aroused all my combative qualities of which I have been thought to possess my fair share.  And I threw out all my will to repel them, calling upon all good powers to aid me while I grasped firm hold of the poor spirit who had sought to help me.  Thus I retreated to the door, step by step, the whole crowd of dark spirits following us with wild cries and menacing gestures, yet unable to touch us while I kept firm my determination to keep them off.  At last we reached the door and passed through it, whereupon it seemed to close fast and keep in our pursuers.  Then strong arms seemed to lift us both up and bear us away into a place of safety on the dark plain.My rescued companion was by this time in a state of unconsciousness, and as I stood by him I saw four majestic spirits from the higher spheres making magnetic passes over his prostrate form; and then I beheld the most wonderful sight I had ever seen.  From the dark disfigured body which lay as in a sleep of death there arose a mist-like vapor which grew more and more dense till it took shape in the form of the spirit himself; the purified soul of that poor spirit released from its dark envelope; and I saw those four angelic spirits lift the still unconscious risen soul in their arms as one would bear a child, and then they all floated away from me up, up, till they vanished from my sight.  At my side stood another bright angel who said to me:  "Be of good cheer, oh! Son of the Land of Hope, for many shalt thou help in this dark land, and great is the joy of the angels in Heaven over these sinners that have repented."As he finished speaking he vanished, and I was alone once more on the bleak plains of Hell.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXI.--The Fires of Hell--A Vengeful Spirit--Pirates--The Sea of Foul Mud--The Mountains of Selfish Oppression--The Forest of Desolation--Messages of Love.

Away before me stretched a narrow path, and curious to see where it would lead I followed it, sure that it would somehow lead me to those whom I could help.  After following it for a short time I came to the foot of a range of black mountains, and before me was the entrance to a huge cavern.  Horrible reptiles were hanging on to the walls and crawling at my feet.  Great funguses and monstrous air plants of an oozy slimy kind hung in festoons like ragged shrouds from the roof, and a dark pool of stagnant water almost covered the floor.  I thought of turning away from this spot, but a voice seemed to bid me go on, so I entered, and skirting round the edge of the dark pool found myself at the entrance to a small dark passage in the rocks.  Down this I went, and turning a corner saw before me a red light as from a fire, while dark forms like goblins passed and repassed between it and myself.  Another moment and I stood at the end of the passage.  Before me was a gigantic dungeon-like vault, its uneven rocky roof half revealed and half hidden by the masses of lurid smoke and flames which arose from an enormous fire blazing in the middle of the cavern, while round it were dancing such a troop of demons as might well typify the Devils of Hell.  With shrieks and yells of laughter they were prodding at the fire with long black spears and dancing and flinging themselves about in the wildest fashion, while in a corner were huddled together a dozen or so of miserable dark spirits towards whom they made frantic rushes from time to time as if about to seize and hurl them into the fire, always retreating again with yells and howls of rage.I soon perceived that I was invisible to these beings, so taking courage from that fact, I drew nearer.  To my horror I discovered that the fire was composed of the bodies of living men and women who writhed and twisted in the flames, and were tossed about by the spears of those awful demons.  I was so appalled by this discovery that I cried out to know if this was a real scene or only some horrible illusion of this dreadful place, and the same deep mysterious voice that had often spoken to me in my wanderings answered me now."Son! they are living souls who in their earthly lives doomed hundreds of their fellow men to die this dreadful death, and knew no pity, no remorse, in doing so.  Their own cruelties have kindled these fierce flames of passion and hate in the breast of their many victims, and in the spirit world these fiery germs have grown till they are now a fierce flame to consume the oppressors.  These fires are fed solely by the fierce cruelties of those they now consume; there is not here one pang of anguish which has not been suffered a hundred fold more in the persons of these spirits' many helpless victims.  From this fire these spirits will come forth touched by a pity, born of their own sufferings, for those they wronged in the past, and then will be extended to them the hand of help and the means of progression through deeds of mercy as many and as great as have been their merciless deeds in the past.  Do not shudder nor marvel that such retribution as this is allowed to be.  The souls of these spirits were so hard, so cruel, that only sufferings felt by themselves could make them pity others.  Even since they left the earth life they have only been intent upon making others more helpless suffer, till the bitter hatred they have aroused has become at last a torrent which has engulfed themselves.  Furthermore, know that these flames are not truly material, although to your eyes and to theirs they appear so, for in the spirit world that which is mental is likewise objective, and fierce hatred or burning passion does indeed seem a living fire.  You shall now follow one of these spirits and see for yourself that what seems to you cruel justice is yet mercy in disguise.  Behold these passions are burning themselves out and the souls are about to pass into the darkness of the plain beyond."As the voice ceased the flames died down and all was darkness save for a faint bluish light like phosphorus that filled the cavern, and by it I saw the forms of the spirits rise from the ashes of the fire and pass out of the cavern.  As I followed them one became separated from the others and passing on before me went into the streets of a city that was near.  It seemed to me like one of the old Spanish cities of the West Indies or South America.  There were Indians passing along its streets and mingling with Spaniards and men of several other nations.Following the spirit through several streets we came to a large building which seemed to be a monastery of the order of Jesuits--who had helped to colonize the country and force upon the unhappy natives the Roman Catholic religion, in the days when religious persecution was thought by most creeds to be a proof of religious zeal; and then, while I stood watching this spirit, I saw pass before me a panorama of his life.I saw him first chief of his order, sitting as a judge before whom were brought many poor Indians and heretics, and I saw him condemning them by hundreds to torture and flames because they would not become converts to his teachings.  I saw him oppressing all who were not powerful enough to resist him, and extorting jewels and gold in enormous quantities as tribute to him and to his order; and if any sought to resist him and his demands he had them arrested and almost without even the pretense of a trial thrown into dungeons and tortured and burned.  I read in his heart a perfect thirst for wealth and power and an actual love for beholding the sufferings of his victims, and I knew (reading as I seemed to do his innermost soul) that his religion was but a cloak, a convenient name, under which to extort the gold he loved and gratify his love of power.Again I saw the great square or market place of this city with hundreds of great fires blazing all round it till it was like a furnace, and a whole helpless crowd of timid gentle natives were bound hand and foot and thrown into the flames, and their cries of agony went up to Heaven as this cruel man and his vile accomplices chanted their false prayers and held aloft the sacred cross which was desecrated by their unholy hands, their horrible lives of cruelty and vice, and their greed for gold.  I saw that this horror was perpetrated in the name of the Church of Christ--of him whose teachings were of love and charity, who came to teach that God was perfect Love.  And I saw this man who called himself Christ's minister, and yet had no thought of pity for one of these unhappy victims; he thought alone of how the spectacle would strike terror to the hearts of other Indian tribes, and make them bring him more gold to satisfy his greedy lust.  Then I beheld this man returned to his own land of Spain and revelling in his ill-gotten wealth, a powerful wealthy prince of the church, venerated by the poor ignorant populace as a holy man who had gone forth into that Western World beyond the seas to plant the banner of his church and preach the blessed gospel of love and peace, while, instead, his path had been marked in fire and blood, and then my sympathy for him was gone.  Then I saw this man upon his deathbed, and I saw monks and priests chanting mass for his soul that it might go to Heaven, and instead I saw it drawn down and down to Hell by the chains woven in his wicked life.  I saw the great hordes of his former victims awaiting him there, drawn down in their turn by their thirst for revenge, their hunger for power to avenge their sufferings and the sufferings of those most dear to them.I saw this man in Hell surrounded by those he had wronged, and haunted by the empty wraiths of such as were too good and pure to come to this place of horror or to wish for vengeance on their murderer, just as I had seen in the Frozen Land with the man in the icy cage; and in Hell the only thought of that spirit was rage because his power on earth was no more--his only idea how he might join with others in Hell as cruel as himself and thus still oppress and torture.  If he could have doomed his victims to death a second time he would have done it.  In his heart there was neither pity nor remorse, only anger that he was so powerless.  Had he possessed one feeling of sorrow or one thought of kindness for another, it would have helped him and created a wall between himself and these vengeful spirits, and his sufferings, though they might be great, would not have at last assumed the physical aspect in which I had beheld them.  As it was, his passion of cruelty was so great it fed and fanned into fresh life the spiritual flames which theirs created, till at last when I saw him first they were dying out exhausted by their own violence.  Those demons I had beheld were the last and most fierce of his victims in whom the desire for revenge was even then not fully satisfied, while those I had beheld crouching in the corner were some who, no longer desirous of tormenting him themselves, had yet been unable to withdraw themselves from beholding his sufferings and those of his accomplices.And now I beheld that spirit with the newly awakened thought of repentence, returning to the city to warn others of his Jesuit fraternity, and to try to turn them from the path of his own errors.  He did not yet realize the length of time that had elapsed since he had left the earth life, nor that this city was the spiritual counterpart of the one he had lived in on earth.  In time, I was told, he would be sent back to earth to work as a spirit in helping to teach mortals the pity and mercy he had not shown in his own life, but first he would have to work here in this dark place, striving to release the souls of those whom his crimes had dragged down with him.  Thus I left this man at the door of that building which was the counterpart of his earthly house, and passed on by myself through the city.Like the Roman city this one was disfigured and its beauties blotted out by the crimes of which it had been the silent witness; and to me the air seemed full of dark phantom forms wailing and weeping and dragging after them their heavy chains.  The whole place seemed built upon living graves and shrouded in a dark red mist of blood and tears.  It was like one vast prison house whose walls were built of deeds of violence and robbery and oppression.And as I wandered on I had a waking dream, and saw the city as it had been on earth ere the white man had set his foot upon its soil.  I saw a peaceful primitive people living upon fruits and grains and leading their simple lives in an innocence akin to that of childhood, worshiping the Great Supreme under a name of their own, yet none the less worshiping him in spirit and in truth--their simple faith and their patient virtues the outcome of the inspiration given them from that Great Spirit who is universal and belongs to no creeds, no churches.  Then I saw white men come thirsting for gold and greedy to grasp the goods of others, and these simple people welcomed them like brothers, and in their innocence showed them the treasures they had gathered from the earth--gold and silver and jewels.  Then I saw the treachery which marked the path of the white man; how they plundered and killed the simple natives; how they tortured and made slaves of them, forcing them to labor in the mines till they died by thousands; how all faith, all promises, were broken by the white man till the peaceful happy country was filled with tears and blood.Then I beheld afar, away in Spain, a few good, true, kindly men whose souls were pure and who believed that they alone had the true faith by which only man can be saved and live eternally, who thought that God had given this light to but one small spot of his earth, and had left all the rest in darkness and error--had left countless thousands to perish because this light had been denied to them but given exclusively to that one small spot of earth, that small section of his people.I thought that these good and pure men were so sorry for those who, they thought, were in the darkness and error of a false religion, that they set forth and crossed that unknown ocean to that strange far-away land to carry with them their system of religion, and to give it to those poor simple people whose lives had been so good and gentle and spiritual under their own faith, their own beliefs.I saw these good but ignorant priests land on this strange shore and beheld them working everywhere amongst the natives, spreading their own belief and crushing out and destroying all traces of a primitive faith as worthy of respect as their own.  These priests were kind good men who sought to alleviate the physical lot of the poor oppressed natives even while they labored for their spiritual welfare also, and on every side there sprang up missions, churches and schools.Then I beheld great numbers of men, priests as well as many others, come over from Spain, eager, not for the good of the church nor to spread the truths of their religion, but only greedy for the gold of this new land, and for all that could minister to their own gratification; men whose lives had disgraced them in their own country till they were obliged to fly to this strange one to escape the consequences of their misdeeds.  I saw these men arrive in hordes and mingle with those whose motives were pure and good, till they had outnumbered them, and then thrust the good aside everywhere, and made of themselves tyrannical masters over the unhappy natives, in the name of the Holy Church of Christ.And then I saw the Inquisition brought to the unhappy land and established as the last link in the chain of slavery and oppression thus riveted round this unhappy people, till it swept almost all of them from the face of the earth; and everywhere I beheld the wild thirst, the greed for gold that consumed as with a fire of hell all who sought that land.  Blind were most of them to all its beauties but its gold, deaf to all thought but how they might enrich themselves with it; and in the madness of that time and that awful craving for wealth was this city of Hell, this spiritual counterpart of the earthly city built, stone upon stone, particle by particle, forming between itself and the city of earth chains of attraction which should draw down one by one each of its wicked inhabitants, for truly the earthly lives are building for each man and woman their spiritual habitations.  Thus all these monks and priests, all these fine ladies, all these soldiers and merchants, yea, and even these unhappy natives had been drawn down to Hell by the deeds of their earthly lives, by the passions and hatreds, the greed of gold, the bitter sense of wrongs unrequited and the thirst for revenge which those deeds had created.

At the door of a large square building, whose small grated windows looked like a prison, I stopped, arrested by the cries and shouts which came from it; then guided by the mysterious voice of my unseen guide I entered, and following the sounds soon came to a dungeon cell.  Here I found a great number of spirits surrounding a man who was chained to the wall by an iron girdle round his waist.  His wild glaring eyes, disheveled hair and tattered clothing suggested that he had been there for many years, while the hollow sunken cheeks and the bones sticking through his skin told that he was to all appearance dying of starvation; yet I knew that here there was no death, no such relief from suffering.  Near him stood another man with folded arms and bowed head, whose wasted features and skeleton form scarred with many wounds made him an even more pitiable object than the other, though he was free while the other was chained to the wall.  Around them both danced and yelled other spirits, all wild and savage and degraded.  Some of them were Indians, a few Spanish, and one or two looked, I thought, like Englishmen.  All were at the same work--throwing sharp knives at the chained man that never seemed to hit him, shaking their fists in his face, cursing and reviling him, yet, strange to say, never able to actually touch him, and all the time there he stood chained to the wall, unable to move or get away from them.  And there stood the other man silently watching him.As I stood looking at this scene I became conscious of the past history of those two men.  I saw the one who was chained to the wall in a handsome house like a palace, and knew he had been one of the judges sent out from Spain to preside over the so-called courts of justice, which had but proved additional means for extorting money from the natives and oppressing all who sought to interfere with the rich and powerful.  I saw the other man who had been a merchant, living in a pretty villa with a beautiful, a very beautiful, wife and one little child.  This woman had attracted the notice of the judge, who conceived an unholy passion for her, and on her persistently repulsing all his advances he made an excuse to have the husband arrested on suspicion by the Inquisition and thrown into prison.  Then he carried off the poor wife and so insulted her that she died, and the poor little child was strangled by order of the cruel judge.Meantime the unfortunate husband lay in prison, ignorant of the fate of his wife and child and of the charge under which he had been arrested, growing more and more exhausted from the scanty food and the horrors of the dungeon, and more and more desperate from the suspense.  At last he was brought before the council of the Inquisition, charged with heretical practices and conspiracy against the crown, and on denial of these charges was tortured to make him confess and give up the names of certain of his friends who were accused of being his accomplices.  As the poor man, bewildered and indignant, still protested his innocence he was sent back to his dungeon and there slowly starved to death, the cruel judge not daring to set him at liberty, well knowing that he would make the city ring with the story of his wrongs and his wife's fate when he should learn it.As so this poor man had died, but he did not join his wife, who, poor injured soul, had passed at once with her little innocent child into the higher spheres.  She was so good and pure and gentle that she had even forgiven her murderer--for such he was, though he had not intended to kill her--and between her and the husband she so dearly loved there was a wall created by his bitter revengeful feelings against the man who had destroyed them both.When this poor wronged husband died, his soul could not leave the earth.  It was tied there by his hatred of his enemy and his thirst for revenge.  His own wrongs he might have forgiven, but the fate of his wife and child had been too dreadful.  He could not forgive that.  Before even his love for his wife came this hate, and day and night his spirit clung fast to the judge, seeking for the chance of vengeance; and at last it came.  Devils from Hell--such as had once tempted me--clustered round the wronged spirit and taught it how through the hand of a mortal it could strike the assassin's dagger to the judge's heart, and then when death severed the body and the spirit he could drag that down with him to Hell.  So terrible had been this craving for revenge, nursed through the waiting years of solitude in prison and in the spirit land, that the poor wife had tried and tried in vain to draw near her husband and soften his heart with better thoughts.  Her gentle soul was shut out by the wall of evil drawn round the unhappy man, and he also had no hope of ever seeing her again.  He deemed that she had gone to Heaven and was lost to him for evermore.  A Roman Catholic of the narrow views held nearly two hundred years ago when this man had lived, he believed that being under the ban of its priests and denied the ministrations of the church when he died, was the reason he was one of the eternally lost, while his wife and child must be with the angels of Heaven.  Is it wonderful, then, that all this poor spirit's thoughts should center in the desire for vengeance, and that he should plan only how to make his enemy suffer as he had been made to suffer?  Thus, then, it was he who inspired a man on earth to kill the judge; his hand guided the mortal's with so unerring an aim that the judge fell pierced to his false, cruel heart.  The earthly body died but the immortal soul lived, and awakened to find itself in Hell, chained to a dungeon wall as he had chained his victim, and face to face with him at last.There were others whom the judge had wronged and sent to a death of suffering to gratify his anger or to enrich himself at their expense, and these all gathered round him and made his awakening a Hell indeed.  Yet such was the indomitable strength of will of this man that none of the blows aimed at him could touch him, none of the missiles strike, and thus through all the years had those two deadly enemies faced each other, pouring out their hatred and defiance while those other spirits, like the chorus of a Greek tragedy, came and went and amused themselves devising fresh means to torment the chained man whose strong will kept  them at bay.And away in the bright spheres mourned the poor wife, striving and hoping till the time should come when her influence would be felt even in this awful place, when her love and her unceasing prayers should reach the soul of her husband and soften it, that he might relent in his bitter purpose and turn from his revenge.  It was her prayers which had drawn me to this dungeon, and it was her soul which spoke to mine, telling me all the sad cruel story, and pleading with me to carry to her unhappy husband the knowledge that she lived only in thoughts of him, only in the hope that he would be drawn by her love to the upper spheres to join her in peace and happiness at last.  With this vision strong upon me, I drew near the sullen man who was growing tired of his revenge, and whose heart was full of longing for the wife he loved so passionately.I touched him upon the shoulder and said:  "Friend, I know why you are here, and all the cruel story of your wrongs, and I am sent from her you love to tell you that in the bright land above she awaits you, wearying that you do not come and marveling that you can find revenge more sweet than her caresses.  She bids me tell you that you chain yourself here when you might be free."The spirit started as I spoke, then turning to me grasped my arm and gazed long and ernestly into my face as though to read there whether I spoke truly or falsely.  Then he sighed as he drew back, saying:  "Who are you and why do you come here?  You are like none of those who belong to this awful place, and your words are words of hope, yet how can there be hope for the soul in Hell?""There is hope even here; for hope is eternal and God in his mercy shuts none out from it, whatever man in his earth-distorted image of the divine teachings may do.  I am sent to give hope to you and to others who are, like you, in sorrow for the past, and if you will but come with me, I can show you how to reach the Better Land."I saw that he hesitated, and a bitter struggle went on in his heart, for he knew that it was his presence which kept his enemy a prisoner, that were he to go the other would be free to wander through this Dark Land, and even yet he could hardly let him go.  Then I spoke again of his wife; his child; would he not rather go to them?  The strong passionate man broke down as he thought of those loved ones, and burying his face in his hands wept bitter tears.  I put my arm through his and led him, unresisting, out of the prison and out of the city.  Here we found kind spirit friends were awaiting the poor man, and with them I left him that they might bear him to a bright land where he would see his wife from time to time, till he worked himself up to the level of her sphere, where they would be united forever in a happiness more perfect than could ever have been their lot on earth.

I did not return to the city, for I felt my work there was done, and so wandered on in search of fresh fields of usefulness.  In the middle of a dark lonely plain I came upon a solitary hut, in which I found a man lying on some wisps of dirty straw, unable to move and to all appearance dying.He told me that in his earth life he had thus abandoned and left to die a sick comrade, whom he had robbed of the gold for which they had both risked their lives, and that now he also was dead he found himself lying in the same helpless deserted way.I asked him if he would not wish to get up and go and do something to help others and thus atone for the murder of his friend, because if so I thought I could help him.He thought he would like to get up certainly.  He was sick of this hole, but he did not see why he should work at anything or bother about other people.  He would rather look for the money he had buried, and spend that.  Here his cunning eyes glanced furtively at me to see what I thought of his money and if I was likely to try to find it.I suggested to him that he ought rather to think of trying to find the friend he had murdered and make reparation to him.  But he wouldn't hear of that, and got quite angry, said he was not sorry he had killed his friend, and only sorry he was here.  He thought I would have helped him to get away.  I tried to talk to this man and make him see how he really might better his position and undo the wrong he had done, but it was no use, his only idea was that once given the use of his limbs again he could go and rob or kill some one else.  So at last I left him where he lay, and as I went out his feeble hand picked up a stone and flung it after me."What," I asked mentally, "will become of this man?"I was answered:  "He has just come from earth after dying a violent death, and his spirit is weak, but ere long he will grow strong, and then he will go forth and join other marauders like himself who go about in bands, and add another horror to this place.  After the lapse of many years--it may even be centuries--the desire for better things will awake, and he will begin to progress, but very slowly, for the soul which has been in chains so long and is so poorly developed, so degraded as in this man, often takes cycles of time to develop its dormant powers."

After I had wandered for some time over this dreary desolate plain I felt so tired, weary of heart, that I sat down, and began musing upon what I had seen in this awful sphere.  The sight of so much evil and suffering had depressed me, the awful darkness and heavy murky clouds oppressed my soul that ever had loved the sunshine and the light as I fancy only we of the Southern nations love it.  And then I wearied.  Ah! how I wearied and longed for news from her whom I had left on earth.  No word had reached me as yet from my friends--no news of my beloved.  I knew not how long I had been in this place where there was no day to mark the time, nothing but eternal night that brooded and reigned in silence over everything.  My thoughts were full of my beloved, and I prayed earnestly, that she might be kept safe on earth to gladden my eyes when the time of probation in this place should be over.  While I prayed I became conscious of a soft pale light suffused around me, as from a glowing star, that grew and grew till it expanded and opened out into a most glorious picture framed in rays of light, and in the centre I saw my darling, her eyes looking into mine and smiling at me, her sweet lips parted as though speaking my name; then she seemed to raise her hand and  touching her lips with her finger tips, threw me a kiss.  So shyly, so prettily, was it done that I was in raptures, and rose to return her that kiss, to look more closely at her, and lo! the vision had vanished and I was alone on the dark plain once more.  But no longer sad, that bright vision had cheered me, and given me hope and courage to go on once more and bring to others such hope as cheered myself.I arose and went on again, and in a short time was overtaken by a number of dark and most repulsive-looking spirits; they wore ragged black cloaks and seemed to have their faces concealed by black masks like spectral highwaymen.  They did not see me, and I had found that as a rule the dwellers of this sphere were too low in intelligence and spiritual sight to be able to see anyone from the spheres above unless brought into direct contact with them.  Curious to see what they were about, I drew back and followed them at a little distance.  Presently another party of dark spirits approached, carrying what looked like bags with some sort of treasure.  Immediately they were attacked by the first-comers.  They had no weapons in their hands, but they fought like wild beasts with teeth and claws, their finger nails being like the claws of a wild animal or a vulture.  They fastened upon each other's throats and tore them.  They scratched and bit like tigers or wolves, till one-half at least were left lying helpless upon the ground, while the rest rushed off with the treasure (which to me seemed only lumps of hard stone).When all who were able to move had gone, I drew near the poor spirits lying moaning on the ground to see if I could help any of them.  But it seemed to be no use doing so; they only tried to turn upon me and tear me in pieces.  They were more like savage beasts than men, even their bodies were bent like a beast's, the arms long like an ape's, the hands hard, and the fingers and nails like claws, and they half walked and half crawled on all-fours.  The faces could scarcely be called human; the very features had become bestial, while they lay snarling and showing their teeth like wolves.  I thought of the strange wild tales I had read of men changing into animals, and I felt I could almost have believed these were such creatures.  In their horrible glaring eyes there was an expression of calculation and cunning which was certainly human, and the motions of their hands were not like those of an animal; moreover they had speech and were mingling their howls and groans with oaths and curses and foul language unknown to animals."Are there souls even here?" I asked.Again came the answer:  "Yes, even here.  Lost, degraded, dragged down and smothered, till almost all trace is lost, yet even here there are the germs of souls.  These men were pirates of the Spanish main, highwaymen, freebooters, slave dealers, and kidnappers of men.  They have so brutalized themselves that almost all trace of the human is merged in the wild animal.  Their instincts were those of savage beasts; now they live like beasts and fight like them.""And for them is there still hope, and can anyone help them?"  I asked."Even for these there is hope, though many will not avail themselves of it for ages yet to come.  Yet here and there are others who even now can be helped."I turned, and at my feet lay a man who had dragged himself to me with great difficulty and was now too exhausted for further effort.  He was less horrible to look upon than the others, and in his distorted face there were yet traces of better things.  I bent over him and heard his lips murmur:  "Water! Water for any sake!  Give me water for I am consumed with a living fire."I had no water to give him and knew not where to get any in this land, but I gave him a few drops of the essence I had brought from the Land of Dawn for myself.  The effect upon him was like magic.  It was an elixir.  He sat up and stared at me and said:"You must be a magician.  That has cooled me and put out the fire that has burned within me for years.  I have been filled with a living fire of thirst ever since I came to this Hell."I had now drawn him away from the others, and began to make passes over his body, and as I did so his sufferings ceased and he grew quiet and restful.  I was standing by him wondering what to do next, whether to speak or to go away and leave him to himself, when he caught my hand and kissed it passionately."Oh! friend, how am I to thank you?  What shall I call you who have come to give me relief after all these years of suffering?""If you are thus grateful to me, would you not wish to earn the gratitude of others by helping them?  Shall I show you how you could?""Yes!  Oh! yes, most gladly, if only you will take me with you, good friend.""Well, then, let me help you up, and if you are able we had bettr leave this spot as soon as we can," said I, and together we set forth to see what we could do.My companion told me he had been a pirate and in the slave trade.  He had been mate of a ship and was killed in a fight, and had awakened to find himself and others of the crew in this dark place.  How long he had been there he had no idea, but it seemed like eternity.  He and other spirits like him went about in bands and were always fighting.  When they did not meet another party to fight they fought amongst themselves; the thirst for fighting was the only excitement they could get in this horrible place where there was never any drink to be got which could quench the awful burning thirst which consumed them all; what they drank only seemed to make them a thousand times worse, and was like pouring living fire down their throats.  Then he said:  "You never could die, no matter what you suffered, that was the awful curse of the thing, you had got beyond death, and it was no use trying to kill yourself or get others to kill you, there was no such escape from suffering."We are like a lot of hungry wolves," he said, "for want of anyone to attack us we used to fall upon each other and fight till we were exhausted, and then we would lie moaning and suffering till we recovered enough to go forth again and attack someone else.  I have been longing for any means of escape.  I have almost got to praying for it at last.  I felt I would do anything if God would only forgive me and let me have another chance; and when I saw you standing near me I thought perhaps you were an angel sent down to me after all.  Only you've got no wings nor anything of that sort, as they paint 'em in pictures.  But then pictures don't give you much idea of this place, and if they are wrong about one place why not about the other?"I laughed at him; yes, even in that place of sorrow I laughed, my heart felt so much lightened to find myself of so much use.  And then I told him who I was and how I came to be there, and he said if I wanted to help people there were some dismal swamps near where a great many unhappy spirits were imprisoned, and he could take me to them and help a bit himself he thought.  He seemed afraid to let me go out of his sight lest I should disappear and leave him alone again.  I felt quite attracted to this man because he seemed so very grateful and I was also glad of companionship of any sort (except that of those most repulsive beings who seemed the majority of the dwellers here) for I felt lonely and somewhat desolate in this far-off dismal country.The intense darkness, the horrible atmosphere of thick fog, made it almost impossible to see far in any direction, so that we reached the land of swamps before I was aware of it except for feeling a cold, damp, offensive air which blew in our faces.  Then I saw looming before me a great sea of liquid mud, black, fetid and stagnant, a thick slime of oily blackness floating on the top.  Here and there monstrous reptiles, with huge inflated bodies and projecting eyes were wallowing.  Great bats, with almost human faces like vampires, hovered over it, while black and grey smoke wreaths of noisome vapor rose from its decaying surface, and hung over it in weird fantastic phantom shapes that shifted and changed ever and anon into fresh forms of ugliness--now waving aloft wild arms and shaking, nodding, gibbering heads, which seemed almost endowed with sense and speech--then melting into mist again to form into some new creature of repulsive horror.On the shores of this great foul sea were innumerable crawling slimy creatures of hideous shape and gigantic size that lay sprawling on their backs or plunged into that horrid sea.  I shuddered as I looked upon it and was about to ask if there could indeed be lost souls struggling in that filthy slime, when my ears heard a chorus of wailing cries and calls for help coming from the darkness before me, that touched my heart with their mournful hopelessness, and my eyes, growing more accustomed to the mist, distinguished here and there struggling human forms wading up to their armpits in the mud.  I called to them and told them to try and walk towards me, for I was on the shore, but they either could not see or could not hear me for they took no notice, and my companion said he believed they were both deaf and blind to everything but their immediate surroundings.  He had been in the sea of foul mud himself for a time, but had managed to struggle out, though he had understood that most were unable to do so without help from another, and that some went on stumbling about in it for years.  Again we heard those pitiful cries, and one sounded so near us that I thought of plunging in myself and trying to drag the wretched spirit out, but faugh! it was too horrible, too disgusting.  I recoiled in horror at the thought.  And then again that despairing cry smote upon my ears and made me feel I must venture it.  So in I went, trying my best to stifle my sense of disgust, and, guided by the cries, soon reached the man, the great phantoms of the mist wavering and swooping and rushing overhead as I did so.  He was up to his neck in the mud and seemed sinking lower when I found him, and it seemed impossible for me alone to draw him out, so I called to the pirate spirit to come and help me, but he was nowhere to be seen.  Thinking he had only led me into a trap and deserted me, I was about to turn and struggle out again, when the unfortunate spirit besought me so pitifully not to abandon him that I made another great effort and succeeded in dragging him a few yards and drawing his feet out of a trap of weeds at the bottom in which they appeared to be caught.  Then, somehow, I half dragged, half supported him till we reached the shore where the unfortunate spirit sank down in unconsciousness.  I was a good deal exhausted also and sat down beside him to rest.  I looked round for my pirate friend, and beheld him wallowing about in the sea at some distance and evidently bringing out someone along with him.  Even in the midst of my awful surroundings I could not help feeling a certain sense of amusement in looking at him, he made such frantic and exaggerated efforts to haul along the unlucky spirit, and was so shouting and going on that it was calculated to alarm anyone who was timid, and I did not wonder to hear the poor spirit almost imploring not to be so energetic, to take it a little slower, and to give him time to follow.  I went over to them, and the poor rescued one being now near the shore I helped to get him out and to let him rest beside the other one.The pirate spirit seemed greatly delighted with his successful efforts and very proud of himself, and was quite ready to set off again, so I sent him after someone else whom we heard calling, and was attending to the other two when I again heard most pitiful wailings not far from me, though I could see no one at first, then a faint, tiny speck of light like a will-o'-the-wisp glimmered in the darkness of that disgusting swamp, and by its light I saw someone moving about and calling for aid, so, not very willingly, I confess, I went into the mud again.  When I reached the man I found he had a woman with him whom he was supporting and trying to encourage, and with considerable trouble I got them both out and found the pirate spirit had also arrived with his rescued one.Truly a strange group we must have made on the shores of that slimy sea, which I learned afterwards was the spiritual creation of all the disgusting thoughts, all the impure desires of the lives of men on earth, attracted and collected into this great swamp of foulness.  Those spirits who were thus wallowing in it had reveled in such low abominations in their earth lives and had continued to enjoy such pleasures after death through the mediumship of mortal men and women, till at last even the earth plane had become too high for them by reason of their own exceeding vileness, and they had been drawn down by the force of attraction into this horrible sink of corruption to wander in it till the very disgust of themselves should work a cure.One man I had rescued had been one of the celebrated wits of Charles the Second's court, and after his death had long haunted the earth plane, sinking, however, lower and lower till he had sunk into this sea at last, the weeds of his pride and arrogance forming chains in which his feet were so entangled that he could not move till I released him.   Another man had been a celebrated dramatist of the reign of the early Georges.  While the man and woman had belonged to the court of Louis the Fifteenth and had been drawn together to this place.  Those rescued by the pirate were somewhat similar in their histories.I had been somewhat troubled at first as to how I was going to free myself from the mud of that horrible sea, but I now suddenly saw a small clear fountain of pure water spring up near to us as if by magic, and in its fresh stream we soon washed all traces of the mud away.I now advised those whom we had rescued to try what they could do to help others in this land of darkness as a return for the help given to themselves, and having given them what advice and help I could I started once more upon my pilgrimage.  The pirate, however, seemed so very unwilling to part from me that we two set forth together once more.I shall not attempt to describe all whom we sought to help in our wanderings.  Were I to do so this narrative would fill volumes and probably only weary my readers, so I shall pass over what seemed to me like weeks of earthly time, as nearly as I am able to reckon it, and will describe our arrival at a vast range of mountains whose bleak summits towered into the night sky overhead.  We were both somewhat discouraged with the results of our efforts to help people.  Here and there we had found a few who were willing to listen and to be helped, but as a rule our attempts had been met with scorn and derision, while not a few had even attacked us for interfering with them, and we had some trouble to save ourselves from injury.Our last attempt had been with a man and woman of most repulsive appearance who were fighting at the door of a wretched hovel.  The man was beating her so terribly I could not but interfere to stop him.  Whereupon they both set on me at once, the woman spirit doing her best to scratch my eyes out, and I was glad to have the pirate come to my assistance, for, truth to tell, the combined attack had made me lose my temper, and by doing so I put myself for the moment on their level, and so was deprived of the protection afforded me by my superior spiritual development.These two had been guilty of a most cruel and brutal murder of an old man (the husband of the woman) for the sake of his money; and they had been hanged for the crime, their mutual guilt forming a bond between them so strong that they had been drawn down together and were unable to separate in spite of the bitter hatred they now felt for each other.  Each felt the other to be the cause of their being in this place, and each felt the other more guilty than themselves, and it had been their eagerness each to betray the other which had helped to hang both.  Now they seemed simply to exist in order to fight together, and I can fancy no punishment more awful than theirs must have been, thus linked together in hate.In their present state of mind it was not possible to help them in any way.Shortly after leaving this interesting couple we found ourselves at the foot of the great dark mountains, and by the aid of a curious pale phosphorescent glow which hung in patches over them we were able to explore them a little.  There were no regular pathways, and the rocks were very steep, so we stumbled up as best we might--for I should explain that by taking on a certain proportion of the conditions of this low sphere I had lost the power to rise at will and float, which was a privilege of those who had reached the Land of Dawn.  After a toilsome ascent of one of the lower ranges of the mountains we began to tramp along the crest of one, faintly lighted by the strange gleaming patches of phosphorescent light, and beheld on either side of us vast deep chasms in the rocks, gloomy precipices, and awful looking black pits.  From some of these came wailing cries and moans and occasionally prayers for help.  I was much shocked to think there were spirits down in such depths of misery, and felt quite at a loss how to help them, when my companion, who had shown a most remarkable eagerness to second all my efforts to rescue people, suggested that we should make a rope from some of the great rank, withered-looking weeds and grass that grew in small crevices of these otherwise barren rocks, and with such a rope I could lower him down, as he was more used to climbing in that fashion than I, and thus we might be able to draw up some of these spirits out of their dreadful position.This was a good idea, so we set to work and soon had a rope strong enough to bear the weight of my friend, for you should know that in spiritual, as well as in material things, weight is a matter of comparison, and the materiality of those low spheres will give them a much greater solidity and weight than belongs to a spirit sphere more advanced, and though to your material eyes of earth life my pirate friend would have shown neither distinct material form nor weight, yet a very small development of your spiritual faculties would have enabled you to both see and feel his presence, though a spirit the next degree higher would still remain invisible to you.  Thus I am not in error, nor do I even say what is improbable, when I thus speak of my friend's weight, which for a rope made of spiritual grass and weeds was as great a strain as would have been the case with an earthly man and earth materials.  Having made one end of the rope fast to a rock, the spirit descended with the speed and sureness acquired by long practice as a sailor.  Once there he soon made it fast round the body of the poor helpless one whom he found lying moaning at the bottom.  Then I drew up the rope and the spirit, and when he had been made safe I lowered it to my friend and drew him up, and having done what we could for the rescued one we went on and helped a few more in like fashion.When we had pulled out as many as we could find, a most strange thing happened.  The phosphorescent light died out and left us in utter darkness, while a mysterious voice floating, as it seemed, in the air, said, "Go on now, your work here is done.  Those whom you have rescued were caught in their own traps, and the pitfalls that they made for others had received themselves, till that time when repentance and a desire to atone should draw rescuers to help them and free them from the prisons they had themselves made.  In these mountains are many spirits imprisoned who may not yet be helped out by any, for they would only be a danger to others were they free, and the ruin and evil they would shed around make their longer imprisonment a necessity.  Yet are their prisons of their own creating, for these great mountains of misery are the outcome and product of men's earthly lives, and these precipices are but the spiritual counterparts of those precipices of despair over which they have in earthly life driven their unhappy victims.  Not till their hearts soften, not till they have learned to long for liberty that they may do good instead of evil, will their prisons be opened and they be drawn forth from the living death in which their own frightful cruelties to others have entombed them."The voice ceased, and alone and in darkness we groped our way down the mountain side till we reached the level ground once more.  Those awful mysterious dark valleys of eternal night--those towering mountains of selfishness and oppression--had struck such a chill to my heart that I was glad indeed to know there was no call of duty for me to linger longer there.  

Our wandering now brought us to an immense forest, whose weird fantastic trees were like what one sees in some awful nightmare.  The leafless branches seemed like living arms held out to grasp and hold the hapless wanderer.  The long snake-like roots stretched out like twisting ropes to trip him up. The trunks were bare and blackened as though scorched by the blasting breath of fire.  From the bark a thick foul slime oozed and like powerful wax held fast any hand that touched it.  Great waving shrouds of some strange dark air plant clothed the branches like a pall, and helped to enfold and bewilder any who tried to penetrate through this ghostly forest.  Faint muffled cries as of those who are exhausted and half smothered came from this awful wood, and here and there we could see the imprisoned souls held captive in the embrace of these extraordinary prisons, struggling to get free, yet unable to move one single step."How," I wondered, "shall we help these?"  Some were caught by the foot--a twisted root holding them as in a vice.  Another's hand was glued to the trunk of a tree.  Another was enveloped in a shroud of the black moss, while yet another's head and shoulders were held fast by a couple of branches which had closed upon them.  Wild ferocious looking beasts prowled round them, and huge vultures flapped their wings overhead, yet seemed unable to touch any of the prisoners, though they came so near."Who are those men and women?" I asked."They are those," was the reply, "who viewed with delight the sufferings of others, those who gave their fellow men to be torn in pieces by wild beasts that they might enjoy the excitement of their sufferings.  They are all those who for no reason but the lust of cruelty have, in many different ways and in many different ages, tortured and entrapped and killed those who were more helpless than themselves, and for all now here release will only come when they have learned the lesson of mercy and pity for others and the desire to save some one else from suffering, even at the expense of suffering to themselves.  Then will these bands and fetters which hold them be loosed, then they will be free to go forth and work out their atonement.  Till then no one else can help them--none can release them.  Their release must be effected by themselves through their own more merciful desires and aspirations.  If you will but recall the history of your earth and think how men in all ages have enslaved, oppressed and tortured their fellow men in every country of that globe, you will not wonder that this vast forest should be well peopled.  It was deemed right that for your own instruction you should see this fearful place, but as none of those you see and pity have so far changed their hearts that you can give them aid, you will now pass on to another region where you can do more good."

After leaving the Forest of Desolation we had not gone far upon our road when to my joy I saw my friend Hassein approaching.  Mindful, however, of Ahrinziman's warning I gave him the sign agreed upon and received the countersign in return.  He had come, he said, with a message from my father and from my beloved who had sent me what were indeed sweet words of love and encouragement.  Hassein told me that my mission would now lie amongst those great masses of spirits whose evil propensities were equalled only by their intellectual powers, and their ingenuity in works of evil.  "They are those," said he, "who were rulers of men and kings of intellect in all branches, but who have perverted and abused the powers with which they were endowed till they have made of them a curse and not a blessing.  With most of them you will have to guard yourself at all points against the allurements they will hold out to tempt you, and the treachery of every kind they will practice on yourself.  Yet amongst them are a few whom you are sent to succor and whom your own instinct and events will point out as those to whom your words will be welcome and your aid valuable.  I shall not in all probability bring you messages again, but some other may be sent to do so, and you must, above all things and before all things, remember to distrust any who come to you and cannot give the sign and symbol I have given.  You are now in reality about to invade the enemies' camp, and you will find that your errand is known to them and resented, whatever it may suit them to pretend.  Beware, then, of all their false promises, and when they seem most friendly distrust them most."I promised to remember and heed his warning, and he added that it was necessary I should part for a time from my faithful companion, the pirate, as he could not safely accompany me in those scenes to which my path would now lead, but he promised he would place him under the care of one who could and would help him to leave that dark country soon.After giving him loving and helpful messages to my beloved and my father, which he promised to deliver to them, we parted, and I set forth in the direction pointed out, greatly cheered and comforted by the good news and loving messages I had received.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXII.--Amusements in a Great City of Hell--Words of Caution.

I had proceeded but a short distance when I saw Faithful Friend sitting by the wayside, evidently waiting for me.  I was truly glad to see him again and to have further guidance from him.  We greeted one another with much cordiality.  He was now, he said, appointed to accompany me during a part of my present journey, and he told me of many strange circumstances which had befallen him and which I am sure would prove very interesting, but as they do not properly belong to my own Wanderings I will not give any account of them here.Faithful Friend took me to a tall tower, from the top of which we could see all over the city we were about to visit--this view of it beforehand being, he said, likely to prove both useful and interesting to me.  We were, as I have said, surrounded always by this dark midnight sky and heavy smoky atmosphere somewhat like a black fog yet different and not quite so dense, since it was possible to see through it.  Here and there this darkness was lighted up in some places by the strange phosphorescent light I have described, and elsewhere by the lurid flames kindled from the fierce passions of the spiritual inhabitants.When we had climbed to the top of the tall tower, which appeared to be built of black rocks, we saw lying below us a wide stretch of dark country.  Heavy night clouds hung upon the horizon, and near to us lay the great city, a strange mixture of magnificence and ruin, such as characterized all the cities I saw in this dark land.  A treeless blackened waste surrounded it and great masses of dark blood-tinged vapor hung brooding over this great city of sorrow and crime.  Mighty castles, lofty palaces, handsome buildings, all stamped with ruin and decay--all bleared and blotched with the stains of the sinful lives lived within them.  Crumbling into decay, yet held together by the magnetism of their spiritual inhabitants--buildings that would last while the links woven by their spiritual occupants' earthly lives held them in this place, and would crumble into the dust of decay whenever the soul's repentance should sever those links and suffer it to wander free; crumble into decay, however, only to be reconstructed by another sinful soul in the shape into which his earthly life of pleasure should form it.  Here there was a palace--there beside it a hovel.  Even as the lives and ambitions of the indwelling spirits had been interwoven and blended on earth, so were their dwellings constructed here side by side.Have you ever thought, ye who dwell yet on earth, how the associates of your earthly lives may become those of your spiritual?  How the ties of magnetism which are formed on earth may link your spirits and your fates together in the spirit land so that you can only with great difficulty and much suffering sever them?  Thus I saw in these buildings before me the proud patrician's palace, built of his ambitions and disfigured by his crimes, joined to the humble abodes of his slaves and his parasites and panderers of earth which had been as surely formed by their desires and disfigured by their crimes, and between which and his palace there were the same links of spiritual magnetism as between himself and those who had been the sharers and instruments of his evil ambitions.  He was no more able to free himself from them and their importunities than they were able to free themselves from his tyranny, till a higher and purer desire should awaken in the souls of one set or the other of them and thus raise them above their present level.  So it was that they still repeated over again their lives of earth in hideous mockery of the past, impelled thereto by that past itself, their memories presenting to them over and over again as in a moving panorama their past acts and the actors, so that by no plunge into wild excess in that dark land could they escape the grinding of memory's millstones, till at length the last lust of sin and wickedness should be ground out of their souls.Over this great spiritual city of past earth lives hung, as I have said, patches of light of a dim misty appearance like faintly luminous smoke, steel grey in color.  This, I was told, was the light thrown off from the powerful intellects of the inhabitants whose souls were degraded but not undeveloped, and whose intellects were of a high order but devoted to base things, so that the true soul light was wanting and this strange reflection of its intellectual powers alone remained.  In other parts of the city the atmosphere itself seemed on fire.  Flames hung in the air and flickered from place to place, like ghostly fires whose fuel has turned to ashes ere the flames have burned out, and as the floating phantom flames were swept to and fro by the currents of the air I saw groups of dark spirits passing up and down the streets heedless, or perhaps unconscious, of these spectral flames that were thrown into the atmosphere by themselves, and were created by their own fierce passions which hung around them as spiritual flames.As I looked and gazed upon this strange city of dead and ruined souls, a strange wave of feeling swept over me, for in its crumbling walls, its disused buildings, I could trace a resemblance to the one city on earth with which I was most familiar and which was dear to my heart since I had been one of her sons, and I called aloud to my companion to ask what this meant--what was this vision I beheld before me.  Was it the past or the future or the present of my beloved city?He answered, "It is all three.  There before you now are the buildings and the spirits of its past--such, that is, as have been evil--and there among them are buildings half finished, which those who are dwelling there now are forming for themselves; and as these dwellings of the past are, so shall these half finished buildings be in the days to come when each who builds now shall have completed his or her lifework of sin and oppression.  Behold and look upon it well, and then go back to earth a messenger of warning to sound in the ears of your countrymen the doom that awaits so many.If thy voice shall echo in even one heart and arrest the building of but one of these unfinished houses, you shall have done well and your visit here would be worth all that it may cost you.  Yet that is not the only reason for your coming.  For you and me, oh! my friend, there is work even in this city; there are souls whom we can save from their darkened lives, who will go back to earth and with trumpet tongues proclaim in the ears of men the horrors of the retribution they have known, and from which they would save others."Bethink you how many ages have passed since the world was young and how much improvement there has been in the lives and thoughts of the men who dwell upon it, and shall we not suppose that even ordinary reason might admit it must naturally be due to the influence of those who have returned to earth to warn others from the precipice over which themselves had fallen in all the pride and glory and lust of sin.  Is it not a far nobler ideal to place before men--the idea that God sends these his children (sinful and disobedient once if you will, but repentant now), back to earth as ministering spirits to war and help and strengthen others who struggle yet in the unregenerated sinfulness of their lower natures rather than believe that he would doom any to the hopeless, helpless misery of eternal punishment?  You and I have both been sinners--beyond pardon, some of the good of earth might have said--yet we have found mercy in our God even after the eleventh hour, and shall not even these also know hope?  If they have sunk lower than we, shall we therefore in our little minds set limits to the heights to which they may yet climb?  No! perish the thought that such horrors as we have looked upon in these Hells could be eternal.  God is good and his mercy is beyond any man's power to limit."We descended now from the tower and entered the city.  In one of the large squares--with whose earthly counterpart I was very familiar--we found quite a large crowd of dark spirits assembled, listening to some sort of proclamation.  Evidently it was one which excited their derision and anger for there were yells, and hoots, and cries resounding on all sides, and as I drew yet more near I perceived it was one which had been read recently in the earthly counterpart, and had for its object the further liberation and advancement of the people--an object which, down here in this stronghold of oppression and tyranny, only provoked a desire for its suppression and these dark beings around me were vowing themselves to thwart the good purpose as far as lay in their power.  The more men were oppressed and the more that they quarreled and fought against the oppression with violence, the stronger were these beings here below to interfere in their affairs and to stir up strife and fightings among them.  The more men became free and enlightened and improved, the less chance was there that these dark spirits would be drawn to earth by the kindling of kindred passions there and thus be enabled to mingle with and control men for their own evil purposes.  These dark beings delight in war, misery and bloodshed, and are ever eager to return to earth to kindle men's fierce cruel passions afresh.  In times of great national oppression and revolt when the heated passions of men are inflamed to fever heat, these dwellers of the depths are drawn up to earth's surface by the force of kindred desires, and excite and urge on revolutions, which, begun at first from motives that are high and pure and noble, will under the stress of passion and the instigation of these dark beings from the lower sphere become at last mere excuses for wild butcheries and excesses of every kind.  By these very excesses a reaction is created, and these dark demons and those whom they control are in their turn swept away by the higher powers, leaving a wide track of ruin and suffering to mark where they have been.  Thus in these lowest Hells a rich harvest is reaped of unhappy souls who have been drawn along with the evil spirits that tempted them.As I stood watching the crowd, Faithful Friend drew my attention to a group of spirits who were pointing over at us and evidently mediated addressing us."I shall go," said he, "for a few moments and leave you to speak with them alone.  It will be better to do so, for they may recognize me as having been here before, and I would wish you to see them by yourself.  I shall not, however, be far away, and will meet you again later when I see that I can help you by doing so.  At this moment something tells me to leave you for a little."As he spoke he moved away, and the dark spirits drew near to me with every gesture of friendliness.  I thought it as well to respond with politeness, though in my heart I felt the most violent repugnance to their company, they were so repulsive looking, so horrible in their wicked, leering ugliness.One touched me on the shoulder, and as I turned to him with a dim sense of having seen him before, he laughed--a wild horrid laugh--and cried out:  "I hail thee, friend--who I see dost not so well remember me as I do thee, though it was upon the earth plane we met before.  I, as well as others, then sought hard to be of service to thee, only thou wouldst have none of our help, and played us, methinks, but a scurvy trick instead.  None the less for this, we, who are as lambs, didst thou but know us, have forgiven thee."Another also drew near, leering in my face with a smile perfectly diabolical, and said:  "So ho!  You are here after all, friend, in this nice land with us.  Then surely you must have done something to merit the distinction?  Say whom you have killed or caused to be killed, for none are here who cannot claim at least one slain by them, while many of us can boast of a procession as long as the ghosts that appeared to Macbeth, and others again--our most distinguished citizens--count their slain by hundreds.  Did you kill that one after all?--ha! ha! ha!" and he broke into such a wild horrible peal of laughter that I turned to fly from them--for like a flash had come across my mind the memory of that time when I, too, could have been almost a murderer, and I recognized in these horrible beings those who had surrounded me and counseled me how to fulfill my desire--how to wreak my vengeance even though no earthly form was still mine.  I recoiled from them but they had no thought to let me go.  I was here--drawn down, as they hoped, at last--and they sought to keep me with them that I might afford them some sport and they might avenge themselves upon me for their former defeat.I read in their minds this thought, though outwardly they were crowding around me with every protestation of hearty friendliness.  For a moment I was at a loss what to do.  Then I resolved to go with them and see what they intended, watching at the same time for the first opportunity to free myself from them.  I therefore suffered them to take me by an arm each, and we proceeded towards a large house on one side of the square which they said was theirs, and where they would have the pleasure of introducing me to their friends. Faithful Friend passed close to us and looking at me impressed the warning,"Consent to go, but beware of entering into any of their enjoyments or allowing your mind to be dragged down to the level of theirs."We entered and passed up a wide staircase of greyish stone, which like all things here bore the marks and stains of shame and crime.  The broad steps were broken and imperfect, with holes here and there large enough, some of them, to let a man through into the black dungeon-like depths beneath.  As we passed up I felt one of them give me a sly push just as we were stepping over one of these, and had I not been watching for some such trick I might have been tripped up and pushed in.  As it was I simply drew aside and my too officious companion narrowly escaped tumbling in himself, whereat the rest all laughed and he scowled savagely at me.  I recognized him just then as the one whose hand had been shriveled in the silver ring of fire drawn around my darling on the occasion when her love had drawn me to her and saved me from yielding to these dark fiends.  This spirit held his hand carefully hidden under his black cloak, yet I could see through it, and I beheld the shriveled hand and arm, and knew then that I might indeed beware of its owner.At the top of the staircase we passed into a large magnificent room, lighted up by a glare of fire and hung around with dark draperies which were in perfect rags and tatters and all splashed with crimson stains of wet blood, as though this had been the scene of not one but many, murders.  Around the rooms were placed ghostly phantoms of ancient furniture--ragged, dirty, and defaced, yet retaining in them a semblance to an earthly apartment of great pretensions to splendor.  This room was filled with the spirits of men and women.  Such men!  and alas! such women!  They had lost all that could ever have given them any claim to the charms and privileges of their sex.  They were worse to look upon than the most degraded bedraggled specimens to be seen in any earthly slum at night.  Only in Hell could women sink to such an awful degradation as these.  The men were to the full as bad or even if possible worse, and words utterly fail me to describe them, were it indeed advisable to do so.  They were eating, drinking, shouting, dancing, playing cards and quarreling over them--in short, going on in such a way as the worst and lowest scenes of earthly dissipation can but faintly picture.I could see a faint reflection of the earthly lives of each, and knew that each and all of them, men and women alike, had been guilty, not only of shameless lives, but also of murder from one motive or another.  On my left was one who had been a Duchess in the days of the sixteenth century, and I beheld that in her history she had from jealousy and cupidity poisoned no less than six persons.  Beside her was a man who had belonged to the same era, and had caused several persons obnoxious to him to be assassinated by his bravoes, and had moreover slain another with his own hand in a most treacherous manner during a quarrel.Another woman had killed her illegitimate child because it stood between her and wealth and position.  She had not been many years in this place and seemed more overcome by shame and remorse than any of the others, so I resolved if possible to get near to and speak to her.My entrance was greeted with great shouts of laughter and wild applause, while half a dozen or so of eager hands took hold of me and dragged me to the table, whereupon there were cries:  "Let us drink to the damnation of this our new Brother!  Let us baptize him with a draught of this our new Brother!  Let us baptize him with a draught of this fine cooling wine?"  And before I well realized their intentions, they were all waving their glasses aloft amidst yells and shouts and horrible laughter, whilst one, seizing a full glass of the fiery liquid, tried to throw it over me.  I had just presence of mind enough to step lightly aside, so that the liquor was nearly all spilt upon the floor and only a small portion fell upon my robe which it scorched and burned like vitrol, while the wine itself turned into a bluish flame--such as one sees with lighted whiskey--and disappeared at last with an explosion as of gunpowder.  Then they put before me a tray full of dishes which at first sight resembled earthly delicacies, but on closer inspection I saw they were full of the most horrible corrupting and loathsome maggots.  As I turned away from them one hag of a woman (for she was much more old and ugly and horrible to look upon than the most degraded specimen you can imagine) whose bleared eyes and fiendish expression made me recoil from her, seized me round the neck and tried, with many grimaces which she intended for coquettish smiles (she had been, oh ye powers! a great beauty on earth) to induce me to join her and her party in a little game of cards.  She said:  "The stakes for which we would play consist of the liberty of the loser.  We have invented this pleasing mode of passing our time here since it revives for us the divertissements of the past; and because there is no money here which one can win, or use if you win, seeing it all turns to dross in your hands, we have adopted this mode of paying our debts, and we agree to be the slave of anyone who beats us at our games of chance and skill till we can turn the tables on them by ourselves winning and making them in turn our slaves.  'Tis a charming arrangement, as you would find did you join our party for a little.  These others here," she added, with a strange mixture of insolent arrogance and animosity in her tone--"these others here are but the canaille, the scum of the place, and you do well to turn from them and their amusements.  But for me, I am a Royal Duchess, and these my friends are all noble also--and we would adopt you, who are also, I perceive, one of the elite, among ourselves."With the air of a queen she signed me to be seated beside herself, and had she been a few degrees less horrible I might have been tempted to do so if only from my curiosity to see what their game would be like.  But disgust was too strong in me and I shook myself free of her as well as I could, saying, which was true, that cards had never possessed any attraction for me.  I was bent on getting near the woman I wished to speak to, and very soon an opening in the crowd allowed me to do so.As soon as I got beside her I addressed her in a low voice and asked if she was sorry for the murder of her child, and would she wish to leave this place even though it would be a long and sad and suffering road that would take her from it?  How her face brightened as I spoke!  How eagerly she faltered out:  "What do you mean?""Be assured," I said, "I mean well to you, and if you will watch and follow me, I shall doubtless find some means for us both to leave this dreadful place."  She pressed my hand in assent, for she did not venture to speak for the other spirits were again crowding around us in a way that was rapidly growing more and more threatening, although the guise of friendliness was still kept up.The Duchess and her party had returned to their cards with a frightful avidity; they were quarreling over them and accusing each other of cheating, which I have no doubt was the case, and it seemed as though a fight was about to begin in that corner of the room to vary the monotony of their existence.  I noticed also that the others were collecting in groups round the doors so as to keep me from leaving in case I desired to do so, and I saw my enemy with the withered hand whispering with some others of very low degraded type, such as might have been slaves in their past lives.  Half a dozen men and women came up and urged me to join in a dance they were indulging in, which was like some of those abominations we read of in descriptions of the Witches' Sabbaths of the old days of witchcraft, and which I shall certainly not attempt further to describe.  Can it be, I thought to myself as I looked at them, that there was truth in these old tales after all?  and can the explanation be that these unfortunate beings, who were accused as witches, did really allow themselves to be so dominated by evil spirits that their souls were for a time drawn down to one of these spheres, and took part in some of its frightful orgies?  I know not, but there seems truly a marvelous resemblance between these things I was now witnessing and what was related by the so-called witches, most of them poor half-witted mortals more to be pitied than condemned.As these creatures, whose gestures it were an insult to call dancing, approached, I saw they were trying to get behind us in a ring and surround us, and some instinct seemed to tell me not to allow them.  I drew back close to the wall, holding the woman's hand in mine and whispering to her not to leave go of me on any account.  The whole crowd of spirits were now gathering towards my end of the room, the dull ferocity of their faces and wild savage glitter of their eyes in terrible contrast to their affectation of light-hearted gaiety.  Closer and closer they gathered--a moving mass of evil personified.For once their quarrels and jealousies merged in their common desire to do me harm, to get me down and trample me and rend me to pieces.  As the muttering of a storm came here and there broken disjointed words of hate and menace, while those dancing demons kept up their wild antics in front of us.  All at once a great cry--a yell--of fury broke from them.  "A spy! a traitor!  An enemy has got amongst us!  It is one of the accursed brothers from above come here to spy upon us and carry away our victims.  Down upon him!  Stamp upon him!  Crush him to death!  Tear him to pieces!  Hurl him into the vaults below!  Away with him!  Away!  Away!"Like as an avalanche sweeps down the mountain side they rushed upon us--those raging fiends--and I for one thought we were done for and could not but regret that I had been drawn into entering the place at all.  I thought I was lost, when lo! just as the nearest of them were actually upon us the wall behind opened and Faithful Friend and another spirit drew us through, the wall closing again so suddenly that the yelling crowd scarce realized how we had disappeared.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXIII.--The Palace of My Ancestors--False Brothers Baffled.

On the outskirts of the town we came to a magnificent palace, also most strangely familiar and yet unfamiliar to my eyes.  In wandering through this city I was so reminded of its earthly double that I felt as one who sees some familiar beloved spot in a nightmare vision which has distorted and rendered hideous all that he demed so fair.  I had oftentimes in my youth gazed up at this beautiful palace and taken pride to myself that I came of the race who had once owned it and all its broad lands, and now, here, to behold it thus, with all its beauties tarnished, its marble stained and mildewed, its terraces and statues broken and defaced, its fair front marred with the black cobwebs of past crimes and wrongs done within its walls, and its lovely gardens a dreary blackened waste as though the breath of a pestilence had swept over it--sent through me a thrill of sorrow and dismay, and it was with a saddened heart I followed my friend into the interior.Up its great broad stairways we passed, and through the handsome doors which opened of themselves to admit us.  Around us were many dark spirits flitting to and fro.  Each and all seemed to expect and welcome us as guests whose coming was awaited.  At the last door Faithful Friend once again left me, saying he would rejoin me in another place.A great blaze of ruddy light greeted my eyes as this last door opened, and seemed as though someone had opened the door of a furnace, so hot and stifling was the atmosphere.  At first I almost deemed the place on fire, then by degrees the blaze of light died down to a dull red glow and a wave of steel grey mist swept through the hall instead, while a wind as of ice froze the blood at my heart and seemed to impart its icy chill.  These strange waves of heat and cold were caused by the intense fire of passion and the cold selfish chill of the dual nature of the man who reigned here as Prince.  To the most fierce insatiable passions he united an intense selfishness and an intellect of the highest order.  As these swayed him in turn in his earthly life, causing strange alternations of fiery passion and cool calculation in his conduct, so did these as waves thrown off by his spirit cause in this his spiritual mansion these extraordinary variations of intense heat and extreme cold that knew no medium of temperature between.  As he had dominated all men on earth who came within the range of his power, so did he dominate the spiritual beings around him now, and rule as absolutely over them as he had ruled over his earthly subjects.At the top of this great hall I beheld him seated in his chair of state which had around it all but imperial insignia.  His walls were hung with the semblance of ancient tapestry, but, ah! how more than merely faded and ragged it looked.  It was as though the thoughts and the life and the magnetism of the man had become woven into those ghostly hangings and had corrupted them with his own corruption.  Instead of pictures of the chase, of floating nymphs, and crowned sea-gods there was a constantly shifting panorama of this man's past life in all its hideousness and nakedness, thrown like pictures from a magic lantern upon the stately mouldering ragged Arras drapery behind and around him.  The great windows, through which the light of day never shone, were hung with the semblance of what had on earth been handsome velvet curtains, but which now appeared as some funeral pall shrouding the skeleton shapes that lurked like avenging spectres within them--spectral forms of those victims whom this man had sacrificed to his lust and ambition.  Great drinking cups of silver, that seemed of a white heat when you touched them, and huge costly vases adorned the tables, and here as elsewhere there was the same hideous phantom of a feast--the same bitter mockery of earthly pleasure.At my entrance the Lord of this horrid place rose from his throne to greet me with welcoming words, and I recognized with a thrill of horror that he was the spiritual counterpart of that ancestor of my family from whom we had all been so proud to think we were descended, and whose portraits I had often been told I much resembled.  The same man, the same haughty handsome features, without doubt, but, ah! how subtle, how awful was the change upon them, the brand of shame and dishonor stamped on every line, the corruption showing through the mask with which he still strove to cover it.  Here in Hell all men are seen as they are, and no power can avail to hide one atom of their vileness--and this man was vile indeed.  Even in an age of sensuality he had been distinguished for his sins, and in an age when men thought but little of cruelty he had shown as one without pity or remorse.  I saw it all now mirrored in those pictures around him, and I felt overwhelmed to think that there could have been points of resemblance of any sort between us.  I shuddered at the false empty pride of those who had gloried in saying they were allied to such a man, simply because he had in his day wielded almost regal power.  And this man spoke to me now as one in whom he had an interest, since I was of his race.He told me he welcomed me here and would that I should dwell with him.  By the mysterious link that earthly relationship gave he had attached himself to my earth-life and had from time to time been able to influence it.  When I had felt most of ambition and a proud desire to rise and be again one with the great ones of earth as had been my ancestors in the past, then had he been drawn up to me and had fed and fostered my pride and my haughty spirit, that was in a sense akin to his own.  And he it was, he told me, who had prompted those acts of my life of which I felt now the most ashamed--acts that I would have given all my life to undo, after I had done them.  And it was he, he said, who had from time to time sought to raise me in the world till I should be able to grasp power of some kind and reign a king in the field of intellect if I could not reign king of a country as he had done.  Through me, he had hoped himself again to wield power over men, which should be some compensation for his banishment to this place of darkness and decay."Faugh!" he cried.  "This is as a charnel-house of mouldering bones and dead skeletons, but now you are come to join me we shall see if we cannot, combined, do something to make ourselves feared, if not obeyed, by the dwellers of the earth.  I have had many a disappointment in you, oh! son of our noble race, and I feared you would escape me at last.  I have tried for years to draw you down, but was ever baffled by some unseen power.  Once and again when I deemed I had beyond doubt made all things sure, you would shake me off and break away from all control, till I had well nigh abandoned the struggle. But I do not yield readily to anyone, and when I could not be with you myself I sent some of my henchmen to do you service--ho! ho! service--yes, service--and so here you are at last, and by my faith you shall not again leave me.  Behold how fair are the pleasures I have prepared for you."He took my hand--his seemed as though burning with more than the fire of fever--and led me to a seat beside himself.  I hesitated, then resolved to sit down and see this adventure out, but prayed in my heart to be kept safe from temptation.  I noticed he did not offer me wine or food--(his instinct and knowledge told him I should only despise them)--but he caused a most lovely strain of music to sound in my ears that had so long been deprived of the solace of that heavenly art which ever appealed most strongly to my senses.  A wild weird sensuous strain, such as a siren might have sung when she sought to lure her victims, swelled, died away, and rose again.  No music of the earth could have been at once so beautiful and so horrible--could at the same time intoxicate and inflame the brain and heart, and yet fill my soul with so intense a feeling of fear and repugnance.And then before us rose a great black mirror in which I saw reflected the earth and its life, and myself swaying the minds and the thoughts of thousands through the fevered fascinations of such music which I could make mine, and through its spell waken the lowest yet the most refined of passions, till those who heard should lose themselves and their souls under its potent witchery.Then he showed me armies and nations dominated to ambitious ends by himself and his influence, so that he should reign again as a despot through the organism of an earthly tyrant.  Here, too, he said, I should share his power.Again, I saw the power in intellect and in literature which I could control and influence through the imaginative descriptive faculties of mortals who, under my prompting, would write such books as appealed to the reason, the intellect, and the sensual passions of mankind, until the false glamour thrown over them should cause men to view with indulgence and even approval the most revolting ideas and the most abominable teachings.He showed me picture after picture, illustrating how man on earth could be used by spirits, who possessed sufficient will power and knowledge, as mere tools through which to satisfy their lust for power and sensual enjoyments of every sort.  Much of this I had known before but had never fully realized the vast extent of the mischief possible to such a being as the one before me, were it not for the checks imposed upon him by those higher powers whose wills are as strong as his.  Them he only knows as an unseen force opposed to him, which baffles his efforts at every turn, unless he can find in man a medium of so congenial a nature that they can truly work together as one.  Then indeed do sorrow and devastation follow in their train and then do we see such monsters of triumphant wickedness as have disgraced the annals of all times.  Now, thank Heaven, these are growing fewer and farther between, as the human race and the spirit spheres become purified through the teachings of the angels of the celestial spheres.Last of all there appeared before us a woman's form, of such surpassing loveliness, such seductive charm, that for one instant I arose to look more closely at her and see if she could be real, and at that moment there came between me and the black magic mirror the mist-like form of an angel with the face of my beloved.  And beside her this woman seemed so coarse and material and revolting to me that the momentary illusion of the senses was gone and I knew her for what she was, what all her kind are in truth--sirens that betray and ruinand drag men's souls to Hell while they themselves are all but soulless.This revulsion of feeling in myself caused the waves of magnetic ether on which the music and these images were borne to us, to waver and break and vanish, leaving me alone with my tempter once more, with his voice sounding in my ears, pointing out to me how all these delights might still be enjoyed by me if I would but join him and be his pupil.  But his words fell upon deaf ears, his promises allured me not.  In my heart was only a horror of all these things, only a wild longing to free myself from his presence.I rose and turned from him, and sought to go forth, but found I could not move one step.  An invisible chain held me fast, and with a derisive laugh of rage and triumph, he called out to me ironically:  "Go, since thou wilt have none of my favors or my promises.  Go forth now and see what awaits you."  I could not move one step, and began to feel a strange alarm creeping over me and a strange numbness of limbs and brain.  A mist seemed to gather round and enfold me in its chill embrace, while phantom forms of awful shape and giant size drew near and yet more near.  Oh, horror!  they were my own past misdeeds, my own evil thoughts and desires, which had been prompted by this very man beside me and which nestling in my heart had formed those links between us that held me to him now.A wild, fierce, cruel laugh broke from him at my discomfiture.  He pointed to these weird shapes, and bid me see what I was who thought myself too good for his company.  Darker and darker grew the hall, and wave on wave the grim phantoms crowded round us, growing each more black and fearful as they gathered, hemming me in on every side, while below our feet opened a great vault or pit in which I saw, or seemed to see, a seething mass of struggling human forms.  My fearful ancestor shook in wild paroxysms of rage and fiendish laughter, and, pointing to the gathering phantoms bid them hurl me into the black pit.  But suddenly above me in the darkness gleamed a star and from it fell a ray of light like a rope, which I grasped with both my hands and as the folds of light diffused themselves around me I was drawn up, out of that dark place, away from that fearful palace.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXIV.--The Story of Benedetto--Plotters Again Baffled.

Faithful Friend now proposed to me that we should visit one more city in this strange land, in order that I might see the man whose fate might have been my own but for the constancy and love which has so helped and sustained me.  Our earthly histories were in some respects different, but there were some points of resemblance both in that and in our dispositions which would make the sight of this man and the knowledge of his history useful to me, while at a future time I might be able to help him."It is now more than ten years," he said, "since this man passed from earth, and it is only lately that he has begun to wish to progress.  I found him here on my former visit to this place and was able to assist him a little and finally to enroll him as one of our Brotherhood, and I am now told that he is shortly to leave this sphere for a higher one."I assented to the proposed journey, and after a short but very rapid flight we found ourselves hovering over a wide lagoon upon whose dark bosom there floated a great city, its towers and palaces rising from the waters, and reflected in them as in a mirror of black marble veined with dark red lines that somehow made me feel they were streams of blood flowing through it.  Overhead there hung the same dark pall of cloud lighted by the patches of steel grey and fiery red floating vapor which I had noticed in the other city.  The appearance of this place suggested to me that we must be about to enter the Venice of these lower spheres, and on my saying so to Faithful Friend he answered:  "Yes, and you will here find many celebrated men whose names were written on the history of their times in letters of fire and blood."We now found ourselves in the town, and proceeded to pass through its principal canals and squares in order that I might see them.Yes, there they were, these degraded counterparts of all those beautiful places made familiar by the brush of the artist and the fame of those who have carved for themselves a niche in the Temple of History.  There flowed the canals, seeming like dark crimson streams of blood flowing from some vast shambles, washing and rippling up the marble steps of the palaces to leave there a thick foul stain.  The very stones of the buildings and pavements seemed to me to ooze and drip blood.  The air was thick with its red shade.  Deep down below the crimson waters I saw the skeleton forms of the countless thousands who had met their deaths by assassination or more legalized forms of murder, and whose bodies had found sepulture beneath the dark waves.  Below in the dungeons which honeycombed the city I beheld many spirits crowded together and like caged wild beasts--the ferocity of the cruel tiger in their gleaming eyes and the vindictive malice of the chained human tyrant in every attitude of their crouching figures.  Spirits whom it was needful to thus confine since they were more ferocious than savage animals.  Processions of city magistrates and their attendants, haughty nobles with their motley following of soldiers and seamen and slaves, merchants and priests, humble citizens and fishermen, men and women of all ranks and all times, passed to and fro, and nearly all were alike degraded and repulsive-looking.  And as they came and went it seemed to me as if skeleton hands, phantom arms, rose through the stones of the pavements from the dungeons beneath, striving to draw these others down to share their own misery.  There was a haunted, hunted look on many of their faces, and black care seemed to sit behind them continually.Far out in the waters of the lagoon spectral galleys floated, filled with slaves chained to their oars, but amongst them there were no longer the helpless victims of political intrigue or private revenge. These beings were the spirits of those who had been the hard taskmasters, the skillful plotters who had consigned many to this living death.  Yet farther out at sea, I could behold the great ships, and nearer at hand in the ruined harbor there were more spiritual counterparts of those piratical craft of the Adriatic, filled with the spirits of their piratical crews who had made plunder and rapine and war their delight, and who now spent their time battling with one another and making forays upon others like themselves.  Spectral-looking gondolas floated upon the water-ways of the city, filled with spirits bent upon following still the occupations and pleasures of their former lives.  In short, in this Venice, as in the other cities I had seen, there existed a life akin to that of earth save that from this place all the good and pure and true, all the real patriots and unselfish citizens were gone, and only the evil left to prey upon each other and act as avenging spirits to their companions in crime.Seated upon the parapet of one of the smaller bridges we found a man, wearing the dress of the Brothers of Hope--a dark grey robe such as I had myself worn in the earlier stages of my wanderings.  His arms were folded upon his breast and his face was so far concealed by the hood that we could not see his features, but I knew at once that this was the man we had come to see, and I likewise recognized his identity as that of a celebrated Venetian painter whom I had known in my youth, though not very intimately.  We had not met again and I was ignorant that he had passed from earth, till I saw him sitting thus upon the bridge in this city of Hell.  I confess the recognition gave me somewhat of a shock, recalling as it did those days of my youth when I also was a student of art with all the fairest prospects in life, as it would seem, before us, and now to see him and to think what his life must have been to bring him to this pass.  He did not see us, so Faithful Friend proposed that we should turn aside for a little, while he told me this spirit's history, and then we could approach together and speak to him.  It seemed that this man (whom I shall call by his spirit name of Benedetto, since his earthly life is better to be forgotten) had risen rapidly into fame after I knew him, and had been fairly successful in selling his pictures.  But Italy is not now a rich country, and Benedetto's most wealthy patrons were the English and Americans who came to visit Venice, and at the house of one of them Benedetto met the woman who was to overshadow his whole life with her baneful influence.  He was young, handsome, talented, highly educated, and of an ancient though poor family, and therefore naturally received by all the best society in Venice.  It was to a lady who belonged to the higher ranks of this social sphere that Benedetto lost his heart, and dreamed in his youthful and romantic foolishness that she would be content to become the wife of a struggling artist with nothing but his brains and a growing reputation.  The lady was scarce twenty when they first met, very beautiful, perfect alike in face and form, and endowed with all the charms which can enslave the heart of man--and she encouraged Benedetto in every way, so that, poor youth, he believed her love to be as sincere as his.  But with all the passionate thirst of her nature for admiration and love she was cold, calculating, ambitious, and worldly; incapable of either understanding or returning such a love as she inspired in a nature like Benedetto's, which knows love or hate only in extremes.  She was flattered by his attentions, charmed by his passionate devotion, and proud of having made conquest of one so handsome and so gifted, but she had no idea of sacrificing anything for his sake, and even when she was most tender, most alluring to him, she was striving with all her arts to become the wife of a middle-aged Venetian nobleman, whose wealth and position she coveted even while she despised the man himself.The end of Benedetto's dream came all to soon.  He ventured to lay his heart and all his prospects at the feet of his inamorata, pouring into hear ears all the love and devotion of his soul."And she?""Well, she received it all very coolly, told him not to be a fool, explained to him how impossible it was that she could do without money and position, and, in fine, dismissed him with a calm indifference to his sufferings which nearly drove him mad.  He fled from Venice, went to Paris, and there plunged into all the dissipations of that gay capital, striving to bury the recollection of his unfortunate passion.  They did not meet for some years, and then Benedetto's fate took him back to Venice once more, cured, as he hoped, and prepared to despise himself for his folly.  He had now become famous as a painter, and could almost command his own price for his pictures.  He found that the lady had duly married the Marchese and was reigning as a society beauty and a queen of fashion, surrounded by a crowd of admirers whom she did not always feel it necessary to introduce to her husband.  Benedetto had resolved to treat the lady with cool indifference should they meet, but this was not her intention.  Once her slave, always so--no lover should dare to break her chain till she chose to dismiss him.  She devoted herself once more to the subjugation of Benedetto's heart, and, alas! that heart was only too ready to surrender when she told him, with every accent of feeling in her voice, how she regretted now the path she had chosen.  Thus Benedetto became her unacknowledged lover, and for a time he lived in a state of intoxication of happiness.  But only for a time.  The lady tired of everyone after a little, she liked fresh conquests, new slaves to do her homage.  She liked excitement, and Benedetto with his jealousy, his eternal devotion, grew tiresome, his presence wearisome.  Moreover there was another admirer, young, rich, handsome also, and the Marchesa preferred him, and told Benedetto so, gave him, in fact, his conge for the second time.  His passionate reproaches, his violent protestations, his vehement anger all annoyed the lady greatly; as she grew colder, more insolent towards him, he grew more excited.  He threatened, he implored, he vowed he would shoot himself if she proved false to him, and finally after a violent scene they parted and Benedetto went home.  When he called next day he was told by the servant that the Marchesa declined to see him again.  The insolence of a message thus given him, the heartlessness of the Marchesa, the bitter shame of being a second time trifled with and flung aside like an old glove, were too much for his passionate fiery nature, and he went back to his studio and blew out his brains."When his spirit awoke to consciousness it was to all the horrors of finding himself a prisoner in his coffin in the grave.  He had destroyed his material body but he could not free his spirit from it, till the decaying of that body should liberate the soul.  Those loathsome particles of that corrupting body still clothed the spirit, the link between them was not severed."Oh, the horror of such a fate!  can anyone hear of it and not shudder to think what the bitter weariness and discontent of life, and a reckless desire to be free of it at any cost, may plunge the soul into.  If those on earth would be truly merciful to the suicide they would cremate his body, not bury it, that the soul may, by the speedy dispersal of the particles, be the sooner freed from such a prison.  The soul of a suicide is not ready to leave the body, it is like an unripe fruit and does not fall readily from the material tree which is nourishing it.  A great shock has cast it forth, but it still remains attached, till the sustaining link shall wither away."From time to time Benedetto would lapse into unconsciousness and lose for a little the sense of his terrible position, and from these states of merciful oblivion he would awaken to find that little by little the earthly body was losing its hold upon the spirit and crumbling into dust, but while it did so he had to suffer in all his nerves the pangs of this gradual dissolution.  The sudden destruction of the earthly body, while it would have given his spirit a more violent, more painful shock, would at least have spared him the slow torture of this lingering decay.  At last the material body ceased to hold the spirit, and he rose from the grave but still hung over it, tied, though he was no longer imprisoned; then the last link snapped and he was free to wander forth into the earth plane.  And first his powers of hearing and seeing and feeling were most feebly developed, then gradually they unfolded and he became conscious of his surroundings.  With these powers came again the passions and desires of his earthly life and also the knowledge of how he could yet gratify them.  And again as in his earthly life he sought oblivion for his sorrow and bitterness in the pleasures of the senses.  But he sought in vain.  Memory was ever present with him torturing him with the past.  In his soul there was a wild hunger, a fierce thirst for revenge, for power to make her suffer as he had done, and the very intensity of his thoughts at last carried him to where she was.  He found her as of old, surrounded by her little court of gay admirers.  A little older but still the same, still as heartless, still untroubled by his fate and indifferent to it.  And it maddened him to think of the sufferings he had brought upon himself for the love of this woman.  At last all thoughts became merged in the one thought of how he could find means to drag her down from her positon, how strip her of all those things which she prized more than love or honor or even the lives of those who might be called her victims."And he succeeded, for spirits have more powers than mortals dream of.  Step by step he saw her come down from her proud position, losing first wealth, then honor, stripped of every disguise she had worn, and known for what she was, a vile temptress who played with men's souls as one plays with dice, careless how many hearts she broke, how many lives she ruined, careless alike of her husband's honor and her own fair fame, so long as she could hide her intrigues from the eyes of the world and rise a step higher in wealth and power upon the body of each new victim."And even in his darkness and misery Benedetto hugged himself and was comforted to think it was his hands that were dragging her down and tearing the mask from her beauty and worldliness.  She wondered how it was that so many events all tended to one end--her ruin.  How it was that her most carefully laid schemes were thwarted, her most jealously guarded secrets found out and held up to the light of day.  She began at last to tremble at what each day might bring forth.  It was as though some unseen agency, whose toils she could not escape, was at work to crush her, and then she thought of Benedetto and his last threats that if she drove him to despair he would send himself to Hell and drag her with him.  She had thought he meant to murder her perhaps, and when she heard he had shot himself and was dead, she felt relieved and soon forgot him, save when some event would recall him to her mind for a moment.  And now she was always thinking of him, she could not get away from the obtrusive thought, and she began to shudder with fear lest he should rise from his grave and haunt her."And all the time there stood Benedetto's spirit beside her, whispering in her ears and telling her that this was his revenge come to him at last.  He whispered to her of the past and of that love that had seemed so sweet and that had turned to bitterest burning hate, consuming him as with the fire of Hell whose flames should scorch her soul also and drive her to a despair as great as his."And her mind felt this haunting presence even while her bodily eyes could see nothing.  In vain she fled to society, to all places where there were crowds of men and women, in order to escape; the haunting presence was with her everywhere.  Day by day it grew more distinct, more real, a something from which there was no escape."At last one evening in the dim grey of twilight she saw him, with his wild menacing eyes, his fierce, passionate hate, expressing itself in every line of his face, in every gesture of his form.  The shock was too much for her overwrought nerves and she fell dead upon the floor.  And then Benedetto knew that he had succeeded and had killed her, and that from henceforth the brand of Cain was stamped upon his brow."Then a horror of himself seized upon him, he loathed the deed he had done.  He had intended to kill her and then when the spirit left the body to drag it down with him and to haunt and torment it forever, so that on neither side of the grave should she know rest.  But now his only thought was to escape from himself and the horror of his success, for all good was not dead in this man, and the shock which had killed the Marchesa had awakened him to the true nature of his revengeful feelings.  Then he fled from the earth, down and down even to this city of Hell, the fit dwelling-place for such as he."It was in this place that I found him," said Faithful Friend, "and was able to help the now repentant man and to show him how he might best undo the wrong he had done.  He awaits now the coming of this woman he so loved and hated, in order that he may ask her to forgive him and that he may forgive her himself.  She has also been drawn to this sphere, for her own life was very guilty, and it is in this counterpart of that city which saw the history of their earthly love that they will meet again, and that is why he awaits her upon this bridge where in the past she has so often met him."And will she meet him soon?""Yes! very soon, and then will the sojourn of this man in this sphere be over, and he will be free to pass to a higher one, where his troubled spirit shall at last know a season of rest ere it mounts by slow and painful steps the stony pathway of progression.""Will she, too, leave here with him?""No, oh no! she will be also helped to progress, but their paths will lie widely asunder.  There was no true affinity between them, only passion, and pride, and wounded self-love.  They will part here to meet no more."We now drew near Benedetto, and as I touched him on the shoulder he started and turned round but at first did not recognize me.  Then I made myself known and said how I should rejoice to renew our early friendship in those higher spheres in which I hoped we would both soon meet again.  I told him briefly that I, too, had sinned and suffered, and was working my way upwards now.  He seemed glad to see me and wrung my hand with much emotion when we said good-bye, and then Faithful Friend and I went away, leaving him still seated upon the bridge waiting for his last interview with her who had been once so dear to him and who was now but a painful memory.

As we were on our road from Venice to those plains which I now understood to be the spiritual replica of the plains of Lombardy, my attention was suddenly attracted by a voice calling to me in a pitiful tone for help.  Turning back a little way to my right hand I saw a couple of spirits lying apparently helpless upon the ground, and one was making gestures to cause me to come to him.  So thinking it was some one in need of my help I let my companion go on and went to see what he wanted.  The spirit holding out his hand to me and murmuring something about helping him to rise, I bent down to lift him up, when to my surprise he made a clutch at my legs with his hands and contrived to fasten his teeth in my arm.  While the other one, suddenly jumping up, tried to fasten upon my throat like a wolf.With some trouble and a good deal of anger on my part, I confess, I shook myself free of them and was stepping back, when I half stumbled, and turning my head saw what a great pit had suddenly opened behind me into which with another step backwards I must have fallen.Then I remembered the warnings given me not to allow my lower passions to be aroused and thus place myself on a level with these beings, and I regretted my momentary burst of anger and resolved to keep calm and cool.  I turned towards the two dark spirits again and saw that the one who I fancied had been hurt was crawling along the ground to reach me, while the other was gathering himself together like a wild beast about to spring.  I fixed my eyes steadily upon the pair, whom I now recognized as the man with the withered hand and his friend, who had tried to deceive me with the false message a short time before.  Steadily I looked at them, throwing all the power of my will into the determination that they should not advance nearer to me.  As I did so they faltered and stopped, and finally rolled over on the ground snarling and showing their teeth like a couple of wolves, but unable to approach a step nearer.  Leaving them thus I hurried after Faithful Friend--whom I soon overtook--and narrated to him what had occurred.He laughed and said, "I could have told you who those were, Franchezzo, but I felt it would be no harm to let you find out for yourself, and likewise learn how valuable a protection your own force of character and determination could be.  You are naturally strong willed, and so long as you do not use it to domineer over the just rights of others it is a most useful and valuable quality, and in your work in the spirit world you will have found that it is the great lever by which you can act, not alone upon those round you but even upon apparently inanimate matter, and I thought as those two are very likely to come across you from time to time you might as well settle now which should be master, which should be the dominant personality.  They will be shy of directly meddling with you again, but so long as you work about the earth plane you will find them ready at any chance to thwart your plans if the opportunity comes."

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXV.--A Pitched Battle in Hell.

We now saw before us a vast slightly undulating plain upon which great masses of dark spirits were moving.  At Faithful Friend's suggestion we ascended a small hillock that we might observe their movements."We are now," said Faithful Friend, "about to witness one of the great battles that take place here between the opposing forces of dark spirits whose delight was in war and its rapine and bloodshed, and who, here in the dark state which is the result of their earthly cruelty and ambition, carry on yet their warlike operations against each other and contend for the supremacy of these kingdoms of Hell.  Behold how they are massing their forces for an attack upon those others on our right, and observe the skill they will display in their maneuvres.  The powerful minds of men who swayed armies on earth sway such unhappy beings here as are not strong enough to resist their spell, and thus they force these less powerful spirits to fight under their banners whether they will nor not, just as they did with mortals on earth.  You will see these powerful leaders engage in a struggle worse than deadly since no death can come to end the contest, which they renew over and over again, as it would almost seem eternally--or until, as is to be hoped, the satiety of mind of one or other of these powerful leaders will at last make him long for some nobler form of contest, some higher triumph of the soul than is won over these miserable beings in battles where victory gives only a fresh right to torture and oppress the vanquished.  The same instincts and natural gifts which are now perverted to personal ambition and the lust for cruelty and dominion as their only aim, will, when purified, make these spirits mighty helpers, where now they are destroyers, and the same powers of Will will help forward the progress they now retard.  When this progress shall take place depends, for each, upon the latent nobility of the soul itself--the awakening of the dormant love of goodness and justice and truth to be found in all.  Though like seeds in the earth these germs of better things may lie long hidden beneath the mass of evil that overloads them, there must and does come a time for each when the better soul awakens and these germs of good send out shoots that lead to repentance and bring forth an abounding harvest of virtue and good works."We looked over the vast plain and now beheld the two mighty hosts of spirits drawn up to confront one another in the array of battle. Here and there I beheld powerful spirits, leading each his band or regiment as in an earthly army.  In the van of the opposing forces were two majestic beings who might have been models for Milton's Lucifer, so strong was the sense of power and high intellect with which they impressed me.  In each there was a certain beauty and grandeur of form and feature--a regal majesty even in the degradation of Hell--but alas! the beauty was that of a wild fierce tiger or lion that watches how he may rend his army in pieces and drag his prey into his den.  Dark and forbidding were their countenances, cruel and ferocious their gleaming eyes, the false smile, showing their sharp teeth like those animals of prey.  The cunning of the serpent was in their looks, and the pitiless hunger of the vulture in their smile.  Each rode in his chariot of war drawn, not by horses, but by the spirits of degraded men, whom they lashed forward as beasts of burden and drove furiously on to be trampled down in the melee as cattle.  Wild strains of music that sounded like the shrieks of the souls of the damned and the thunders of a mighty storm broke from the assembled armies, and with one fell swoop they rushed forward and bore down upon each other--flying and hurrying through the air, or dragging themselves along the ground.  Pushing, hustling, jostling, and trampling like a herd of wild animals--on they came, and as they met, their fierce cries and shouts and imprecations rent the air and made even Hell more hideous.  They charged and re-charged, they maneuvered, marched, and counter-marched, these phantom spirit armies of the dead, even as they had done in the battles of earth life.  They fought and wrestled like demons, not men, for they had no weapons save those of wild beasts--their teeth and claws.  If a battle with mortal weapons is horrible, this was doubly so, where they fought as wolves and tigers might--the two powerful leaders directing the mass, urging them on and guiding the fight as the tide of battle swept back one side or the other.Over all had towered these two dark regal spirits, and now no longer content to let their soldiers fight, but bent each upon the destruction of the other, they rose from the fighting mass, and, soaring high above them, turned their looks upon each other with deadliest hate--then flying through the air with their dark robes extended behind and above them like wings, they grappled and wrestled together in a fierce struggle for supremacy.  It was as though two eagles fought in mid-air while a mass of carrion crows grubbed and fought for worms beneath them.  I turned from the crows to watch the eagles and to mark how, with no weapons but their hands and their powerful wills they fought as wild beasts do in a forest.They uttered no sound, no cry, but gripped each other with a death-grip that neither would relax, and swayed to and fro in the air before us.  Now one upward, now the other, their fierce eyes stabbing each other with fiery darts--their hot breath scorching each other's faces--their fingers clutching at each other's throats, and both seeking for a chance to fasten on their enemy with their teeth.  Backwards and forwards, up and down they swayed and writhed in what seemed to me a death struggle for both.  At last one seemed to fail.  He sank below the other, who was bearing him to the ground to dash him, as I saw, over a deep precipice into a chasm in the rocks that skirted the field of battle--a deep and dark and awful pit into which he meant to hurl the vanquished one, and keep him prisoner.  Fierce and long was the struggle, for the one below would not give in and clung to the other to drag him down with him if possible.  But in vain.  His powers were failing fast and as they reached the black chasm and hung poised over it, I saw the uppermost one wrench himself free by a mighty effort and fling the other from him, down into those awful depths.With a shudder I turned away and saw that the battle had been raging as fiercely on the plain.  Those spectral hosts had fought and the army of the victorious general had beaten back the forces of his vanquished foe till they were broken and dispersed in all directions, leaving their disabled comrades on the field lying as wounded men do in an earthly battle, while the victors were dragging away with them their captives, to what fate I could only too well guess.Sickened and disgusted with their brutishness I would fain have left this place, but Faithful Friend, touching my shoulder, said:  "Now has come the time for our work, my friend.  Let us descend yonder and see if there are none whom we can help.  Amongst the fallen and vanquished we may find those who are as sick of war and its horrors as you, and who will be but too glad of our help."  So we went down to the plain.It was as might have been a battle-field when night has fallen upon it and there are but the wounded and the slain left behind.  All the other spirits had gone like a flock of evil birds to seek fresh carrion.  I stood among a writhing, moaning mass of beings and knew not where to begin my help--there were so many.  It was worse--a thousand times worse--than any mortal battle-field.  I have seen the dead and dying lying in the streets of my native town thick as fallen leaves, and my heart has ached and bled for them and burned with shame and anger that such things could be; but even there was at least the peace and sleep of death to soften the anguish, and there was the hope of helping those who yet lived.  But here--in this awful Hell--there seemed no hope and no death that could relieve these suffering ones, no morning that should dawn upon the night of their miseries.  If they revived would it not be to live again this awful life, to find themselves surrounded ever by this awful night, and these fierce wild beasts of men?I stooped down and tried to raise the head of one poor wretch who lay moaning at my feet--crushed till his spirit-body seemed but a shapeless mass--and as I did so the mysterious Voice spoke in my ears and said:"Even in Hell there is Hope or why else are you come?  The darkest hour is ever before the dawn, and for these--the vanquished and the fallen--has come the hour of their change.  The very cause that has made them to be thus borne down and trampled under is that which shall now raise them.  The desire for higher and better things, the shrinking from the evil around them has rendered them weak in the wickedness which is the strength of Hell and its inhabitants, and has made them waver and hesitate to thrust at and harm another with the ruthless force of these other wild and worthless beings, and thus they have been borne down and vanquished, but their fall from power here will open to them the doors of a higher state and thus shall there dawn for them the grey glimmer of a Higher Hope.  Mourn not for them but seek to ease their sufferings that they may sink into a sleep of Death to this sphere and waken to a new life in the sphere next above.""And what," I asked, "of that powerful spirit whom I saw thrown into the dark chasm?""He too will be helped in time, but his soul is not yet ripe for help, and it is of no use to try till then."The Voice ceased and Faithful Friend, who was beside me, made signs to show me how to soothe these weary ones to sleep, and pointed out to me numerous stars of light which had gathered on that field of pain, and said they were carried by those of our Brotherhood who were, like ourselves, drawn here on their mission of Love and Mercy.Ere long the writhing, moaning forms had sunk into unconsciousness and a short time after I saw a sight that was strange and wonderful indeed.  Over each silent form there arose a faint misty floating vapor, such as I had seen once before in the case of a spirit we had rescued, as I have already told.  Gradually these vapors took shape and solidity and assumed the form of the released spirit or soul, then each was borne away by bands of bright ethereal spirits--who had gathered above our heads--till the last was gone and our work and theirs was done.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXVI.--Farewell to the Dark Land.

I now perceived that those Brothers of Hope, who like myself had been assisting the poor wounded spirits, all belonged to the same company as myself, and they were all collecting together, the little starry lights we each carried looking indeed like emblems of hope in darkness.  Faithful Friend and I joined the others and were soon interchanging greetings and congratulations, like a brigade of soldiers about to return home after a successful campaign.Before we again passed through the fiery ring that encompassed this region, the leader of our band conducted us to the top of a high pinnacle of rock from which we beheld the cities and plains and mountains of that Land of Darkness, through which each of us had passed in our pilgrimage.  And standing on that mountain peak we could survey the mighty panorama of Hell stretched out at our feet.  He then addressed us in grave, solemn tones:"This scene upon which we look is but a small, a very small, fractional portion of the great sphere which men have been wont to speak of as 'Hell.'  There are dark spheres above this which may seem to many to deserve the name until they have seen this place and learned in it how low a soul can sink and how much more terrible in this sphere can be both the crimes and the sufferings.  The great belt of dark matter of which is composed this, the lowest of the earth spheres, extends for many million miles around us, and has received within its borders all those multitudes of sinful souls whose material lives have been passed on earth, and whose existences date back to the remote far-off ages in which the planet Earth first began to bear its harvest of conscious immortals, destined to sin and suffer and work out each their own salvation till they should be purified from all earthly stain--all taint of their lower nature.  The multitudes of such lives have been, and shall yet be, as the stars of the sky and the sands of the sea in number, and as each builds for himself his own habitation in the higher or in the lower spheres, so are the vast spheres peopled and their many dwelling places and cities formed."Far beyond the power of any mortal to carry even his thoughts, lie the myriad dwelling places of the spheres, each spot or locality bearing upon it the individual stamp of the spirit whose life has created it, and as there are no two faces, no two minds, exactly similar in all the countless beings that have peopled the earth--so there are no two places in the spirit world exactly alike.  Each place--yea, even each sphere--is the separate creation of the particular class of minds that have created it, and those whose minds are in affinity being drawn to each other in the spirit world every place will bear more or less the peculiar stamp of its inhabitants."Thus in giving a description of this or any other sphere you will naturally be able to tell only what you have seen, and to describe those places to which you were attracted, while another spirit who has beheld a different portion of the same sphere may describe it so very differently that men on earth, who limit all things too much, and measure them by their own standards of probability, will say that since you differ in describing the same sphere you must both be wrong.  They forget that Rome is not Genoa, Milan, or Venice, yet these are all in Italy.  Lyons is not Paris, yet both are in France--and both will bear certain characteristic features, certain national traits of resemblance.  Or to extend the simile still further, New York and Constantinople are both cities upon the planet Earth, yet there is between them and their population so great a difference, so wide a gulf, that it requires that we should look no longer for national characteristics but only for the broad fact that both are inhabited by the human race, differing, however widely, in manners and appearance."And now I would have you each observe that in all your wanderings--in all the sad sights you have seen--all the unhappy beings you have known groveling in this sink of their own iniquities, there were yet the germs of human souls inextinguishable and undestroyable, and you have each learned, I trust, that long as may be the probation of the soul--greatly as it may retard the hour of its release by the perversion of its powers--yet to all is given the inalienable birthright of hope, and to each will come at last the hour of awakening, and those who have sunk to the lowest depths will arise even as a pendulum swung to its farthest limit will arise and swing back again as high as it has sunk low."Bitter and awful is the reckoning the sinful soul must pay for its wild indulgence in evil, but once paid there is not again that reckoning to be met, there is no inexorable creditor whose ears are deaf to the voice of prayer or who will say to the repentant prodigal, "Begone, for your doom is sealed and the hour of your redemption past.  Oh, Brethren of Hope!  Can man in his littleness measure the power of the Almighty whose ways are past his finding out?  Can man put a limit to his mercy and say it shall be denied to any sorrowful sinner however deep has been his sin?  God alone can condemn, and he alone can pardon and his voice cries out to us in everything, in every blade of grass that grows, in every ray of light that shines:  'how great is the goodness and mercy of our God--how long-suffering and how slow to anger.'  And his voice calls with trumpet tongue, through his many angels and ministering spirits, to all who repent and seek for mercy that mercy is ever given--pardon, full and free, is granted unto all who earnestly seek it and would truly labor that they may win it.  Even beyond the grave, even within the gates of Hell itself, there is yet mercy and pardon, yet hope and love held out to all.  Not one atom of the immortal soul essence which has been breathed into man and become a living conscious individuality is ever again truly lost, wholly doomed either to annihilation or eternal misery.  They err, I had almost said they sin, who teach man otherwise, for by so doing they shut a door upon his hopes and render the erring soul yet more desperate because more hopeless, when, as he deems, Death has put the final seal of damnation upon his fate.  I would when each of you returns to the earth plane that you proclaim to all this truth which you have learned in these your wanderings, and strive ever that each and all may feel the sense of hope and the need there is to take heed to their ways while there is yet time.  Far easier were it for man in his earth life to undo his misdeeds than if he wait till Death has placed his barrier between him and those to whom he would atone."In those Hells which you have seen all has been the outcome of men's own evil lives--the works of their own past--either upon earth or in its spheres.  There is nothing but what has been the creation of the soul itself, however horrible to you may appear its surroundings.  However shocked you may have felt at the spiritual appearance of these beings, yet must you ever remember that such as they are, have they made themselves.  God has not added one grain's weight to the burden of any, and equally must it be the work of each to undo what he has done, to build up again what he has destroyed, to purify what he has debased.  And then will these wretched dwellings, these degraded forms--these fearful surroundings--be exchanged for brighter and happier scenes--purer bodies--more peaceful homes, and when at last in the fullness of time the good on earth and in its spheres shall overcome the bad, the evil sights and evil places will be swept away as the froth upon the sea is swept on by the advancing tide, and the pure Water of Life shall flow over these spots and purify them till these solid black mountains, this dense heavy atmosphere, and these foul dwelling-places shall melt in the strong purifying fire of repentance, even as the hard granite rock is melted in the crucible of the chemist till it is dissipated into the atmosphere and floated away to form other rocks elsewhere.  Nothing is ever lost, nothing ever destroyed.  All things are imperishable.  Those atoms which your body has attracted to it to-day are thrown off again tomorrow, and pass on to form other bodies eternally, as these emanations of men's spiritual natures are formed into the earth spheres, and when there is no longer magnetism sufficiently gross to hold together these gross particles which form the lower spheres, these atoms will become detached from following the earth and its sphere in their rushing journey through the limitless ether of space, and will float in suspension in the ether till drawn to another planet whose spheres are congenial and whose spiritual inhabitants are on an equally gross plane.  Thus these same rocks and this country have all formed in the past the lower spheres of other planets which have now grown too highly developed to attract them and they will, when this, our earth, has ceased to attract them, be drawn off and form the spheres of some other planet."So too are our higher spheres formed of matter more etherealized, yet still matter, which has been cast off from planet spheres much in advance of ours, and in like manner these atoms will be left by us and reabsorbed in turn by our successor.  Nothing is lost, nothing wasted, nothing is really new.  The things called new are but new combinations of that which exists already, and is in its nature eternal.  To what ultimate height of development we shall reach, I know not--none can know since there can be no limit to our knowledge or our progress.  But I believe that could we foresee the ultimate destiny of our own small planet, as we can in part judge of it from seeing the more advanced ones around us, we should learn to look upon even the longest earthly life and the longest, saddest probation of these dark spheres as but stepping stones on which man shall mount to the thrones of angels at last."What we can see--what we do know and may grasp--is the great and ever present truth that hope is truly eternal and progression is ever possible even to the lowest and most degraded and sin-stained soul.  It is this great truth we would have each of you to preach both to mortal and immortal man, when you return to the earth planes and to your work there, and as you have been helped and strengthened and taught, so do you feel bound by the obligations of gratitude and the ties of Universal Brotherhood to help others."Let us now bid farewell to this Dark Land, not in sorrow over its sadness and its sins, but in hope and with earnest prayer for the future of all who are yet in the bonds of suffering and sin."As our great leader concluded his speech we took our last look at the Dark Country, and, descending the mountain, we passed once more through the Ring of Fire, which, as before, was by our will power driven back on either side of us that we might pass through in safety.Thus ended my wanderings in the Kingdoms of Hell.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

PART IV.

"Through the Gates of Gold."

CHAPTER XXVII.--Welcome on Our Return--A Magic Mirror--Work in the Cities of Earth--The Land of Remorse--The Valley of Phantom Mists--A Home of Rest.

On our return to the Land of Dawn, we met with a right royal welcome from our Brotherhood, and a festival was given in our honor.On entering our own little rooms each of us found a new robe awaiting him.  It was of a very light grey, almost white color, and the border, girdle, and device of our order--an anchor and a star upon the left sleeve--were in deep golden yellow.I greatly prized this new dress because in the spirit world the dress symbolizes the state of advancement of the spirit, and is esteemed as showing what each one has attained.  What I prized even more than this new dress, however, was a most beautiful wreath of pure white spirit roses which I found had clustered around and framed the magic picture of my beloved--a frame that never withered, never faded, and whose fragrance was wafted to me as I reposed on the snow white couch and gazed out upon those peaceful hills behind which there shone the dawning day.I was aroused from my reverie by a friend who came to summon me to the festival, and on entering the great hall I found my father and some friends of my wanderings awaiting me.  We greeted one another with much emotion, and after we had enjoyed a banquet similar to the one I have described on my first entrance to this sphere, we all assembled at the lower end of the hall before a large curtain of grey and gold which completely covered the walls.While we waited in expectation of what we were to see, a soft strain of music floated towards us as though borne upon some passing breeze.  This grew stronger, fuller, more distinct, till a solemn majestic measure like the march of an army fell upon our ears.  Not a march of triumph or rejoicing but one such as might be played by an army of giants mourning over a dead comrade, so grand, so full of pathos was this strain.Then the curtains glided apart and showed us a huge mirror of black polished marble.  And then the music changed to another measure, still solemn, still grand, but with somewhat of discordance in its tones.  It wavered too and became uneven in the measure of its time, as though halting with uncertain step, stumbling and hesitating.Then the air around us darkened till we could scarce see each other's faces; slowly the light faded, and at last all we could see was the black polished surface of the gigantic mirror, and in it I saw reflected the figures of two of the members of our expedition.  They moved and spoke and the scenery around them grew distinct and such as I had seen in the Inferno we had left.  The weird music stirred my soul to its inmost core, and looking upon the drama being enacted before my eyes I forgot where I was--I forgot everything--and seemed to be wandering once more in the dark depths of Hell.Picture melted into picture, till we had been shown the varied experiences of each of our bank, from the lowest member to our leader himself--the last scene showing the whole company assembled upon the hill listening to the farewell discourse of our commander; and like the chorus in a Greek Tragedy, the wild music seemed to accompany and explain it all, varying with every variation in the dramas, now sad and sorrowful, now full of repose or triumph, and again wailing, sobbing, shrieking or changing into a murmuring lullaby as some poor rescued soul sank to rest at last--then again rising into wild notes of clamor, fierce cries of battle, hoarse curses and imprecations; now surging in wild waves of tumultous melody, then dying away amidst discordant broken notes.  At last as the final scene was enacted it sank into a soft plaintive air of most exquisite sweetness, and died away note by note.  As it ceased the darkness vanished, the curtains glided over the black mirror and we all turned with a sigh of relief and thankfulness to congratulate each other that our wanderings in that dark land were past.I asked my father how this effect had been produced, was it an illusion or what?"My son," he answered, "what you have seen is an application of scientific knowledge, nothing more.  This mirror has been so prepared that it receives and reflects the images thrown upon it from a series of sheets of thin metal, or rather what is the spiritual counterpart of earthly metal.  These sheets of metal have been so highly sensitized that they are able to receive and retain these pictures somewhat in the fashion of a phonograph (such as you saw in earth life) receives and retains the sound waves."When you were wandering in those dark spheres, you were put in magnetic communication with this instrument and the adventures of each were transferred to one of these sensitive sheets, while the emotions of every one of you caused the sound waves in the spheres of music and literature to vibrate in corresponding tones of sympathy."You belong to the spheres of Art, Music and Literature, and therefore you are able to see and feel and understand the vibrations of those spheres.  In the spirit world all emotions, speeches, or events reproduce themselves in objective forms and become for those in harmony with them either pictures, melodies, or spoken narratives.  The spirit world is created by the thoughts and actions of the soul, and therefore every act or thought forms its spiritually material counterpart.  In this sphere you will find many things not yet known to men on earth, many curious inventions which will in time be transmitted to earth and clothed there in material form.  But see! you are about to receive the Palm branch which is given to each of you as a reward of your victory."At this moment the large doors of the hall were once more thrown open and our grand master entered, followed by the same train of handsome youths I had seen before, only this time each carried a branch of palm instead of a wreath of laurel.  When the grand master had seated himself under his canopy of state we were each summoned to his presence to receive our branch of palm, and when we had all done so and returned to our places again a most joyous hymn of victory was sung by everyone, our palm branches waving in time to the music and our glad voices filling the air with triumphant harmony.I now enjoyed a long quiet season of rest which much resembled that half-waking, half-sleeping state, when the mind is too much in repose to think and yet retains full consciousness of all its surroundings.  From this state, which lasted some weeks, I arose completely recovered from the effects of my wanderings in the dark spheres.And my first thought was to visit my beloved, and see if she could see me and be conscious of my improved appearance.  I shall not, however, dwell upon our interview; its joy was for ourselves alone--I only seek to show that death does not of necessity either end our affection for those we have left or shut us out from sharing with them our joys or sorrows.I found that I was now much more able to communicate with her through her own mediumistic powers, so that we did not need any third person to intervene and help us, and thus were my labors lightened and cheered by her sweet affection and her conscious recognition of my presence and of my continued existence.My work at this time was once more upon the earth plane and in those cities whose counterparts I had seen in Hell.  I had to labor among those mortals and spirits who thronged them, and impress their minds with a sense of what I had seen in that dark sphere far below.  I knew I could only make them dimly conscious of it, only arouse a little their dormant sense of fear of future retribution for their present misdeeds, but even that was something and would help to deter some from a too complete abandonment of themselves to selfish pleasure.  Moreover, amongst the spirits who were earth-bound to those cities I found many whom I could assist, with the knowledge and strength which I had gained in my journey.There ever is and ever must be ample work for those who work upon the earth plane, for multitudinous as are the workers there, more are always being wanted, since men are passing over from earth life every hour and every minute, who need all the help that can be given them.Thus passed some months for me, and then I began once more to feel the old restless longing to rise higher myself, to attain more than I had yet done, to approach nearer to that sphere to which my beloved one would pass when her earthly life was ended, and by attaining which I could alone hope to be united to her in the spirit world.  I used to at this time be tormented with a constant fear lest my darling should pass from earth before I had risen to her spiritual level, and thus I should again be parted from her.This fear it was which had ever urged me on to fresh efforts, fresh conquests over myself, and now made me dissatisfied even with the progress I had made.  I knew that I had overcome much, I had struggled hard to improve, and I had risen wonderfully fast, yet in spite of all I was still tormented by the jealous and suspicious feelings which my disposition and my earthly experience had gathered about me.There were even times when I would begin to doubt the constancy of my beloved herself.  In spite of all the many proofs of her love which she had given me, I would fear lest while I was away from her someone yet in the flesh should after all win her love from me.And thus I was in danger of becoming earth-bound by reason of my unworthy desire to watch her continually.  Ah! you who think a spirit has changed all his thoughts and desires at the moment of dissolution, how little you understand of the conditions of that other life beyond the grave, and how slowly, how very slowly we change the habits of thought we have cultivated in our earthly lives or how long they cling to us in the spiritual state.I was then in character much what I had been on earth, only a little better, only learning by degrees wherein my ideas had been wrong and full of prejudice, a lesson we may go on learning through many spheres, higher than any I had attained to.Even while I doubted and feared, I was ashamed of my doubts and knew how unjust they were, yet could I not free myself from them; the experiences of my earth life had taught me suspicion and distrust, and the ghosts of that earth life were not so easily laid.It was while I was in this state of self-torment that Ahrinziman came to me and told me how I might free myself from these haunting shadows of the past."There is," said he, "a land not far from here called the Land of Remorse; were you to visit it, the journey would be of much service to you, for once its hills and valleys were passed and its difficulties overcome, the true nature of your earthly life and its mistakes would be clearly realized and prove a great means of progression for your soul. Such a journey will indeed be full of much bitterness and sorrow, for you will see displayed in all their nakedness, the actions of your past, actions which you have already in part atoned for but do not yet see as the eyes of the higher spiritual intelligences see them."Few who come over from earth life really realize the true motives which prompted their actions; many indeed go on for years, some even for centuries, before this knowledge comes to them.  They excuse and justify to their own consciences their misdeeds, and such a land as this I speak of is very useful for enlightening them.  The journey must, however, be undertaken voluntarily, and it will then shorten by years the pathway of progression."In that land men's lives are stored up as pictures which, mirrored in the wondrous spiritual atmosphere, reflect for them the reasons of many failures; and show the subtle causes at work in their own hearts which have shaped the lives of each.  It would be a severe and keen self-examination through which you would pass--a bitter experience of your own nature, your own self, but though a bitter it is a salutary medicine, and would go far to heal your soul of those maladies of the earth life which like a miasma hang about it still.""Show me," I answered, "where this land is, and I will go to it."Ahrinziman took me to the top of one of those dim and distant hills which I could see from the window of my little room, and leading me to where we looked down across a wide plain bounded by another range of hills far away, said:"On the other side of those farther hills lies this wondrous land of which I speak, a land through which most spirits pass whose lives have been such as to call for great sorrow and remorse.  Those whose errors have been merely trivial, daily weaknesses such as are common to all mankind, do not pass through it; there are other means whereby they may be enlightened as to the source of their mistakes.  This land is more particularly useful to such as yourself, of strong powers and strong will, who will recognize readily and admit freely wherein you have done wrong, and in doing so arise to better things.  Like a strong tonic this circle of the sphere would be too much for some weak erring spirits who would only be crushed and overwhelmed and disheartened by the too rapid and vivid realization of all their sins; such spirits must be taught slowly, step by step, a little at a time, while you who are strong of heart and full of courage will but rise the more rapidly the sooner you see and recognize the nature of those fetters which have bound your soul.""And will it take me long to accomplish this journey?"No, it will last but a short time--two or three weeks of earth time--for behold as I shadow it forth to you I see following it fast the image of your returning spirit, showing that the two events are not separated by a wide interval.  In the spirit world where time is not reckoned by days or weeks or counted by hours, we judge of how long an event will take to accomplish or when an occurrence will happen by seeing how near or how far away they appear, and also by observing whether the shadow cast by the coming event touches the earth or is yet distant from it--we then try to judge as nearly as possible of what will be its corresponding time as measured by earthly standards.  Even the wisest of us may not always be able to do this with perfect correctness; thus it is as well for those who communicate with friends on earth not to give an exact date for foreseen events, since many things may intervene to delay it and thus make the date incorrect.  An event may be shown very near, yet instead of continuing to travel to the mortal at the same speed it may be delayed or held in suspense, and sometimes even turned aside altogether by a stronger power than the one which has set it in motion."I thanked my guide for his advice and we parted.  I was so very eager to progress that a very short time after this conversation saw me setting forth upon my new journey.I found my progress not so rapid as had been the case in my previous travels through the spirit land, for now I had taken upon me the full burden of my past sins, and like the load carried by the pilgrim Christian it almost weighed me down to the earth, making my movements very slow and laborious.  Like a pilgrim, I was habited in a coarse grey robe, my feet were bare and my head uncovered, for in the spirit world the condition of your mind forms your clothing and surroundings, and my feelings then were as though I wore sackcloth and had put dust and ashes upon my head.When I had at last crossed those dim far-off hills there lay before me a wide sandy plain--a great desert--in which I saw the barren sands of my earthly life lie scattered.  No tree, no shrub, no green thing was there anywhere for the eye to rest upon, no water of refreshment to sparkle before us like hopes of happiness.  There was no shade for our weary limbs should we seek for repose.  The lives of those who crossed this plain in search of the rest beyond, had been barren of true, pure, unselfish affection and that self-denial which alone can make the desert to blossom like the rose and sweet waters of refreshment to spring up around their paths.I descended to this dreary waste of sand, and took a narrow path which seemed to lead to the hills on the other side.  The load I carried had now become almost intolerable to me and I longed to lay it down--but in vain; I could not for one moment detach it.  The hot sand seemed to blister my feet as I walked, and each step was so labored as to be most painful.  As I passed slowly on there rose before me pictures of my past and of all those whom I had known.  These pictures seemed to be just in front of me and to float in the atmosphere like those mirages seen by earthly travelers through the desert.Like dissolving views they appeared to melt into one another and give place to fresh scenes.  Through them all there moved the friends or strangers whom I had met and known, and the long forgotten unkind thoughts and words which I had spoken to them rose up in an accusing array before me--the tears I had made others shed--the cruel words (sharper and harder to bear than any blow) with which I had wounded the feelings of those around me.  A thousand hard unworthy thoughts and selfish actions of my past--long thrust aside and forgotten or excused--all rose up once more before me, picture after picture--till at last I was so overwhelmed to see what an array of them there was, that I broke down, and casting my pride to the winds I bowed myself in the dust and wept bitter tears of shame and sorrow.  And where my tears fell on the hot dry sand there sprang up around me little flowers like white stars, each little waxy blossom bearing in its heart a drop of dew, so that the place I had sunk down upon in such sorrow had become a little oasis of beauty in that weary desert.I plucked a few of those tiny blossoms and placed them in my bosom as a memorial of that spot, and then rose to go on again.  To my surprise the pictures were no longer visible, but in front of me I beheld a woman carrying a little child whose weight seemed too much for her strength, and it was wailing with weariness and fear.I hurried up to them and offered to carry the poor little one, for I was touched by the sight of its poor little frightened face and weary drooping head.  The woman stared at me for a moment and then put the little one in my arms, and as I covered him over with a part of my robe the poor tired little creature sank into a quiet sleep.  The woman told me the child was hers, but she had not felt much affection for it during its life.  "In fact," said she, "I did not want a child at all.  I do not care for children, and when this one came I was annoyed and neglected it.  Then, as it grew older, and was (as I thought then) naughty and troublesome, I used to beat it and shut it up in dark rooms, and was otherwise hard and unkind.  At last when it was five years old it died, and then I died not long afterwards of the same fever.  Since I came to the spirit world that child has seemed to haunt me, and at last I was advised to take this journey, carrying him with me since I cannot rid myself of his presence.""And do you even yet feel no love for the poor little thing?""Well, no! I can't say I have come to love it, perhaps I never shall really love it as some mothers do, indeed I am one of those women who should not be mothers at all--the maternal instinct is, as yet at all events, quite wanting in me.  I do not love the child, but I am sorry now that I was not kinder to him, and I can see that what I thought was a sense of duty urging me to bring him up properly and correct his faults, was only an excuse for my own temper and the irritation the care of him caused.  I can see I have done wrong and why I did so, but I cannot say I have much love for this child.""And are you to take him with you through all your journey?" I asked, feeling so sorry for the poor little unloved thing that I bent over him and kissed him, my own eyes growing dim as I did so, for I thought of my beloved on earth and what a treasure she would have deemed such a child, and how tender she would have been to it.  And as I kissed him he put his little arms around my neck and smiled up at me in a half-asleep way that should have gone straight to the woman's heart.  Even as it was her face relaxed a little, and she said more graciously than she had yet spoken:"I am only to carry him a little farther I believe, and then he will be taken to a sphere where there are many children like him whose parents do not care about them and who are taken care of by spirits who are fond of children.""I am glad to think that," I said, and then we trudged on together for a bit farther, till we reached a small group of rocks where there was a little pool of water, beside which we sat down to rest.  Presently I fell asleep, and when I awoke the woman and the child had gone.I arose and resumed my way, and shortly after arrived at the foot of the mountains, which pride and ambition had reared.  Hard, rocky, and precipitous was the pathway across them, with scarce foothold to help one on, and ofttimes it seemed as though these rocks reared by selfish pride would prove too difficult to surmount.  And as I climbed I recognized what share I had had in building them, what atoms my pride had sent to swell these difficulties I now encountered.Few of us know the secrets of our own hearts.  We so often deem that it is a far nobler ambition than mere self-aggrandisement which inspires our efforts to place ourselves on a higher level than our fellow men who are not so well equipped for the battle of life.I looked back upon my past with shame as I recognized one great rock after another to be the spiritual emblems of the stumbling blocks which I had placed in the path of my feebler brothers, whose poor crude efforts had once seemed to me only worthy of prompt extinction in the interests of all true art, and I longed to have my life to live over again that I might do better with it and encourage where I had once condemned, help where I had crushed.I had been so hard to myself, so eager ever to attain to the highest possible excellence, that I had never been satisfied with any of my own efforts--even when the applause of my fellows was ringing in my ears, even when I had carried off the highest prizes from all competitors--and so I had thought myself entitled to exact as high a standard from all who sought to study my beautiful art.  I could see no merit in the efforts of the poor strugglers who were as infants beside the great master minds.  Talent, genius, I could cordially admire, frankly appreciate, but with complacent mediocrity I had no sympathy; such I had had no desire to help.  I was ignorant then that those feeble powers were like tiny seeds which though they would never develop into anything of value on earth, would yet blossom into the perfect flower in the great Hereafter.  In my early days, when success first was mine, and before I had made shipwreck of my life, I had been full of the wildest, most ambitious dreams, and though in later years when sorrow and disappointments had taught me somewhat of pity for the struggles of others, yet I could not learn to feel true cordial sympathy with mediocrity and its struggles, and now I recognized that it was the want of such sympathy which had piled up high these rocks so typical of my arrogance.In my sorrow and remorse at this discovery I looked around to see if there might be anyone near me weaker than myself, whom it may not be too late to assist upon his path, and as I looked I saw above me on this hard road a young man almost spent and much exhausted with his effort to climb these rocks, which family pride and an ambition to rank with the noble and wealthy had piled up for him--a pride to which he had sacrificed all those who should have been most dear.  He was clinging to a jutting-out portion of rock, and was so spent and exhausted he seemed almost ready to let go and fall.I shouted to him to hold on, and soon climbed up to where he was, and there with some difficulty succeeded in dragging him up to the summit of these rocks.  My strength being evidently double his, I was only too ready to help him as some relief to the remorse I now felt at thinking how many feeble minds I had crushed in the past.When we reached the top and sat down to rest, I found myself to be much bruised and torn by the sharp stones over which we had stumbled.  But I also found that in my struggles to ascend, my burden of selfish pride had fallen from me and was gone, and as I looked back over the path by which I had climbed I clothed myself anew in the sackcloth and ashes of humility, and resolved I would go back to earth and seek to help some of those feebler ones to a fuller understanding of my art.  I would seek as far as I could to give them the help of my higher knowledge.  Where I had crushed the timid aspiring soul I would now encourage; where my sharp tongue and keen wit had wounded I would strive to heal.  I knew now that none should dare to despise his weaker brother or crush out his hopes because to a more advanced mind they seem small and trivial.I sat long upon that mountain thinking of these things--the young man whom I had helped going on without me.  At last I rose and wended my way slowly through a deep ravine spanned by a broken bridge and approached by a high gate, at which many spirits were waiting, and trying by various means to open it in order that they might pass through.  Some tried force, others tried to climb over, others again sought to find some secret spring, and when one after another tried and failed some of the others again would seek to console the disappointed ones.  As I drew near six or seven spirits who still hovered about the gate drew back, curious to see what I would do.  It was a great gate of what looked to me like sheets of iron, though its real nature I do not even now know.  It was so high and so smooth, no one could climb it, so solid it was vain to dream of forcing it, so fast shut there appeared no chance of opening it.  I stood in front of it in despair, wondering what I should do now, when I saw a poor woman near me weeping most bitterly with disappointment; she had been there some time and had tried in vain to open the gate.  I did my best to comfort her and give her all the hope I could, and while I was doing so the solid gate before us melted away and we passed through.  Then as suddenly I saw it rise again behind me, while the woman had vanished, and beside the bridge stood a feeble old man bent nearly double.  As I was still wondering about the gate a voice said to me, "That is the gate of kind deeds and kind thoughts.  Those who are on the other side must wait till their kind thoughts and acts for others are heavy enough to weigh the gate down, when it will open for them as it did for you who have tried so hard to help your fellows."I now advanced to the bridge where the old man was standing, poking about with his stick as if feeling his way, and groaning over his helplessness.  I was so afraid he would fall through the broken part without seeing it, that I rushed impulsively forward and offered to help him over.  But he shook his head, "No! no! young man, the bridge is so rotten it will never bear your weight and mine.  Go on yourself, and leave me here to do the best I can.""Not so, you are feeble, and old enough to be my grandfather, and if I leave you you will most likely drop through the broken place.  Now, I am active and strong, and it will go hard with us if I do not contrive somehow to get us both across."Without waiting for his reply I took hold of him and hoisted him on to my back, and telling him to hold tight by my shoulders I started to cross the bridge.Sapristi! what a weight that old man seemed!  Sinbad's old man of the sea was a joke to him.  That bridge, too, how it creaked, groaned and bent under our weight.  I thought we must both be tumbled into the chasm below, and all the time the old man kept imploring me not to drop him.  On I struggled, holding with my hands as well as I could, and crawling on all-fours when we reached the worst part.  When we got to the middle there was a great ragged hole and only the broken ends of the two great beams to catch hold of.  Here I did feel it a difficulty.  I could have swung myself across I felt certain, but it was a different thing with that heavy old man clinging to me and half choking me, and a thought did cross my mind that I might have done better to leave him alone, but that seemed so cruel to the poor old soul that I made up my mind to risk it.  The poor old man gave a great sigh when he saw how matters stood, and said:"You had better abandon me after all.  I am too helpless to get across and you will only spoil your own chance by trying it.  Leave me here and go on alone."His tone was so dejected, so miserable, I could never have so left him, and I thought to make a desperate effort for us both, so telling him to hold on tight I grasped the broken beam with one hand and, making a great spring, I swung myself over the chasm with such a will we seemed to fly across, and alighted upon the other side unharmed.As I looked back to see what we had escaped, I cried out in astonishment, for there was no break in the bridge at all, but it was as sound a bridge as ever I saw, and by my side there stood not a feeble old man but Ahrinziman himself, laughing at my astonishment.  He put his hand on my shoulder and said:"Franchezzo, my son, that was but a little trial to test if you would be unselfish enough to burden yourself with a heavy old man when your own chance seemed so small.  I leave you now to encounter the last of your trials and to judge for yourself the nature of those doubts and suspicions you have cherished.  Adieu, and may success attend you."He turned away from me and immediately vanished, leaving me to go on alone through another deep valley which was before me.It lay between two precipitous hills, and was called "The valley of the phantom mists."  Great wreaths of grey vapor floated to and fro and crept up the hill sides, shaping themselves into mysterious phantom forms and hovering around me as I walked.The farther I advanced through the ravine the thicker grew these shapes, growing more distinct and like living things.  I knew them to be no more than the thought creations of my earthly life, yet seen in this lifelike palpable form they were like haunting ghosts of my past, rising up in accusing array against me.  The suspicions I had nursed, the doubts I had fostered, the unkind, unholy thoughts I had cherished, all seemed to gather round me, menacing and terrible, mocking me and taunting me with the past, whispering in my ears and closing over my head like great waves of darkness.  As my life had grown more full of such thoughts, so did my path become blocked with them till they hemmed me in on every side.  Such fearful, distorted, hateful-looking things!  And these had been my own thoughts, these mirrored the state of my own mind towards others.  These brooding spirits of the mist--dark, suspicious, and bewildering--contronted me now and showed me what my heart had been.  I had had so little faith in goodness--so little trust in my fellow man.  Because I had been cruelly deceived I had said in my haste all men, and women too, are liars, and I had sneered at the weakness and the folly around me, and thought it was always the same thing everywhere, all bitterness and disappointment.So these thought-creations had grown up, mass upon mass, till now that I sought to battle with them they seemed to overwhelm and stifle me, wrapping me up in the great vaporous folds of their phantom forms.  In vain I sought to beat them off, to shake myself free of them.  They gathered round and closed me in even as my doubts and suspicions had done.  I was seized with horror, and fought as if they had been living things that were sweeping me to destruction.  And then I saw a deep dark crevasse open in the ground before me, to which these phantoms were driving me, a gulf into which it seemed I must sink unless I could free myself from these awful ghosts.  Like a madman I strove and wrestled with them, fighting as for dear life, and still they closed me in and forced me back and back towards that gloomy chasm.  Then in my anguish of soul I called aloud for help to be free from them, and throwing out my arms before me with all my force I seemed to grasp the foremost phantom and hurl it from me.  Then did the mighty cloud of doubts waver and break as though a wind had scattered them, and I sank overcome and exhausted upon the ground; and as I sank into unconsciousness I had a dream, a brief but lovely dream, in which I thought my beloved had come to me and scattered those foul thoughts, and that she knelt down beside me and drew my head to rest upon her bosom as a mother with her child.  I thought I felt her arms encircle me and hold me safe, and then the dream was over and I fell asleep.When I recovered consciousness I was resting still in that valley, but the mists had rolled away and my time of bitter doubt and suspicion was past.  I lay upon a bank of soft green turf at the end of the ravine, and before me there was a meadow watered by a smooth peaceful river of clear crystal water.  I arose and followed the windings of the stream for a short distance, and arrived at a beautiful grove of trees.  Through the trunks I could see a clear pool on whose surface floated water-lilies.  There was a fairy-like fountain in the middle, from which the spray fell like a shower of diamonds into the transparent water.  The trees arched their branches overhead and through them I could see the blue sky.  I drew near to rest and refresh myself at the fountain, and as I did so a fair nymph in a robe of green gossamer and with a crown of water-lilies on her head drew near to help me.  She was the guardian spirit of the fountain, and her work was to help and refresh all weary wanderers like myself.  "In earth life," said she, "I lived in a forest, and here in the spirit land I find a home surrounded by the woods I love so well."She gave me food and drink, and after I had rested a while showed me a broad pathway through the trees, which led to a Home of Rest where I might repose for a time.  With a grateful heart I thanked this bright spirit, and following the path soon found myself before a large building covered with honeysuckle and ivy.  It had many windows and wide open doors as though to invite all to enter.  It was approached by a great gateway of what looked like wrought iron, only that the birds and flowers on it were so life-like they seemed to have clustered there to rest.  While I stood looking at the gate it opened as by magic, and I passed on to the house.  Here several spirits in white robes came to welcome me, and I was conducted to a pretty room whose windows looked out upon a grassy lawn and soft fairy-like trees, and here I was bidden to repose myself.On awakening I found my pilgrim dress was gone, and in its stead there lay my light grey robe, only now it had a triple border of pure white.  I was greatly pleased, and arrayed myself with pleasure, for I felt the white to be a sign of my progression--white in the spirit world symbolizing purity and happiness, while black is the reverse.Presently I was conducted to a large pleasant room in which were a number of spirits dressed like myself, among whom I was pleased to recognize the woman with the child whom I had helped across the Plains of Repentance and Tears.  She smiled much more kindly on the child, and greeted me with pleasure, thanking me for my help, while the little one climbed upon my knees and established himself there as an earthly child might have done.An ample repast of fruits and cakes and the pure wine of the spirit land was set before us, and when we were all refreshed and had returned our thanks to God for all his mercies, the Brother who presided wished us all God's speed, and then with grateful hearts we bade each other adieu and set forth to return to our own homes.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXVIII.--My Home and Work in the Morning Land.

I was not, however, destined to remain in the Land of Dawn.  My home was now to be in the circle of the Morning Land, and I was therefore escorted thither by my friends.It lay beyond the peaceful lake and those hills behind which I used to watch the light of that dawning day which never seemed to grow brighter or advance in the Land of Dawn, but whose beauties belonged to this Morning Land.  This land lay in an opposite direction from that range of hills beyond which lay the Plain of Remorse.Here in the Morning Land I found that I was to have a little house of my own, a something earned by myself.  I have always loved a place of my own, and this little cottage, simple as it was, was very dear to me.  It was indeed a peaceful place.  The green hills shut it in on every side save in front, where they opened out and the ground stretched away in undulating slopes of green and golden meadow land.  There were no trees, no shrubs, around my new home, no flowers to gladden my eyes, because my efforts had not yet blossomed into flower.  But there was one sweet trailing honeysuckle that clustered around the little porch and shed the fragrance of its love into my rooms.  This was the gift of my beloved to me, the spiritual growth of her sweet pure loving thoughts which twined around my dwelling to whisper to me ever of her constant love and truth.There were only two little rooms, the one for me to receive my friends and to study in, and the other my chamber of repose, where I could rest when weary with my work on the earth plane.  And in this room there was my picture framed in roses, and all my little treasures.  The blue sky outside shed down on me so pure a light, my eyes, long wearied to see it, gazed on it again and yet again.  The soft green grass and the fragrant honeysuckle were all so sweet, so delicious to me, wearied as I was with my long dark wanderings, that I was overcome with the emotions of my gratitude.  I was aroused by a kindly hand, a loving voice, and looking up, beheld my father.  Ah!  what a joy, what a happiness I felt, and still more when he bade me come to earth with him and show this home in a vision to her who was its guiding star!What happy hours I can recall when I look back to that, my first home in the spirit land.  I was so proud to think I had won it.  My present home is far finer, my present sphere far more beautiful in every way, but I have never felt a greater happiness than I felt when that first home of my own was given to me.I should but weary my readers were I to attempt to describe all the work on the earth plane I did at this time, all the sad ones I helped to cheer and direct upon the better way.  There is a sameness in such work that makes one example serve for many.Time passes on for spirits as well as mortals and brings ever new changes--fresh progression.  And thus while I was working to help others I was gradually myself learning the lesson which had proved most hard for me to learn.  The lesson of that entire forgiveness of our enemies which will enable us to feel that we not only desire them no harm but that we even wish to do them good--to return good for evil cordially.  It had been a hard struggle to overcome my desire for revenge, or wish that at all events some punishment should overtake the one who had so deeply wronged me, and it was as hard, or harder even, to desire now to benefit that person.  Time and again while I was working on the earth plane I went and stood beside that one, unseen and unfelt save for the thoughts of me that would be awakened, and each time I perceived that my enemy's thoughts were to the full as bitter as my own.  There was no love lost between us.  Standing there I beheld time after time the events of our lives blended together in one picture, the dark shadows of our passionate hate dimming and blurring these pictures as storm clouds sweep over a summer sky.  And in the clearer light of my spiritual knowledge I beheld where my faults had lain, as strongly or more so than I beheld those of my enemy.  And from such visits I would return to my little cottage in the spirit land overwhelmed with the bitterest regrets, the keenest anguish, yet always unable to feel aught but bitterness and anger towards the one whose life seemed only to have been linked by sorrow and wrong to my own.At last one day while standing beside this mortal I became conscious of a new feeling, almost of pity, for this person was also oppressed in soul--also conscious of regret in thinking of our past.  A wish had arisen that a different course towards me had been followed.  Thus was there created between us a kinder thought, which though faint and feeble was yet the first fruits of my efforts to overcome my own anger--the first softening and melting of the hard wall of hatred between us.  Then was there given to me a chance to assist and benefit this person even as the chance had before come to me of doing harm, and now I was able to overcome my bitterness and to take advantage of this opportunity, so that it was my hand--the hand which had been raised to curse and blight--which was now the one to help instead.My enemy was not conscious of my presence nor of my interference for good, but felt in a dim fashion that somehow the hatred between us was dead, and that, as I was dead, it were perhaps better to let our quarrels die also.  Thus came at last a mutual pardon which severed the links which had so long bound our earthly lives together.  I know that during the earthly life of that one we shall never cross each other's path again, but even as I had seen in the case of my friend Benedetto, when death shall sever the thread of that earthly life, our spirits will meet once again, in order that each may ask pardon from the other.  Not until then will all links be finally severed between us and each pass on to our appointed sphere.  Great and lasting are the effects upon the soul of our loves and our hates; long, long after the life of earth is past do they cling to us, and many are the spirits whom I have seen tied to each other, not by mutual love but mutual hate.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXIX.--The Formation of Planets.

When I had at last learned the lesson of self conquest my mind seemed to be free from a great oppressive weight, and I turned to the study of the spirit land and its conditions with renewed interest.  At this period of my wanderings I used to see my friend Hassein very often, and he helped me to an understanding of many things which had perplexed me in my earthly life.On one occasion when we were seated in my little home enjoying one of our many conversations, I asked him to tell me more of the spheres and their relation to the earth."The term spheres," said he, "is, as you have seen, applied to those great belts of spiritual matter which encircle the earth and other planets.  It is likewise applied to those still vaster, more extended, thought waves which circle throughout all the universe.  Thus we may say there are two classes of spheres--those which are in a measure material and encircle each their own planet or their own solar system and form the dwelling places of the spiritual inhabitants of each planet.  These spheres are divided into circles indicating, like steps upon the ladder of progress, the moral advancement of the spirits."The other class of spheres are mental, not material, in their constituents and do not belong to any planetary or solar system, but are as limitless as the universe, circling in ever widening currents of thought emanations from the central point, around which all the universe is held to be revolving, and which point is said to be the immediate environment of the Supreme Being, from whom these thought waves are held to proceed.  It may perhaps make my meaning still clearer to say there is one great sphere of the intellectual faculties or attributes belonging essentially to the soul, and then to divide this sphere into circles such as the circles of Philosophy, of Art, of Music, of Literature, etc.It is a common mode of expression to call them spheres, but to my mind it is more correct to describe them as circles.  These Intellectual Circles, like great wheels, inclose all those lesser wheels, those spiral rings, which surround each their own solar system, or parent planet, wheels within wheels, revolving around the one great centre continually.  In the spirit world only those who are in sympathy ever remain together, and though the ties of relationship or the links of kind remembrance may at times draw together those who have no common bonds of union, these will be but flying visits, and each will return to their own circle and sphere, drawn back by the strong magnetic attraction which holds each sphere and each circle of a sphere in unison.  A spirit belonging to the sphere of Music or Philosophy, will be drawn to others of a like disposition who are in the same stage of moral advancement as himself, but his development of a higher degree of music or philosophy will not enable him to ascend into a higher circle of the Moral Spheres, or planetary spheres, than his moral development entitles him to occupy.  The central suns of each of the vast intellectual circles of the mental sphere shine as burnished magnets.  They are as great prisms glowing with the celestial fires of purity and truth, and darting on all sides their glorious rays of knowledge, and in these rays cluster the multitudes of spirits who are seeking to light their lamps at these glowing shrines.  In those rays which reach the earth pure and unbroken, are found those gems of truth which have illuminated the minds of men in all ages of the world's history, and shattered into a thousand fragments the great rocks of error and darkness, even as the lightning's flash shivers a granite rock, letting into the depths below the clear light of God's sun, and those spirits who are most highly advanced are those who are nearest to the central force, to the dazzling light of these starlike centres.  These great spheres of the intellectual and moral faculties may, then, be termed the "universal" spheres; those around each planet, "planetary" spheres; and those surrounding the sun centres, "solar" spheres; the first being understood to consist of thought or sound essence, the others of various degrees of spiritualized matter.""And how, then, would you describe the creation of a planet and its spheres?""The creation of a planet may be said to begin from the time when it is cast off from the parent sun in the form of a nebulous mass of fiery vapor.  In this stage it is a most powerful magnet, attracting to itself the minute particles of matter which float through all the ether of space.  This ether has been supposed to be void of all material atoms such as float in the atmosphere of planets, but that is an incorrect supposition, the fact being that the atoms of matter are simply subdivided into even more minute particles compared to which a grain of sand is as the bulk of the sun to the earth.  These atoms being thus subdivided and dispersed through space (instead of being clustered by the forces of magnetic attraction in the planet into atoms the size of those which float as motes in the earth's atmosphere), have become not only invisible to man's material sight but are also incapable of being detected by the ordinary chemical means at his disposal.  They are, in fact, etherealized, and have become of the first degree of spirit matter in consequence of the amount of soul essence which has become amalgamated with their grosser elements.  In becoming attracted to the glowing mass of an embryo plant, these atoms become so thickly clustered together that the more ethereal elements are pressed out and escape back into space, leaving the solid gross portion to form into rock, etc., through the constant attracting of fresh atoms and the necessarily vast increase of pressure thus caused.  These atoms exist eternally, and are as indestructible as all the other elements which constitute the universe, and they are absorbed and cast off again by planet after planet as each passes through the various stages of its existence and development."The atoms of matter may be broadly classed under three heads, and again each of the three heads may be subdivided into an infinite number of degrees of density, in order to express the various stages of sublimation to which they have attained.  The three principal classes may be termed, material or planetary matter--spiritual or soul enveloping matter, which is no longer visible to material sight--and soul essence, this last being so sublimated that it is not possible for me yet to describe its nature to you.  Of the material matter the lowest, most gross form, is that of which mineral substances, such as rocks, earth, etc., are formed; these are thrown off into the atmosphere as dust and reabsorbed continually to be changed, by the process continually going on in nature everywhere, into plants, etc.  The intermediate degree between the rocks and the plants is the fluidic, in which the more solid particles are held in solution by the various gases or vaporized form of the chemical elements which constitute them.  The second degree of material matter is that of plant or vegetable life which is nourished by the blending of the most gross matter with the fluidic.  Thus through infinite gradations of earthly matter we reach the highest, namely, flesh and bones and muscles which, whether it clothes the soul of man or one of the lower animals, is still the highest degree of material matter, containing in this highest degree of earthly material development all those elements of which the lower degrees are composed."The second or spiritual form of matter is, as I have said, merely the etherealized development of the first or earthly form of matter, while the soul essence is the animating principle of both, the Divine germ, without which the two first forms of matter could not exist.  It is a part of the law of the two first classes of matter that they should clothe the higher soul principle, or they lose their power of cohesion and are diffused into their elemental parts again.  Soul matter is the only one which possesses any permanent identity.  It is the true Ego, since by no power can it be disintegrated or lose its individuality.  It is the true life of whatever lower forms of matter it may animate, and as such changes and shapes that lower matter into its own identity.  Soul essence is in and of every type of life, from the mineral and vegetable to man, the highest type of animal, and each of these types is capable of development into the highest or celestial form, in which state it is found in the Heavenly Sphere of each planet and each solar system."Since, then, we maintain that everything has its soul of a higher or lower type, it need not create surprise in the mind of any mortal to be told that there are plants and flowers, rocks and deserts, beasts and birds, in the spirit world.  They exist there in their spiritualized or developed state, and are more etherealized as they advance higher, in accordance with the same law which governs alike the development of man, the highest type, and that of the lowest form of soul matter.  When a plant dies or the solid rock is dispersed into dust or fused into gas, its soul essence passes with the spiritual matter pertaining to it, into the spirit world, and to that sphere to which its development is most akin--the most material portion being absorbed by the earth, the more sublimated particles of matter feeling less of the earth attraction and therefore floating farther from it.  Thus in the early stages of a planet's life, when it possesses but a small portion of the soul essence and a large amount of gross matter, its spheres are thrown out first in the direction farthest from its sun and are very material, and the development of its spiritual inhabitants is very low."At this early stage the vegetable as well as the animal and human types of soul life are coarse and gross, wanting in the refinement and beauty which may be observed as the evolution of the planet advances.  Gradually the vegetation changes, the animals change, the races of men who appear become each higher, more perfect, and as a consequence the spiritual emanations thrown off become correspondingly higher.  In the first stages of a planet's life the spheres scarcely exist.  They may be likened to a cone in shape, the small end being represented by the planet itself, the earth plane being the highest sphere which has developed, and the lower spheres--by reason of the degraded tastes and low intellectual development of the planet's inhabitants--being like the wide end of the cone.  As the planet develops the spheres increase in size and number, and the higher ones begin to form, the point of the cone receding from the planet towards the sun as each of the higher spheres begins its existence."Thus are the spheres formed below and above the planet by the constant influx of the atmoms thrown off from the parent planet.  At a certain stage of their formation, when the intellectual and selfish propensities of man are more highly developed than his moral and unselfish faculties, these lower spheres in extent greatly exceed the higher ones, and these may be termed the Dark Ages of the World's History, when oppression and cruelty and greed spread their dark wings over mankind."After a time the eternal law of the higher evolution of all things causes the higher and lower spheres to become equal in extent and number.  Then may we see the forces of good and evil equally balanced, and this period may be termed the meridian of the planet's life.  Next follows the period when by the gradual improvement of mankind the figure of the cone becomes gradually reversed, the earth plane becoming again the narrow end by reason of the shrinking and disappearance of the lower spheres, while the higher ones expand towards the highest of all, till at last only this highest sphere exists at all and the planet itself shrinks gradually away till all the material gross particles have been thrown off from it, and it vanishes from existence, all its gross atoms floating away imperceptibly, to be reabsorbed by other planets yet in process of formation."Then will the sphere of that planet together with its inhabitants become absorbed into the great spheres of its solar system, and its inhabitants will exist there as do already many communities of spirits whose planets have passed out of existence.  Each planetary community, however, will retain the characteristics and individuality of their planet--just as different nationalities on earth do--till they become gradually merged in the larger nationality of their solar system.  So gradual, so imperceptible, are these processes of development, so vast the periods of time they take to accomplish, that the mind of mortal man may be forgiven for failing to grasp the immensity of the changes which take place.  The lives of all planets are not similar in their duration, because size and position in the solar system, as well as other causes, contribute to modify and slightly alter their development, but the broad features will in all cases be found the same, just as the matter of which each planet is composed shows no chemical substance which does not exist in a greater or less degree in every other.  Thus we are able to judge from the condition of the planets around us what has been the history of our earth in the past and what will be its ultimate destiny.""If, as you say, our spheres are to become absorbed into those of our sun centre, will our individuality as spirits become merged in that of the solar system?""No! most certainly not.  The individuality of each soul germ is indestructible; it is but a minute unit in the vast ocean of soul life, but still it is a distinct unit, the personality of each being in fact its Ego.  It is this very individuality, this very impossibility of dispersing or destroying the soul which constitutes its immortality, which distinguishes it from all other matter, and makes its nature so difficult of explanation or analysis.  You have become a member of our Brotherhood of Hope, yet you retain your individuality, and so it is with the soul eternally, no matter through what conditions of existence it may pass.  Try to imagine a body so light that the most etherealized vapor is heavy beside it, yet a body possessing such power of cohesion that it is utterly impossible to disintegrate its particles, the power of resistance against all material or spiritual forms of matter which it possesses being equal to that which a bar of steel offers to a cloud of vapor.  Imagine this and you will realize how it is that as a spirit you can pass through solid doors and walls of earthly matter, and how a spirit higher than yourself can pass with equal ease through these walls of spiritual matter which surround us here.  The more perfectly the soul is freed from gross matter, the less can it be bound by any element, and the greater become its powers, since it is not the soul essence but its dense envelope which can be imprisoned on earth or in the spheres.  To you now the walls of earthly houses offer no impediment to free ingress or egress.  You pass through them as easily as your earthly body used to pass through the fog.  The density of the fog might be disagreeable to you, but it could not arrest your progress.  Moreover, when you passed through a fog there was no vacuum left to show where your passage through it had been.  This was because the elements of which the fog was composed were attracted together again too quickly for you to perceive where they had been dispersed, and that is exactly what happens when we spirits pass through a material door or wall, the material atoms of which it is composed closing after our progress even more quickly than the fog."I understand you, and now if, as you say, each type of soul essence has a distinct individuality of its own you will not agree with those who believe in the transmigration of the soul of an animal of the lower type into a man, and vice versa.""Certainly not.  The soul of each type we hold to be capable of the highest degree of development in its own type; but the soul of man being the highest type of all is, therefore, capable of the highest degree of development, namely, into those advanced spirits we call angels.  Angels are souls who have passed from the lowest degree of human planetary life through all the planetary spheres till they have attained to the celestial spheres of the solar system, our Heaven of Heavens, which is as far in advanceof our Heaven of the planetary spheres as that is in advance of the planet itself.  We believe that the soul will go on mounting continually as by ever widening spiral rings, till it has reached what we now term the centre of the universe, but whether when we do attain that summit of our present aspirations we shall not find it to be but a finite point revolving round a still greater centre I cannot say.  My own feeling is that we shall attain to centre after centre, ever resting, it may be millions of years, in each, till our aspirations shall again urge us to heights as far again above us.  The more one contemplates the subject the more vast and limitless it becomes.  How, then, can we hope to see an end to our journeyings through that which has no end, and has had no beginning, and how can we even hope to form any clear idea of the nature and attributes of that Supreme Being whom we hold to be the Omnipotent Ruler of the universe, seeing that we cannot even fully and clearly grasp the magnitude of his creation?"

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXX.--Materialization of Spirits.

Another time when we were conversing I asked Hassein for his explanation of the phenomena of the spiritualistic movement which has recently been inaugurated upon earth, and in which I am naturally deeply interested, particularly as relates to materialization, and of which I wished to learn all I could.Hassein replied:  "In order that the mind may grasp the full significance of the Atomic theory, which has of late been advanced by men on earth, and which affords one of the most simple as well as logical explanations of the passage of matter through matter, it may not be out of place to say, for the benefit of those who have not given much thought to the subject and like these questions put before them in the simplest form, that the subdivisions of matter are, as we have said, so minute that even the speck of dust which floats invisible to the eye, unless a sunbeam be let in upon it to illuminate it, is composed of an infinite number of smaller particles, which are attracted and held together by the same laws that govern the attraction and repulsion of larger bodies.  The knowledge of these laws gives to spirits the power of adapting these atoms to their own use, while making the manifestations called 'Materializations' now familiar to students of Spiritualism.  The atoms suitable for their purpose are collected by the spirits wishing to materialize, from the atmosphere, which is full of them and also from the emanations proceeding from the men and women who form the spirit circle.  These atoms are shaped by the spirits' will into the form of their earthly bodies, and held in combination by a chemical substance found, in a greater or less degree, in the bodies of all living things.  Were the chemists of earth life sufficiently advanced in knowledge, they could extract this chemical from every living thing in nature and store it up to be used at will."This substance or essence is in fact the mysterious Elixir of Life, the secret of extracting and retaining which in tangible form has been sought by the sages of all times and countries.  So subtle, so ethereal, however, is it that as yet there is no process known to earthly chemists which can bring this essence into a state to be analyzed by them, although it has been recognized and classed by some under the head of 'Magnetic Aura.'  Of this, however, it is but one--and that the most ethereal--element.  The life-giving rays of the sun contain it, but who is there as yet among chemists who can separate and bottle up in different portions the sunbeams?  And of all portions this especially, which is the most delicate, the most subtle.  Yet this knowledge is possessed by advanced spirits, and some day when the world has progressed far enough in the science of chemistry, the knowledge of this process will be given to men just as the discoveries in electricity and kindred sciences have been given--discoveries which in an earlier age would have been styled miraculous."Here let me remark as to 'Auras,' that the constituent elements of the auras of the different sitters at a seance have quite as much effect upon the materialization as has that of the medium.  Sometimes the chemical elements in the aura of one sitter do not amalgamate or blend thoroughly with those of some other sitter present, and this want of harmony prevents any materialization taking place at all.  In extreme cases these antagonistic elements act so strongly in opposition to each other and are so repellent in their effects upon the atoms collected, that they act as a spiritual explosive which scatters the atoms as dynamite shatters a solid wall."This antagonism has nothing whatever to do with the moral or mental conditions of such persons.  They may both be in all respects most estimable, earnest people, but they should never sit in the same circle and never be brought into magnetic contact, since their auras could never blend, and only general disappointment can result from any atempt to harmonize them.  Although, apart, they might each attain satisfactory enough results, they never could do so in any attempt in combination."In those known as simply physical mediums, that is mediums with whose assistance purely physical phenomena alone are produced, such as the moving of tables or carrying in the air of musical boxes, and similar feats, this peculiar essence exists, but in a form too coarse to be suitable for materialization, which requires a certain degree of refinement in the essence.  In them it is like a coarse raw alcoholic spirit, but in the true materializing medium it is like the same spirit redistilled, refined, and purified, and the purer this essence the more perfect will be the materialization."In many mediums there is a combination of the physical and materializing powers, but in exact proportion as the coarse physical manifestations are cultivated so will the higher and finer forms of materialization be lost."It is erroneous to imagine that in true materialization you are getting merely the double of the medium transformed for the moment into a likeness of your departed friends, or that the emanations from the sitters must always affect the appearance of the resulting spirit forms.  They can only do so when from some cause there is a deficiency of the special essence, or an inability on the spirit's part to use it.  In that case the atoms retain the personality of those from whom they are taken, because the spirit is unable to stamp his identity upon them, as a wax image, and until it be melted into a new mold, it will retain the impress of the old.  The possession of a sufficient amount of the special essence, on the one hand, enables the spirit to clothe himself in the atoms he has collected and to hold them long enough to melt them, as it were, into a state in which they will take on his identity or the stamp of his individuality.  The absence of the essence, on the other hand, causes him to lose his hold before the process has become perfect, and thus he has either hastily to show himself with the imperfect resemblance he has obtained, or else not show himself at all."A familiar simile may explain my meaning.  When in the earthly body, you took flesh, vegetable, and fluid substances ready formed, containing in a prepared state the elements your earthly body required for its renewal, and by the process of digestion you changed these substances into a part of your soul's earthly envelope.  Well, in the same way a spirit takes the ready prepared atoms given off by the medium and members of a materializing seance, and by a process as rapid as lightning artificially digests or arranges them into a material covering or envelope for himself, bearing his own identity more or less completely impressed on it according to his power."Every atom of the body of a mortal is drawn, directly or indirectly, from the atmosphere around him, and absorbed in one form or another, and after it has served as clothing for his spirit, it is cast off to be again absorbed in another form by some other living thing.  Everyone knows that the material of the human body is continually changing, and yet many think to establish a prescriptive right to those atoms thrown off during a seance, and say that when a spirit makes use of them and adapts them to himself, therefore he must have taken their own mental characteristics along with the material atoms, and thus they try to persuade themselves that the spirit appearing clothed with these material atoms is no more than the thought emanation of their own bodies and brains, ignoring, or more probably not knowing, that the grossest material, not the mental atoms, were all the spirit wanted to clothe himself with and make him visible to material sight."The best proof of the fallacy of this supposition is the constant appearance at seances of spirits whom no one present was thinking of at the time, and in some cases even of people whose death was not known to any of the sitters."The essence or fluid ether of which I have spoken is that which principally holds the material body together in life.  At death, or, more correctly, the withdrawal of the soul and the severance of the connecting link between it and the material atoms of the body, it escapes into the surrounding atmosphere, permitting the particles of that body to decay.  Cold retards the dispersal of this fluid ether; heat accelerates it, thus explaining why the body of any animal or plant disintegrates or turns to decay sooner in hot than in cold climates, and thus becomes nourishment fit for those minute parasites which are stimulated and fed by a lower degree of life magnetism which is retained in the discarded envelope.  This essence or fluidic ether is akin to the electric fluid known to scientists, but as electricity is the product of mineral and vegetable substances, it is lower in degree and much coarser in quality than this human electricity, and would require the combination of other elements to make it assimilate with the human."This higher essence is an important element in what has been termed the Higher Animal Life Principle as distinguished from the Soul-Life Principle and from the Astral Life Principle.  Each of which we make distinct elemental principles."In trance, either artificially induced or occurring as part of the spiritual development of certain sensitives or mediums, this life essence remains with the body, but, as life is required for its need in trance, a large portion may be taken away and used by the controlling spirit to clothe himself, care being taken to return it to the medium again.  With some mediums this life essence is given off so freely that unless care is taken to replace it continually, the death of the physical body will soon follow.  In others it can only be extracted with great difficulty, and in some there is so small a quantity that it would be neither wise nor useful to take any away from them at all."The aura of those mediums possessing a large amount of a high and pure quality, will diffuse a most lovely clear silver light, which can be seen by clairvoyants, and it helps even immaterialized spirits to make themselves visible.  This silver light can be seen radiating like the rays of a star from the medium, and where it is present in a very high degree no other light is required for the materialized spirits to show themselves, the spirits appearing as though surrounded by a silver halo, and with this beautiful light illuminating their garments, they appear much as you see pictures of saints and angels, whom no doubt the ancient seers beheld through the medium of this species of aura."Although the aid of a materializing medium and a good circle of persons still in the material body may simplify the process of building up a body in which a spirit may be able to clothe himself, yet it is quite possible for some spirits of the highest spheres to make for themselves a material body without the aid of any medium or any other person in an earth-body.  Their knowledge of the laws of chemistry is sufficient and their will power is adequate to the strain imposed on it in the process, and in the atmosphere of the earth as well as in the plants, minerals, and animals, is to be found every substance of which the body is composed and from which the life essence is extracted.  The human body is a combination of all the materials and gases found on and in the earth and its atmosphere, and it only requires a knowledge of the laws governing the combination and adhesion of the various substances to enable a spirit to make a body in all respects similar to that of terrestrial man, and to clothe himself therewith, holding it in combination for a longer or shorter period at will."Such knowledge is of necessity unknown as yet except in the higher spheres, because it requires a high degree of development in the mental condition of the spirit before he can duly weigh and understand all the minute points and numerous laws of nature involved in the subject.  The ancients were right in saying they could make a man.  They could do so, and even animate their manufacture to a certain degree with the astral or lower life-principle, but they could not continue to sustain that life by reason of the extreme difficulty in collecting this lower life-principle, and when they had so animated the artificially made body it would be devoid of intelligence and reason, these attributes belonging exclusively to the soul, and neither man nor spirit can endow such a body with a soul--that which alone can give it intellect and immortality.  At the same time an artificially made body could serve as a covering to a spirit (or soul) and enable him to converse with men for a longer or shorter time, according to the power of the spirit to retain this material envelope in the complete state.  Thus no doubt those of the ancients who had acquired a knowledge of these things could also renew at will the material covering of their bodies, and make themselves practically live upon the earth forever, or they might disperse these material atoms and walk forth in the spirit freed from the trammels of the flesh, reconstructing the earthly body again when it suited them.  Such spirit men are the Mahatmas, who by the knowledge of these and kindred secrets do possess many of the marvellous powers attributed to them."But where we differ from them is in the application of the knowledge they have thus gained and the doctrines they deduce from it, and also as to the unadvisability of imparting it freely to men in the flesh, and the duty of withholding it from them as a dangerous thing.  We hold there is no knowledge given to any spirit or mortal, which may not be safely possessed by every other, provided they have the mental development to understand and apply this knowledge.  Our great teacher of these subjects, the guide Ahrinziman, was a native of the East and has been a student of occult subjects, both in his earth life and in the two thousand and more years that have passed since he left the earth, and this is his decided opinion, and he has seen both the origin and the practice of many of these ideas that are as yet new to the Western mind."While thus possessing the power to create a material body from the elemental atoms alone, spirits of advanced knowledge seldom use this power, because for ordinary materializing purposes there is no need to exercise it, the emanations from the members of the materializing circle and the aura of the medium, which are already saturated with the necessary essence for the formation of a body, saving them both time and trouble, and simplifying the process.  It is just as the buying a ready made piece of cloth simplifies the making of a garment, instead of the tailor having to proceed first to grow the wool, then to spin it, and finally to weave it into cloth for himself before he can begin to make the garment."In some cases so much of the material is taken from the medium's body so as to perceptibly alter its weight.  In others nearly the whole of the material covering is used, so that to material sight the medium has vanished, although a clairvoyant may perceive the astral or spirit form still seated in the chair.  In such cases it is simply the gross material atoms which have been made use of, while the mental atoms have not been touched.  As a rule the spirits who take part in a materializing seance, both those who materialize themselves and those who assist the chief controlling spirit, are ignorant of the means by which the results are obtained, just as many persons who avail themselves of the discoveries of chemistry and the articles manufactured by chemists are ignorant of how those substances are obtained.  There is in all materializations an invisible head or director from a sphere greatly in advance of the earth, who may be called the chief chemist, and he passes his directions to a spirit strong in the power of controlling the forces of the astral plane and to others under him, who come in contact with the medium and direct the order of the materializations of personal friends of the sitters, besides sometimes materializing and showing themselves to the circle."There is a powerful movement going on now in the spirit world with the object of extending the knowledge of all these subjects, both among spirits and men in the flesh, and the ecclesiasticism, whether of the East or of the West, which would still shut up such knowledge within the precincts of the temple, may fight against this movement, but it will fight in vain.  The power is too strong for them.  Men are pressing into the avenues of knowledge on all sides and thronging round the doors which, sooner or later, must be opened to them."You cannot suppress knowledge.  It is the inalienable birthright of every soul.  Neither can it be made the property of any class.  So soon as the mind begins to think, it will search for knowledge, and feed upon such crumbs as come in its way, and surely it were better to impart the knowledge sought carefully and judiciously so it can be assimilated, than try to suppress the desire for it, or leave the hungry soul to gather it for itself in the garbage heaps of error."The human race is advancing eternally, and the tutelage of the child is no longer adapted to the growing youth.  He demands freedom, and will break from the leading strings altogether unless their tension is relaxed and he is suffered to wander in the pathways of knowledge to the utmost of his powers.  Is it not well, then, that those who are as the sages of the race should respond to this thirst for light and knowledge by giving, through every channel and avenue which can be opened, the wisdom of the ages in such form as may make it the most easily comprehended?  This planet is but a speck of the universal knowledge as is adapted to its state, and each hour requires that the expansion of the human mind shall be met by the expansion of its creeds and its resources, by the pouring in of fresh streams of light, not the suppressing of the old lest it should be too strong for the sight."

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXXI.--Why the Spheres Are Invisible--Spirit Photographs.

"And now, Hassein, there is another point I wish to ask you about.  I have frequently heard men on earth say they want to know, if the spheres exist around the earth and between them and the sun, why is it that all men cannot see them, and why they cannot even see those spirits who are said to be actually in the room with them.  Naturally, men are not all satisfied to be told simply that it is because they are not clairvoyants, and have not the soul-sight.  They want a still clearer explanation.  I am a spirit myself and I know that I exist, and so does my dwelling-place, but I am unable to give an answer to the question.  Can you do so?"Hassein laughed.  "I could give a dozen elaborate explanations, but neither you nor these mortals who are unable to see the spirits would be much wiser after I had done so.  I must, therefore, endeavor to make my answer as free from technicalities as I can.  First, though, let me ask if you have seen the photographs of unmaterialized spirits which have been obtained by certain mediums in the flesh.  You will have noticed that to mortal sight they present a semi-transparent appearance.  The material doors and windows, furniture, etc. show through the figures of the spirits."Now that gives you a very good idea of the amount of materiality possessed by an astral body (the first degree of spiritualized matter).  The material particles are spread so thinly that they are like a fine net-work united by invisible atoms of a more etherealized nature--so sublimated in fact that they cannot be impressed upon the most sensitive plates now used by photographers.  Spirits after they leave the earth plane cannot be photographed by the plates now in use--they do not possess gross enough atoms in the composition of their bodies, and have therefore to either materialize a body like an earthly one, or they may use another method which has been found successful and which is the one commonly used in the case of spirit photographs, where the spirits are visible to clairvoyant sight though invisible to material eyes.  This is simply described by saying these spirits make use of some of those astral envelopes or bodies that I have already described to you as forming from cloud masses of semi-material human atoms--astral shells which never served as the covering of any soul, and which are so plastic in their nature that spirits can mold them into their own likeness as a sculptor molds the clay.  These replicas can be and are photographed, bearing a greater or less resemblance to the spirit, according as his will power and his knowledge enable him to stamp his likeness upon them, and though they are not strictly speaking the photos of the spirits themselves, yet they are none the less evidence of spirit power and of the existence of the spirit who has made use of them, because each spirit must himself stamp his own identity upon the plastic astral form, while more advanced scientific spirits prepare that form to receive the impression."In the case of materialized spirits' photographs, the spirits really make a body from the more material atoms and clothe themselves in it."A clairvoyant seeing one of these astral forms about to be photographed would probably not be able to distinguish between it and a true spirit man or woman, because the power of distinguishing between them is not yet developed in mediums, neither, as a rule, do they know why a spirit that looks solid enough to them comes out on a photographic plate with a semi-transparent appearance.  The see the more spiritualized matter as well as the grosser astral atoms, therefore it appears to them as a solid body with well-rounded, well proportioned limbs, not as a transparent shadow of a spirit whose appearance may well give rise to the idea that returning spirits are mere shades, almost, in fact, empty shells--the real reason of the empty appearance being that, as I have said, the photographic appliances at present in use are not capable of transferring the whole spirit's form but only these grosser particles.  In the case of a fully materialized spirit being photographed, this transparent appearance does not exist.  The form is so perfect, so life-like and solid, that men turn round and say it, therefore, cannot be a spirit photograph at all--it must be nothing but the medium.  Blind seekers, who in trying to grasp a subject so vast, so full of the most subtle difficulties, bring to bear upon it only the knowledge suitable for mundane things, and then conclude that they are able to decide finally so momentous, so scientific a question!"But to return to your question.  Having shown you how a photograph may give a spirit whose appearance is like that of the traditional ghost, I will now show you how mortals may also see them as such, but to illustrate my meaning I will first ask you to imagine yourself back in your earthly body with no more powers of spirit sight than you possessed then.  Let us liken the material and spiritual sight to two eyes.  The one we will call the left, the other the right eye, and let the left stand for the material sight, the right the spiritual.  Suppose you stand with your back to the light and hold your forefinger in front of the right eye where it can be seen by that eye only, the left seeing only the wall before you--shut the right eye and the finger is invisible, yet it is there, only not in the line of vision for the left, or material, sight.  Now open both eyes at once and look at your finger and you will now see it certainly, but owing to a curious optical illusion it will appear transparent, a mere shadow of a finger, the wall being seen through it, and it may be likened to a ghost of a finger although you know it to be a solid reality."Thus you can imagine how a person whose material sight is alone open cannot see that which requires spiritual sight to discern, and how, when both the material and spiritual sight are open at the same mement a spirit may be visible but with the same transparent appearance as your finger had just now.  Hence has arisen the popular idea of a ghost.  A clairvoyant, looking at any spiritual object with the spiritual sight, does so with the material sight closed through the power of the controlling intelligence who directs that person's mediumship.  Therefore to him or to her the spiritual object does present the appearance of a solid reality such as a material finger appears when seen by the material sight alone."Few men know and still fewer consider that even their material sight is dependent upon the material atoms which fill the earth's atmosphere, and without which atoms there would be no light to see anything by.At night mortals can see the stars--even those which are not themselves suns--distant as they are, because they are material objects from which the light of the sun is reflected.  During the day the stars are still there, but the immense mass of material particles in the earth's atmosphere being illuminated by the reflecting of the sun's rays from them, causes so dense an atmosphere of light that the stars are veiled and no longer visible to material eyes.  Ascend, however, above this material atmosphere of illuminated atoms, and, behold, the stars are again visible at mid-day and the surrounding ether of space, being free from such material particles, is quite dark.  There is nothing to reflect the sun's rays.Thus, although the mortal would be nearer to the sun, yet its light is no longer visible to his material eyes, which can only see when there is some material object, however small, to reflect the light of the sun for him.  How, then, does man know that the light of the sun is traveling through the ether space to earth?  Only by reason and analogy, not by sight, for beyond the earth's atmosphere the sun's light is invisible to him.  Men know the light of the moon to be only the light of the sun reflected from the moon's surface.  Experience and experiment have proved this, and it is now universally admitted.  In like manner each little atom of material matter floating in the earth's atmosphere is an infinitesimal moon to reflect the sun's light for man and brighten earth with the splendor of these reflections.  So again those minute particles that are continually being thrown off into the atmosphere by the earth itself, are but the larger and grosser atoms enclosing or rather revolving round, minute spiritual germs that form a spiritual atmosphere around the earth and reflect for clairvoyants the spiritual elements of the light of the sun.  This spiritual atmosphere forms what is known as the astral plane, and bears the same proportion of density to astral bodies that the material atmosphere does to mortal bodies, and the light from the spiritual elements of the sun striking upon these spiritual particles is the light of the astral plane by which spirits see; the material atmosphere of earth being visible to the material sight of mortals.  Is it not, then, easy to imagine that the spirit spheres may exist around the earth, and between man and the material envelope of the sun without his being able to see them, by reason of the fact that his spiritual sight is closed and he can only see what is material?  The spiritual spheres and their inhabitants are certainly more transparent and intangible to mortal sight than his finger appeared just now.  Yet they exist and are as solid a reality as his finger, and are only invisible by reason of his imperfect sight, which is limited to material things of comparatively great density."

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXXII.--Through the Gates of Gold--My Mother--My Home in the Land of Bright Day--I Am Joined by Benedetto.

I was always fond of watching the clouds float over the sky and shape themselves into pictures suggested by my thoughts.  Since I reached the second sphere of the spirit land my skies have always had clouds floating over them, lovely light fleecy clouds which shape themselves into a thousand forms and take on the most lovely shades of color, sometimes becoming rainbow hued and at others of the most dazzling white, and then again vanishing away altogether.  I have been told by some spirits that in their skies they never see a cloud, all is serene clear beauty; and no doubt it is so in their lands, for in the spirit world our thoughts and wishes form our surroundings.  Thus, because I love to see clouds they are to be seen in my sky, at times veiling and softening its beauties and making cloud-castles for me to enjoy.Now, some time after I obtained my little home in the Morning Land I began to see between myself and my cloud-pictures a vision which, like the mirage seen in the desert, hovered on the horizon, distinct and lifelike, only to melt away as I gazed.  This was a most lovely ethereal gate of wrought gold, such as might be the entrance to some fairy land.  A clear stream of water flowed between myself and this gate, while trees so fresh, so green, so aerial, they seemed like fairy trees, arched their branches over it and clustered at the sides.  Again and again did I see this vision, and one day while I was gazing at it my father came unnoticed by me and stood by my side.  He touched my shoulder and said:"Franchezzo, that gate is inviting you to go nearer and see it for yourself.  It is the entrance to the highest circle of this second sphere, and it is within those gates that your new home is waiting for you.  You might have gone some time ago into those circles which lie between you and it, had not your affection for this little cottage made you content to remain in it.  Now, however, it would be as well for you to go forth and see if the wonders of that new land will not still more delight you.  I am, as you know, in the third sphere, which will, therefore, be still above you, but the nearer you approach to me the more easily can I visit you, and in your new home we shall be much oftener together."I was so surprised I could not answer for a little time.  It seemed incredible that I should be able so soon to pass those gates.  Then, taking my father's advice, I bade a regretful adieu to my little home (for I grow much attached to places which I live long in) and set forth to journey to this new country, the gate shining before me all the time, not fading away as it had done before.In the spirit land where the surface is not that of a round globe as with the planets, you do not see the objects on the horizon vanishing in the same way, and earth and sky meeting at last as one.  Instead you see the sky as a vast canopy overhead, and the circles which are above you seem like plateaux resting upon mountain tops on your horizon, and when you reach those mountains and see the new country spread out before you, there are always on its horizon again more mountains and fresh lands lying higher than those you have reached.  Thus also you can look down on those you have passed as upon a succession of terraces, each leading to a lower, less beautiful one, till at last you see the earth plane surrounding the earth itself, and then beyond that again (for those spirits whose sight is well developed) lie another succession of terrace-like lands leading down to Hell.  Thus circle melts into circle and sphere into sphere, only that between each sphere there exists a barrier of magnetic waves which repels those from a lower sphere who seek to pass it until their condition has become in harmony with the higher sphere.In my journey to the golden gates I passed through several circles of this second sphere, whose cities and dwelling-places would have tempted me to linger and admire them had I not been so eager to view the fair land which was now the goal of my hopes.  I knew, moreover, that I could at any time on my way to earth stop and explore those intermediate lands, because a spirit can always retrace his steps if he desires and visit those below him.At last I reached the top of the last range of mountains between me and the golden gates, and saw stretched out before my eyes a most lovely country.  Trees waved their branches as in welcome to me and flowers blossomed everywhere, while at my feet was the shining river and across it the golden gates.  With a great sense of joy in my heart I plunged into that beautiful river to swim across, its refreshing waters closing over my head as I dived and swam.  I had taken no heed to my clothing and as I landed on the farther side I looked to see myself dripping with water, but in a moment I found my clothing as dry as could be, and what was still stranger, my grey robe with its triple bordering of white had changed into one of the most dazzling snowy lustre with a golden girdle and golden borderings.  At the neck and wrists it was clasped with little plain gold clasps, and seemed to be like the finest muslin in texture.  I could scarce believe my senses.  I looked and looked again, and then, with a trembling, beating heart I approached those lovely gates.  As my hand touched them they glided apart and I passed into a wide road bordered by trees and flowering shrubs and plants of most lovely hues--like flowers of earth, indeed, but ah! how much more lovely, how much more fragrant no words of mine can convey to you.The waving branches of the trees bent over me in loving welcome as I passed, the flowers seemed to turn to me as greeting one who loved them well, at my feet there was the soft green sward, and overhead a sky so clear, so pure, so beautiful, the light shimmering through the trees as never did the light of earthly sun.  Before me were lovely blue and purple hills and the gleam of a fair lake, upon whose bosom tiny islets nestled crowned with the green foliage of groups of trees.  Here and there a little boat skimmed over the surface of the lake filled with happy spirits clad in shining robes of many different colors--so like to earth, so like my beloved Southern Land, and yet so changed, so glorified, so free from all taint of wrong and sin!As I passed up the broad flower-girt road a band of spirits came to meet and welcome me, amongst whom I recognized my father, my mother, my brother and a sister, besides many beloved friends of my youth.  They carried gossamer scarfs of red, white and green colors, which they were waving to me, while they strewed my path with masses of the fairest flowers as I approached, and all the time they sang the beautiful songs of our own land in welcome, their voices floating on the soft breeze in the perfection of unison and harmony.  I felt almost overcome with emotion; it seemed far too much happiness for one like me.And then my thoughts even in that bright scene turned to earth, to her who was of all the most dear to me, where all were so dear, and I thought, "Alas that she is not here to share with me the triumphs of this hour; she to whose love more than to any other thing I owe it."  As the thought came to me I suddenly beheld her spirit beside me, half asleep, half conscious, freed for a brief moment from the earthly body and borne in the arms of her chief guardian spirit.  Her dress was of the spirit world, white as a bride's and shimmering with sparkling gems like dew drops.  I turned and clasped her to my heart, and at my touch her soul awoke and she looked smilingly at me.  Then I presented her to my friends as my betrothed bride, and while she was still smiling at us all, her guide again drew near and threw over her a large white mantle.  He lifted her in his arms once more, and like a tired child she seemed to sink into slumber as he bore her away to her earthly body, which she had left for a time to share and crown this supreme moment of my joy.  Ah, me!  even in my joy I felt it hard to let her go, to think I could not keep her with me; but the thread of her earthly life was not yet fully spun, and I knew that she like others must travel the path of her earthly pilgrimage to its end.When my beloved was gone, my friends all clustered round me with tender embraces, my mother whom I had never seen since I was a little child--caressing my hair and covering my face with kisses as though I had been still the little son whom she had left on earth so many, many years ago that his memory of her had been but dim, and that the father had supplied the image of both parents in his thoughts.Then they led me to a lovely villa almost buried in the roses and jasmine which clustered over its walls and twined around the slender white pillars of the piazza, forming a curtain of flowers upon one side.  What a beautiful home it seemed!  How much beyond what I deserved!  Its rooms were spacious, and there were seven of them, each typical of a phase in my own character or some taste I had cultivated.My villa was upon the top of a hill overlooking the lake which lay many hundreds of feet below, its calm waters rippled by magnetic currents and the surrounding hills mirrored in its quiet bosom, and beyond the lake there was a wide valley.  As one looks down from a mountain top to the low hills and the dark valley and level plains below, so did I now look down from my new dwelling upon a panorama of the lower spheres and circles through which I had passed, to the earth plane and again to the earth itself, which lay like a star far below me.  I thought as I looked at it that there dwelt still my beloved, and there yet lay the field of my labors.  I have sat many times since gazing out on that lone star, the pictures of my past life floating in a long wave of memory across my day-dream, and with all my thoughts was interwoven the image of her who is my guiding star.The room from which I could see this view of the distant earth was my music-room, and in it were musical instruments of various kinds.  Flowers festooned the walls and soft draperies the windows, which required no glass in their frames to keep out the soft zephyrs of that fair land.  A honeysuckle, that was surely the same sweet plant which had so rejoiced my heart in my little cottage in the Morning Land, trailed its fragrant tendrils around the window, and on one of the walls hung my picture of my darling, framed with its pure white roses which always seemed to me an emblem of herself.  Here, too, I again found all my little treasures which I had collected in my dark days when hope seemed so far and the shadow of night was ever over me.  The room was full of soft masses of lovely spirit flowers, and the furniture was like that of earth only more light in appearance, more graceful and beautiful in every way.  There was a couch which I much admired.  It was supported by four half-kneeling figures of wood-nymphs, carved as it would seem from a marble of the purest white and even more transparent than alabaster.  Their extended arms and clasped hands formed the back and the upper and lower ends; their heads were crowned with leaves and their floating draperies fell around their forms in so graceful, so natural a manner, it was difficult to believe they were not living spirit-maidens.  The covering of this couch was of a texture like swan's down, only it was pale gold in color; so soft was it, it seemed to invite one to repose, and often have I lain upon it and looked out at the lovely scene and away to the dim star of earth with its weary pilgrims--its toiling souls.The next apartment was filled with beautiful pictures, lovely statues, and tropical flowers.  It was almost more like a conservatory than a room, the pictures being collected at one end of it and the statues and flowers forming a foreground of beauty that was like another and larger picture.  There was a little grotto with a fountain playing, the water sparkling like diamonds and rippling over the sides of the smaller basin into one larger still, with a murmuring sound which suggested a melody to me. Near this grotto was one picture which attracted me at once, for I recognized it as a scene from my earthly life.  It was a picture of one calm and peaceful evening in early summer when my beloved and I had floated on the quiet waters of an earthly river.  The setting sun glowing in the west was sinking behind a bank of trees, while the grey twilight crept over the hollows through the shade of the trees; and in our hearts there was a sense of peace and rest which raised our souls to Heaven.  I looked around and recognized many familiar scenes, which had likewise been full of happiness for me and in whose memories there was no sting.There were also many pictures of my friends, and of scenes in the spirit world.  From the windows I could behold another view than from my music-room.  This view showed those lands which were yet far above me, and whose towers and minarets and mountains shone through a dim haze of bright mist, now rainbow hued, now golden, or blue, or white.  I loved to change from the one view to the other, from the past which was so clear, to the future that was still dim, still veiled for me.In this picture salon there was all which could delight the eye or rest the body, for our bodies require repose as well as do yours on earth, and we can enjoy to rest upon a couch of down earned by our labors as much as you can enjoy the possession of fine furniture bought with gold earned by your work on earth.Another saloon was set apart for the entertainment of my friends, and here again, as in the lower sphere, there were tables set out with a feast of simple but delicious fruits, cakes, and other agreeable foods like earthly foods, only less material, and there was also the delicious sparkling wine of the spirit world which I have before mentioned.  Another room again was full of books recording my life and the lives of those whom I admired or loved.  There were also books upon many subjects, the peculiarity in them being that instead of being printed they seemed full of pictures, which when one studied them appeared to reflect the thoughts of those who had written the books more eloquently than any words.  Here, too, one could sit and receive the inspired thoughts of the great poets and literary men who inhabit the sphere above, and here have I sat, and inscribed upon the blank pages of some book laid open before me, poems to her who filled the larger half of all my thoughts.From this room we passed out to the garden, my father saying he would show me my chamber of repose, after our friends were gone.  Here, as in the house, flowers were everywhere, for I always loved flowers, they spoke to me of so many things and seemed to whisper such bright fancies, such pure thoughts.  There was a terrace around the house, and the garden seemed almost to overhang the lake, especially at one secluded corner which was fenced in with a bank of ferns and flowering shrubs and backed by a screen of trees.  This nook was a little to the side of the house and soon became my favorite resort; the ground was carpeted with soft green moss as you have not on earth--and flowers grew all around.  Here there was a seat whereon I loved to sit and look away to the earth, and fancy where my beloved one's home would be.  Across all those millions of miles of space my thoughts could reach her as hers could now reach me, for the magnetic cord of our love stretched between us and no power could ever shut us out from each other again.When I had seen and admired all, my friends led me back to the house and we all sat down to enjoy the feast of welcome which their love had prepared for me.  Ah! what a happy feast that was.  How we proposed the progression and happiness of each one, and then drank our toast in wine which left no intoxication behind, no after reckoning of shame to mar its refreshing qualities!  How delicious seemed this fruit, these numerous little delicacies which were all the creations of someone's love for me.  It seemed too much happiness, I felt as in a delightful dream from which I must surely wake.  At last all my friends left except my father and mother, and by them I was conducted to the upper chambers of the house.  They were three in number.  Two were for such friends as might come to stay with me, and both were most prettily furnished, most peaceful looking; the third room was for myself, my own room, where I would retire when I desired to rest and to have no companion but my own thoughts.  As we entered, the thing which attracted me most and filled me with more astonishment that anything I had yet seen, was the couch.  It was of snowy white gossamer, bordered with pale lilac and gold, while at the foot were two angels, carved, like the wood-nymphs, out of the dazzlilng white alabaster I have vainly tried to describe.  They were much larger than myself or any spirits whom I had seen, and their heads and extended wings seemed almost to touch the roof of my room, and the pose of these two most lovely figures was perfect in its grace.  Their feet scarce touched the floor and with their bending forms and half-outstretched wings they appeared to hover over the bed as though they had but just arrived from their celestial sphere.They were male and female forms, the man wearing on his head a helmet and bearing in his hand a sword, while the other hand held aloft a crown.  His figure was the perfection of manly beauty and grace, and his face with its perfect features so firmly moulded, expressing at once strength and gentleness, had to my eyes a look of calm regal majesty that was divine.The female figure at his side was smaller--more delicate in every way.  Her face was full of gentle, tender, womanly purity and beauty.  The eyes large and soft even though carved in marble, the long tresses of her hair half-veiling her head and shoulders.  One hand held a harp with seven strings, the other rested upon the shoulder of the male angel as though she supported herself with his strength, while the lovely head was half bent forward and rested upon her arm, and on her head she wore a crown of pure white lilies.The look upon her face was one of such exquisite sweetness, such maternal tenderness, it might well have served for that of the Virgin Mother herself.  The attitudes, the expressions of both were the most perfect realization of angelic beauty I have seen, and for some moments I could but gaze at them expecting them to melt away before my eyes.At last I turned to my father and asked how such lovely figures came to be in my room, and why they were represented with wings, since I had been told that angels had not really wings growing from their bodies at all."My son," he answered, "these lovely figures are the gift of your mother and myself to you, and we would fain think of you as reposing under the shadow of their wings, which represent in a material form the protection we would ever give you.  They are shown with wings because that is the symbol of the angelic spheres, but if you will look closely at them you will find that these wings are like a part of the drapery of the forms, and are not attached to the bodies at all as though they grew from the shoulder in the fashion earthly artists represent them.  The wings, moreover, express the power of angelic beings to soar upon these outstretched pinions into Heaven itself.  The shining helmet and the sword represent war, the helmet the war of the Intellect against Error, Darkness and Oppression.  The sword, the war man must ever wage against the passions of his lower nature.  The crown symbolizes the glory of virtue and self-conquest."The harp in the woman's hand shows that she is an angel of the musical sphere, and the crown of lilies expresses purity and love.  Her hand resting on the man's shoulder is to show that she derives her strength and power from him and from his stronger nature, while her attitude and looks as she bends over your couch express the tender love and protection of woman's maternal nature.  She is smaller than the man, because in you the masculine elements are stronger than the feminine.  In some representations of the angels of men's souls they are made of equal size and stature, because in those characters the masculine and feminine elements are both equal, both evenly balanced, but with you it is not so, therefore are they represented with the woman dependent upon the stronger one."The male angel typifies power and protection.  The female angel purity and love.  Together they show the eternal dual nature of the soul and that one-half is not complete without the other.  They also are the symbolical representation of the twin guardian angels of your soul whose wings may be said in a spiritual sense to be ever outstretched in protection over you."Shall I confess that even in that beautiful home there were times when I felt lonely?  I had this home, earned by myself, but as yet I had no one to share it with me, and I have always felt a pleasure to be doubly sweet when there was some one whom I could feel enjoyed it also.  The one companion of all others for whom I sighed was still on earth, and alas! I knew that not for many years could she join me.  Then Faithful Friend was in a circle of the sphere above me in a home of his own, and as for Hassein, he was far above us both, so that though I saw them at times as well as my dear father and mother, there was no one to share my life with me en bon camarade, no one to watch for my home-coming, and no one for whom in my turn I could watch.  I was often on earth--often with my darling--but I found that with my advanced position in the spirit world I could not remain for so long at a time as I had been wont to do.  It had upon my spirit much the effect of trying to live in a foggy atmosphere or down a coal mine, and I had to return more frequently to the spirit land to recover myself.I used to sit in my lovely rooms and sigh to myself, "Ah, if I had but some one to speak with, some congenial soul to whom I might express all the thoughts which crowd my mind."  It was therefore with the greatest pleasure that I received a visit from Faithful Friend, and heard the suggestion he had to make to me."I have come," said he, "on behalf of a friend who has just come to this circle of the sphere, but who has not yet earned for himself a home of his own and therefore desires to find one with some friend more richly endowed than himself.  He has no relatives here and I thought that you might be glad of his companionship.""Most truly, I would be delighted to share my home with your friend."Faithful Friend laughed.  "He may be called your friend also, for you know him.  It is Benedetto.""Benedetto!" I cried in astonishment and delight.  "Ah! then he will indeed be doubly welcome.  Bring him here as soon as possible.""He is here now--he awaits at your door; he would not come with me till he was sure you would really be glad to welcome him.""No one could be more so," I said.  "Let us go at once and bring him in."So we went to the door and there he stood, looking very different from when I had last seen him in that awful city of the lower sphere--then so sad, weighed down, so oppressed--now so bright, his robes, like mine, of purest white, and though his face was still sad in expression yet there was peace, and there was hope in the eyes he raised to mine as I clasped his hand and embraced him as we of my Southern Land embrace those we love and honor.  It was with much pleasure that we met--we who had both so sinned and so suffered--and we were henceforth to be as brothers.Thus it was that my home became no more solitary, for, when one of us returns from our labors, the other is there to greet him, to share the joy and the care, and to talk over the success or the failure.

     
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXXIII.--My Vision of the Spheres.

How can I tell of the many friends who came to visit me in this bright home, of the cities I saw in that fair land, the lovely scenes I visited?  I cannot.  It would take volumes, and already my narrative has reached its limits.  I shall only tell of one more vision that I had, because in it I was shown a new path wherein I was to labor, one in which I could apply to the aid of others the lessons I had learned in my wanderings.I was lying on the couch in my room and had awakened from a long slumber.  I was watching, as I often did, those two most beautiful figures of my guardian angels, and seeing fresh beauties, fresh meanings in their faces and their attitudes every time I looked at them, when I became conscious that my Eastern guide, Ahrinziman, in his far-off sphere was seeking to communicate with me.  I therefore allowed myself to become perfectly passive and soon felt a great cloud of light of a dazzling white misty substance surrounding me.  It seemed to shut out the walls of my room and everything from me.  Then my soul seemed to arise from my spirit body and float away, leaving my spirit envelope lying upon the couch.I appeared to pass upwards and still upwards, as though the will of my powerful guide was summoning me to him, and I floated on and on with a sense of lightness which even as a spirit I had never felt before.At last I alighted upon the summit of a high mountain, from which I could behold the earth and its lower and higher spheres revolving below me.  I also saw that sphere which was my home, but it appeared to lie far below the height upon which I stood.Beside me was Ahrinziman, and as in a dream I heard his voice speaking to me and saying:"Behold, son of my adoption, the new path in which I would have you labor.  Behold earth and her attendant spheres, and see how important to her welfare is this work in which I would have you to take part.  See now the value of the power you have gained in your journey to the Kingdoms of Hell, since it will enable you to become one of the great army who daily and hourly protect mortal men from the assaults of Hell's inhabitants.  Behold this panorama of the spheres and learn how you can assist in a work as mighty as the spheres themselves."I looked to where he pointed, and I beheld the circling belt of the great earth plane, its magnetic currents like the ebb and flow of an ocean tide, bearing on their waves countless millions upon millions of spirits.  I saw all those strange elemental astral forms, some grotesque, some hideous, some beautiful.  I saw also the earth-bound spirits of men and women still tied by their gross pleasures or their sinful lives, many of them using the organisms of mortals to gratify their degraded cravings.  I beheld these and kindred mysteries of the earth plane, and I likewise beheld sweeping up from the dark spheres below waves of dark and awful beings, ten times more deadly unto man in their influence over him than those dark spirits of the earth plane.  I saw these darker beings crowd around man and cluster thickly near him, and where they gathered they shut out the brightness of the spiritual sun whose rays shine down upon the earth continually.  They shut out this light, with the dark mass of their own cruel evil thoughts, and where this cloud rested there came murder and robbery; and cruelty and lust, and every kind of oppression were in their train, and death and sorrow followed them.  Wherever man had cast aside from him the restraints of his conscience and had given way to greed and selfishness, and pride and ambition, there did these dark beings gather, shutting out the light of truth with their dark bodies.And again I saw many mortals who mourned for the dear ones they had loved and lost, weeping most bitter tears because they could see them no more.  And all the time I saw those for whom they mourned standing beside them, seeking with all their power to show that they still lived, still hovered near, and that death had not robbed of one loving thought, one tender wish, those whom death had left behind to mourn.  All in vain seemed their efforts.  The living could not see or hear them, and the poor sorrowing spirits could not go away to their bright spheres because while those they had left so mourned for them they were tied to the earth plane by the chains of their love, and the light of their spirit lamps grew dim and faded as they thus hung about the atmosphere of earth in helpless sorrow.And Ahrinziman said to me:  "Is there no need here for the means of communication between these two, the living and the so-called dead, that the sorrowful ones on both sides may be comforted?  And, again, is there no need for communication that those other sinful selfish men may be told of the dark beings hovering around them who seek to drag their souls to hell?"Then I beheld a glorious dazzling light as of a sun in splendor, shining as no mortal eye ever saw the sun shine on earth.  And its rays dispelled the clouds of darkness and sorrow, and I heard a glorious strain of music from the celestial spheres, and I thought surely now man will hear this music and see this light and be comforted.  But they could not--their ears were closed by the false ideas they had gathered, and the dust and dross of earth clogged their spirits and made their eyes blind to the glorious light which shone for them in vain.Then I beheld other mortals whose spiritual sight was partly unveiled and whose ears were not quite deaf, and they spoke of the spirit world and its wondrous beauties.  They felt great thoughts and put them into the language of earth.  They heard the wondrous music and tried to give it expression.  They saw lovely visions and tried to paint them, as like to those of the spirit as the limits of their earthly environments would allow.  And these mortals were termed geniuses, and their words and their music and their pictures all helped to raise men's souls nearer to the God who gave that soul--for all that is highest and purest and best comes from the inspiration of the spirit world.Yet with all this beauty of art and music and literature--with all these aspirations--with all the fervor of religious feeling, there was still no way opened by which men on earth could hold communion with the loved ones who had gone before them into that land which dwellers upon earth have called the Land of Shades, and from whose bourn, they thought, no traveler could return--a land that was all vague and misty to their thought.  And there was likewise no means by which those spirit ones who sought to help man to a higher, purer knowledge of Truth could communicate with him directly.  The ideas and the fallacies of ancient theories formulated in the days of the world's infancy continually mixed with the newer, more perfect sight which the spirit world sought to give, and clouded its clearness and refracted its rays so that they reached the minds of mortals broken and imperfect.Then I beheld that the walls of the material life were pierced with many doors, and at each door stood an angel to guard it, and from each door on earth even to the highest spheres I saw a great chain of spirits, each link being one stage higher than the one below it, and to mortals upon earth were given the keys of these doors that they might keep them open and that between mortals and the spirit world there might be communication.But, alas! as time passed on I saw that many of those who held these keys were not faithful.  They were allured by the joys and the gifts of earth, and turned aside and suffered their doors to close.  Others again kept their doors but partly open and where only light and truth should have shown they suffered errors and darkness to creep in, and again the light from the spirit world was sullied and broken as it passed through these darkened doorways.  Sill more sad, as time passed on, the light ceased to shine at all and gave place to the thick impure rays from dark deceitful spirits from the lower sphere, and at last the angel would close that door to be opened no more on earth.Then I turned from this sad sight and beheld many new doors opened where mortals stood, whose hearts were pure and unselfish and unsullied by the desires of earth; and through these doors poured such a flood of light upon the earth that my eyes were dazzled, and I had to turn aside.  When I looked again I saw these doorways thronged by spirits, beautiful, bright spirits, and others whose raiment was dark and their hearts sad because their lives had been sinful, but in whose souls there was a desire for good, and there were spirits who were fair and bright, but sorrowful, because they could speak no more with those whom they had left on earth; and I beheld the sorrowful and the sinful spirits alike comforted and helped by means of the communication with the earth, and in the hearts of many mortals there was joy, for death's dark curtain was drawn aside and there was news from those beyond the grave.Then I saw pass before me great armies of spirits from all the higher spheres, their raiment of purest white and their helmets of silver and gold glittering in the glorious spiritual light.  And some among them seemed to be the leaders who directed the others in their work.  And I asked, "Who are these?  Were they ever mortal men?"And Ahrinziman answered me:  "These were not only mortal men but they were many of them men of evil lives, who by reason thereof descended to those Kingdoms of Hell which you have seen, but who because of their great repentance and the many and great works of atonement which they have done, and the perfect conquest over their own lower natures which they have gained, are now the leaders in the armies of light, the strong warriors who protect men from the evils of those lower spheres."From time to time I saw dark masses of spirits, like waves washing on a shore and flowing over portions of the earth, drawn thither by man's own evil desires and greedy selfishness, and then I would see them driven back by the armies of light spirits, for between these two there was a constant conflict, and the prize for which they contended was man's soul; and yet these two contending forces had no weapons but their wills.  They fought not save with the repelling powers of their magnetism which was so antagonistic that neither could long remain in close contact with the other.Ahrinziman pointed out to me one door at which stood a mortal woman, and said:  "Behold the chain there is incomplete; it wants still one link between her and the spirit chain.  Go down and form that link, and then will your strength protect her and make her strong; then will you guard her from those dark spirits who hover near, and help her to keep open her door.  Your wanderings in those lower spheres have given you the power of repelling their inhabitants, and where stronger power is required it will be sent to protect her--and those who seek to communicate through her will do so only when you see fit, and when you desire to rest in the spirit world another guide will take your place.  And now look again at the earth and the conflict that surrounds it."I looked as he spoke, and saw black thunder clouds hovering over the earth and gathering dark as night, and a sound as of a rushing storm swept upwards from the dark spheres of hell, and like the waves of a storm-tossed ocean these dark clouds of spirits rolled up against the sea of bright spirits, sweeping them back and rolling over the earth as though to blot out from it the light of truth, and they assailed each door of light and sought to overwhelm it.  Then did this war in the spirit world become a war amongst men--nation fighting against nation for supremacy.  It seemed as though in the great thirst for wealth and greed for conquest, all nations and all peoples must be engulfed, so universal was this war.  And I looked to see were there none to aid, none who would come forth from the realms of light and wrest from the dark spirits their power over the earth.  The seething mass of dark spirits were attacking those doors of light and striving to sweep away those poor faithful mortals who stood within them, that man might be driven back to the days of his ignorance again.Then it was that like a Star in the East I saw a light, glittering and dazzling all by its brightness, and it came down and down, and grew and grew till I saw it was a vast host of radiant angels from the heavenly spheres, and with their coming those other bright spirits whom I had seen driven back by the forces of evil gathered together again and joined those glorious warriors, and this great ocean of light, this mighty host of bright spirits swept down to earth and surrounded it with a great belt of glorious light.  Everywhere I saw the rays of light, like spears, darting down and rending the dark mass in a thousand places.  Like swords of fire flashed these dazzling rays and cut through the dark wall of spirits on all sides, scattering them to the four winds of heaven.  Vainly did their leaders seek to gather their forces together again, vainly seek to drive them on.  A stronger power was opposed to them, and they were hurled back by the brightness of these hosts of heaven till, like a dark and evil mist, they sank down, rolling back to those dark spheres from which they had come."And who were these bright angels?" I asked again, "these warriors who never drew back yet never slew, who held in check these mighty forces of evil, not with the sword of destruction but by the force of their mighty wills, by the eternal power of good over evil?"And the answer was:  "They are those who are also the redeemed ones of the darkest spheres, who long, long ages ago have washed their sin-stained garments in the pools of repentance, and have, by their own labors, risen from the ashes of their dead selves to higher things, not through a belief in the sacrifice of an innocent life for their sins, but by many years of earnest labors--many acts of atonement--by sorrow and by bitter tears--by many weary hours of striving to conquer first the evil in themselves that they who have overcome may help others who sin to do so  likewise.  These are the angels of the heavenly spheres of earth, once men like themselves and able to sympathize with all the struggles of sinful men.  A might host they are, ever strong to protect, powerful to save."My vision of the earth and its surroundings faded away, and in its stead I beheld one lone star shining above me with a pure silver light.  And its ray fell like a thin thread of silver upon the earth and upon the spot where my beloved dwelt.  Ahrinziman said to me:"Behold the star of her earthly destiny, how clear and pure it shines, and know, oh! beloved pupil, that for each soul born upon earth there shines in the spiritual heavens such a star whose path is marked out when the soul is born; a path it must follow to the end, unless by an act of suicide it sever the thread of the earthly life and by thus transgressing a law of nature plunge itself into great sorrow and suffering.""Do you mean that the fate of every soul is fixed, and that we are but straws floating on the stream of our destiny?""Not quite.  The great events of the earth life are fixed, they will inevitably be encountered at certain periods of the earthly existence, and they are such events as those wise guardians of the angelic spheres deem to be calculated to develop and educate that soul; how these events will affect the life of each soul--whether they shall be the turning point for good or ill, for happiness or for sorrow--rests with the soul itself, and this is the prerogative of our free will, without which we would be but puppets, irresponsible for our acts and worthy of neither reward nor punishment for them.  But to return to that star--note that while the mortal follows the destined path with earnest endeavor to do right in all things, while the soul is pure and the thoughts unselfish, then does that star shine out with a clear unsullied ray, and light the pathway of the soul.  The light of this star comes from the soul and is the reflection of its purity.  If, then, the soul cease to be pure, if it develp its lower instead of its higher attributes, the star of that soul's destiny will grow pale and faint, the light flickering like some will-o'-the-wisp hovering over a dark morass; no longer will it shine as a clear beacon of the soul; and at last, if the soul become very evil, the light of the star will die out and expire, to shine no more upon its earthly path."It is by watching these spiritual stars and tracing the path marked out for them in the spiritual heavens, that spirit seers are able to foretell the fate of each soul, and from the light given by the star to say whether the life of the soul is good or evil.  Adieu, and may the new field of your labors yield you the fairest fruits."He ceased speaking and my soul seemed to sink down and down till I reached the spirit body I had left lying on my couch, and for a brief moment as I re-entered it I lost consciousness; then I awoke to find myself in my own room, with those beautiful white angels hovering over me, symbols, as my father had said, of eternal protection and love.

    
A Wanderer in the Sprit Lands, by Franchezzo (A. Farnese), [1896], at sacred-texts.com

CHAPTER XXXIV.--Conclusion.

My task is done, my story told, and it but remains for me to say to all who read it, that I trust they will believe it is as it professes to be, the true narrative of a repentant soul who has passed from darkness into light, and I would have them ask themselves if it might not be well to profit by the experiences of others and to weigh well the evidence for and against the possibility of the spirit's return.  And you who would think the gospel of mercy after death too easy a one, too lenient to the sinners, do you know what it is to suffer all the pangs of an awakened conscience?  Have you seen that path of bitter tears, of weary effort, which the soul must climb if it would return to God?  Do you realize what it means to undo, step by step, through years of darkness and suffering and bitter anguish of soul, the sinful acts and words and thoughts of an earthly lifetime?--for even to the uttermost farthing must the debt be paid; each must drink to the last dregs the cup that he has filled.  Can you imagine what it is to hover around the earth in helpless, hopeless impotence, beholding the bitter curse of your sins working their baneful effects upon the descendants you have left, with the taint of your past lurking in their blood and poisoning it?  To know that each of these tainted lives--all these beings cursed with evil propensities ere they were born--have become a charge upon your conscience in so far as you have contributed to make them what they are, clogs which will continue to drag back your soul when it attempts to rise, until you shall have made due atonement to them, and helped to raise them from that slough into which your unbridled passions have contributed to sink them?  Do you understand now how and why there may be spirits working still about the earth who died hundreds of years ago?  Can you imagine how a spirit must feel who seeks from the grave to call aloud to others, and especially to those he has betrayed to their ruin as well as his own, and finds that all ears are deaf to his words, all hearts are closed to his cries of anguish and remorse?  He cannot now undo one foolish or revengeful act.  He cannot avert one single consequence of suffering which he has brought upon others or himself; an awful wall has risen, a great gulf opened between him and the world of living men on earth, and unless some kind hand will bridge it over for him and help him to return and speak with those whom he has wronged, even the confession of his sorrow--even such tardy reparation as he may still make is denied to him.  And is there, then, no need that those who have passed beyond the tomb should return and warn their brethren, even as Dives sought to return and could not?  Are men on earth so good that they require no voice to echo to them from beyond the gates of death a foreshadowing of the fate awaiting them?  Far easier were it for man to repent now while still on earth than to wait till he goes to that land where he can deal with the things of earth no more, save through the organisms of others.I met a spirit once who in the reign of Queene Anne had defrauded another of a property by means of forged title deeds, and who when I saw him was still earth-bound to that house and land, utterly unable to break his chains until the help was given him of a medium through whom he confessed where he had hidden the true title deeds, and gave the names of those to whom of right the property should belong.  This poor spirit was freed by his confession from his chain to that house, but not from his imprisonment to the earth plane.  He had to work there till his efforts had raised up and helped onward those whom he had driven into the ways of sin and death by his crime.  Not till he has done so can this spirit hope to leave the earth plane, and there he still works, striving to undo the effects of his past sin.  Will anyone say his punishment was too light?  Shall anyone judge his brother man and say at what point God's mercy shall stop and that sinner be doomed eternally?  Ah, no!  Few dare to face the true meaning of their creeds or to follow out even in thought the bitter and awful consequences of a belief in eternal punishment for any of the erring children of God.I have in these pages sought to show what has been the true experience of one whom the churches might deem a lost soul, since I died without a belief in any church, any religion, and but a shadowy belief in a God.  My own conscience ever whispered to me that there must be a Supreme, a Divine Being, but I stifled the thought and thrust it from me, cheating myself into a sense of security and indifference akin to that of the foolish ostrich which buries its head in the sand and fancies none can see it; and in all my wanderings, although I have indeed learned that there is a Divine Omnipotent Ruler of the Universe--its upholder and sustainer--I have not learned that he can be reduced to a personality, a definite shape in the likeness of man, a something whose attributes we finite creatures can argue about and settle.  Neither have I seen anything which would incline me to believe in one form of religious belief rather than in another.  What I have learned is to free the mind, if possible, from the boundaries of any and every creed.The infancy of the race of planetary man, when his mental condition resembles that of a child, may be called the Age of Faith.  The Mother Church supplies for him the comfort and hope of immortality and takes from his mind the burden of thinking out for himself a theory of First Cause, which will account to him for his own existence and that of his surroundings.  Faith steps in as a maternal satisfier of the longings of his imperfectly developed soul and the man of a primitive race believes without questioning why he does so.  Among the early tribes of savages the more spiritualized men become the mystery men, and then the priests, and as age succeeds to age the idea of an established church is formulated.Next comes the Age of Reason, when the development of man's intellectual faculties causes him to be no longer satisfied with blind faith in the unknown, the mother's milk of the Churches no longer assuages his mental hunger, he requires stronger food, and if it be withheld, he breaks away from the fostering care of Mother Church which once sustained but which now only cramps and cripples the growing and expanding soul.  Man's reason demands greater freedom and its due share of nourishment, and must find it somewhere, and in the struggle between the rebellious growing child and the Mother Church, who seeks to retain still the power she wielded over the infant, the Faith that once sufficed as food comes to be regarded as something nauseous and to be rejected at all cost, hence the Age of Reason becomes a time of uprootal of all the cherished beliefs of the past.Then comes another stage, in which the child, now grown to be a youth who has seen and tasted for himself the joys and sorrows, the penalties, and pleasures and benefits of reason, and has thereby learned to put a juster value on the powers and limitations of his own reasoning faculties, looks back at the faith he once despised, and recognizes that it also has its beauties and its value.  He sees that though faith alone cannot suffice for the nourishment of the soul beyond its infant stage, yet reason alone, devoid of faith, is but a cold hard fare upon which to sustain the soul now becoming conscious of the immeasurable and boundless universe by which it is surrounded, and of the many mysteries it contains--mysteries reason alone is not able to explain.  Man turns back to faith once more and seeks to unite it with reason, that henceforth they may assist each other.Now Faith and Reason are the central thought principles of two different spheres of thought in the spirit world.  Faith is the vitalizing principle of religion or ecclesiasticism, as Reason is of philosophy.  These two schools of thought which appear at first sight opposed to each other, are none the less capable of being blended in the mental development of the same personality, the properly balanced mind being that in which they are equally proportioned.  Where one predominates over the other to a great degree, the individual--be he mortal or disembodied spirit--will be narrow-minded in one direction or the other and incapable of taking a just view of any mental problem.  His mind will resemble a two wheeled gig which has a big and a little wheel attached to the same axle, and in consequence neither wheel can make due progress, the mental gig coming to a stop till the defect be remedied.A man may be thoroughly conscientious in his desire for truth, but if his intellectual as well as his moral faculties have not been equally developed, his mind will be like a highway blocked by huge masses of error, so that the ethereal rays from the star of truth cannot penetrate it; they are broken and refracted by the obstructions, so that either they do not reach the man's soul at all or they are such distorted images of the truth that they are simply a source of prejudice and error.  The intellect may be called the eye of the soul, and if the sight of that eye be imperfect the soul remains in mental darkness, however earnest may be its desire for light.  The mental sight must be developed and used ere it can become clear and strong.Blind ignorant faith is no safeguard against error.  The history of religious persecutions in all ages is surely proof of that.  The great minds of earth to whom great intellectual discoveries are due have been those in which the moral and intellectual powers are equally balanced, and the perfect man or angel will be the man in whom all the qualities of the soul have been developed to their highest point.Every attribute of the soul, mental and moral, has its corresponding ray of color, and the blending of these forms the beautiful and varied tints of the rainbow, and like it they melt into one another to form the perfect whole.In some souls the development of certain faculties will take place more rapidly than that of others; in some certain seed germs of intellect and morality will lie fallow and give no sign that they exist, but they are none the less there, and either on earth or in the great Hereafter they will begin to grow and to blossom into perfection.Evil is caused by the lack of development of the moral attributes in certain souls and the over development of other qualities.  The souls which are now inhabiting the lower spheres are simply passing through the process of eduction needful to awaken into active life and growth the dormant moral faculties, and terrible as are the evils and sufferings wrought in the process they are yet necessary and beneficent in their ultimate results.In the sphere where I now dwell there is a magnificent and beautiful palace belonging to the Brotherhood of Hope.  This palace is the meeting place for all members of our Brotherhood, and in it there is a fine hall built of what is the spiritual counterpart of white marble.  This hall is called the "Hall of Lecture," and in it we assemble to listen to discourses delivered to us by advanced spirits from the higher sphere.  At the upper end there is a magnificent picture called "The Perfect Man."  That is to say it represents a man, or rather angel, who is relatively perfect.  I say relatively perfect, because even the utmost perfection which can be imagined or attained, can only be relative to the still greater heights which must be eternally possible for the soul.  Unlike Alexander who mourned that he had left no more worlds to conquer, the soul has no limits put to the possibilities of its intellectual and moral conquests.  The universe of mind is as boundless as that of matter, and as eternal.  Hence none can use the word perfect as implying a point beyond which progress is impossible.In the picture this relatively perfect angel is represented as standing on the highest pinnacle of the celestial spheres.  The earth and her attendant spheres lie far below him.  His gaze is turned with an expression of wonder, delight, and awe to those far distant regions which lie beyond the power of mortal mind to grasp, regions which lie beyond our solar universe.  They are become for the angel his new Land of Promise.On his head the angel wears a golden helmet, symbolizing spiritual strength and conquest.  On one arm he bears a silver shield typical of the Protection of Faith.  His garments are of dazzling white showing the purity of his soul, and the wide outstretched wings symbolize the power of intellect to soar into the highest thought-regions of the universe.  Behind the angel there is a white cloud spanned by a rainbow whose every tint and shade blended into perfect harmony shows that the angel has developed to the highest degree every intellectual and moral attribute of his soul.The rich coloring of this picture, the purity of its dazzling white, the brilliancy of its glowing tints, no pen can describe, no earthly brush could ever paint, and yet I am told it falls far short of the beauty of the original picture, which is in the highest sphere of all, and which represents a former grand master of our order who has passed on to spheres beyond the limits of our solar system.  Replicas of this picture are to be seen in the highest circle of each earth sphere in the buildings belonging to the Brotherhood of Hope, and they show the connecting links between our Brotherhood and the celestial spheres of the solar system, and also to what heights all may aspire in the ages of eternity before us.  Yes, each one of us, the most degraded brother who labors in the lowest sphere of earth, and even the most degraded soul that struggles there in darkness and sin unspeakable, is not shut out, for all souls are equal before God and there is nothing which has been attained by one that may not be attained by all if they but strive earnestly for it.Such, then, is the knowledge I have gained, such the beliefs I have arrived at since I passed from earth life, but I cannot say I have seen that any particular belief helps or retards the soul's progress, except in so far as this, that some creeds have a tendency to cramp the mind and obscure the clearness of its vision and distort its ideas of right and wrong, thereby preventing those who hold those beliefs from possessing the perfect freedom of thought and absence of prejudice which can alone fit the soul to rise to the highest spheres.I have written this story of my wanderings in the hope that amongst those who read it may be found some who will think it worth while to inquire whether, after all, it may not be, as it professes to be, a true story.  There may also be others who have lost those who were very dear to them, but whose lives were not such as gave hope that they could be numbered with those whom the churches call "The Blessed Dead who die in the Lord"--dear friends who have not died in the paths of goodness and truth--I would ask those mourners to take hope and to believe that their beloved but erring friends may not be wholly lost--not utterly beyond hope, yes, even though some may have perished by their own hands and under circumstances which would seem to preclude all hope.  I would ask those on earth to think over all that I have said and to ask themselves whether even yet their prayers and their sympathy may not be able to help and comfort those who need all the help and comfort that can be given to them.From my home in the Bright Land--so like the land of my birth--I go still to work upon the earth plane and among those who are unhappy.  I also help to carry forward the great work of spirit communion between the living of earth and those whom they call dead.I spend a portion of each day with my beloved, and I am able to help and protect her in many ways.  I am also cheered in my home in the spirit land by the visits of many friends and companions of my wanderings, and in that bright land surrounded by so many memorials of love and friendship, I await with a grateful heart that happy time when my beloved one's earthly pilgrimage shall be finished, when her lamp of life shall have burned out and her star of earth has set, and she shall come to join me in an even brighter home, where for us both shall shine eternally the twin stars of Hope and Love.(The End.)




===== BOOK: wta.txt =====



With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

WITH THE ADEPTS

  

AN ADVENTURE AMONG THE ROSICRUCIANS

  

BY FRANZ HARTMANN

  

NEW AND REVISED EDITION

  

WILLIAM RIDER & SON: LONDON

  

[1910]

Scanned proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, September 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

           

       PREFACE

       <page vii>

     
      I.

       THE EXCURSION

       <page 1>

     
      II.

       THE MONASTERY

       <page 20>

     
      III.

       UNEXPECTED   REVELATIONS

       <page 45>

     
      IV.

       THE REFECTORY

       <page 71>

     
      V.

       RECOLLECTIONS   OF PAST LIVES

       <page 88>

     
      VI.

       THE ALCHEMICAL   LABORATORY

       <page 102>

     
      VII.

       THE HIGHER LIFE

       <page 135>

     
      VIII.

       BLACK MAGIC

       <page 158>

     
      IX.

       THE END

       <page 170>

     
   

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE

THE following account of a psychic experience has been gathered from notes handed to me by a friend, a writer of considerable repute. Whether the adventures told therein are to be regarded as a dream, or an actual experience on the astral plane, I must leave to the reader to judge.

F. H.

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

WITH THE ADEPTS

  

I

  

THE EXCURSION

I AM penning these lines in a little village in the Alpine mountains, in Southern Bavaria, and only a short distance from the Austrian frontier. The impressions I received yesterday are still fresh in my mind; the experiences which caused them were as real to me as any other experience caused by the events of every-day life; nevertheless, they were of such an extraordinary character that I cannot persuade myself that they were more than a dream.

Having finished the long and tedious labour of investigating the history of the Rosicrucians, and studying old worm-eaten books, mouldy manuscripts hardly legible from age, passing days and parts of night in convent libraries and antiquarian shops, collecting and copying everything that seemed to be of any value for my object in view, and having at last finished my task, I made up my mind to grant to myself

[p. 2]

a few holidays, and to spend them among the sublime scenery of the Tyrolian Alps.

The mountains were not yet free from snow, although the spring had advanced; but I was anxious to escape the turmoil and noise of the city, to breathe once more the pure and exhilarating air of the mountain heights, to see the shining glaciers glistening like vast mirrors in the light of the rising sun, and to share the feeling of the poet Byron when he wrote the following verses:--

"He who ascends to mountain tops shall find
    The loftiest peaks most wrapp'd in clouds and snow;
  He who surpasses or subdues mankind
    Must look down on the hate of those below;
  Though high above the sun of glory glow,
    And far beneath the earth and ocean spread,
  Round him are icy rocks, and loudly blow
    Contending tempests on his naked head,
  And thus reward the toils which to these summits led."

Boarding the train, I soon arrived at the foot of the hills. Thence I wandered on foot, highly enjoying the change from the smoky atmosphere of the crowded streets to the fresh air of the country, pregnant with the odour of the pines and the daisies, the latter of which were appearing in places from which the snow was gone. The road led up through the valley of the river, and, as I advanced, the valley grew narrower and the sides of the mountain steeper. Here and there were clusters of farmhouses, and some rustic cottages clinging

[p. 3]

to the projecting rocks of the mountains as if seeking protection against the storms which often blow through these valleys. The sun was sinking down below the western horizon, and gilded the snowy peaks of the mountains and the brazen cross on the top of the spire of the little village church, from which tolled the curfew, or, as it is here called, the Ave Maria, when I arrived at the place selected as a starting-point for my excursions into the mountains.

Finding a hospitable reception in the village inn, I soon retired to rest, and awoke early in the morning, having been aroused from my sleep by the tinkling of little bells hanging around the necks of the goats which were sent out to their pasturage. I arose and stepped to the window. The shadows of night were fleeing before the approach of the coming sun; the dawn had begun, and before me in sublime array stood the grand old peaks of the mountains, reminding me of Edwin Arnold's description of the view to be had from the windows of Prince Siddartha's palace, Vishramvan. There the grand mountains stood:--

"Ranged in white ranks against the blue-untrod
  Infinite, wonderful--whose uplands vast,
  And lifted universe of crest and crag,
  Shoulder and shelf, green slope and icy horn,
  Riven ravine and splintered precipice,
  Led climbing thought higher and higher, until
  It seemed to stand in heaven and speak with gods."

[p. 4]

Soon I was on the way, and wandered farther up through the valley along the river-bed; but the river was here merely a small stream, rushing and dancing wildly over the rocks, while farther down, where it had grown big, it flowed in tranquil majesty through the plains. The valley through which I wandered seemed to cut through long ranges of mountains, and other valleys opened into this. Some of these valleys were known to me, for I had roamed through them and explored their mysterious recesses, caves, and forests some twenty years ago; but there was one mysterious valley which had not yet been explored by me, and which led towards a high, bifurcated mountain peak, whose summit was said to be inaccessible, and upon which the foot of no mortal had ever trod. Towards this valley I seemed to be attracted by some invisible but irresistible power. I felt as if, in its unexplored depths at the foot of this inaccessible mountain, the secret and undefined longings of my heart were to be satisfied; as if there a mystery was to be revealed to me, whose solution could not be found in books.

The sun had not yet risen above the horizon, and the dark woods to the right and left were of a uniform colour. As I entered the narrow, mysterious valley, the path rose gradually, leading through a dark forest along the side

[p. 5]

of a mountain. Slowly and almost imperceptibly it ascended; at first it was near the rushing stream, but as I progressed the roar of the torrent sounded more and more distant; the foaming stream itself seemed to sink farther down. At last the forest became thinner, and the dark woods were now far below me; but before me and above the intervening trees rose the naked cliffs of the inaccessible mountain. Still the path led up higher. Soon the distant noise of a waterfall was heard, and I approached again the bed of the mountain stream, which, however, now seemed to be a mass of rocks, split into pieces by some giant power, lying about in wild confusion, while the white foam of the water danced between the cliffs.

Here and there were little islands of soil covered with green vegetation. They stood like isolated tables in the midst of the wilderness; for the combined action of water and air had decomposed and eaten away a great part of their foundations, and they looked like plates of soil resting upon small pedestals; hard as they are, their final tumble is merely a question of time, for their foundations are slowly crumbling away.

My path took me upwards, sometimes nearing the river-bed, sometimes receding from it, leading sometimes over steep rocks, and again descending

[p. 6]

to the bottom of ravines formed by the melting snows. Thus I entered deep into the mysterious valley, when the first signs of sunrise appeared upon the cliffs above my head. One of these towering peaks was crowned with a halo of light, while beyond it the full sunlight streamed into the valley below. A mild breeze swept through the tops of the trees, and the foliage of the birch-trees, with which the pine forest was sprinkled, trembled in the morning air. No sound could now be heard, except occasionally the note of a titmouse, and more rarely the cry of a hawk which rose in long-drawn, spiral motions high up into the air to begin its work of the day.

Now the ash-gray walls and cliffs began to assume a pale silvery hue, while in the rents and crags of the rock the dark blue shade seemed to resist the influence of the light. Looking backwards, I saw how the valley widened, and, far down, the stream could be seen as it wandered towards the plains. Obtaining more room as it advanced, it spread, and formed ponds and tanks and little lakes among the meadows. On the opposite side of the valley rose the tops of high mountains far into the sky, and between the interstices of the summits, still more summits arose. The foot of the range was covered with a dark vegetation, but the mountain sides

[p. 7]

exhibited a great variety of colours, from the almost black appearance of the rocks below to the ethereal white of the farthest peaks, whose delicate hues seemed to blend with the pale blue sky. Here and there the surface was already covered with spots of light from the rising sun, falling through the rents of the rocks and through the branches of trees, foreboding the near arrival of the orb of day. Thus the higher peaks enjoyed the warm light of the sun long before it shone into the valley below; but while it shone in its full brightness upon the mountain tops, the dark shadows in the deep valley became thinner and began to disappear.

At last the solemn moment arrived, and the sun rose in his sublime majesty over the tops of the mountains, becoming visible to all. The shadows fled, and a flood of light penetrated into the valley, lightening up the dark forest of pines and illuminating the caves of the rocks. Shining upon the fields of snow and the glaciers, its light was reflected as in a mirror and produced a blinding effect, but upon the rocky surface it became softened, and gave it the appearance of a thousand various hues.

The road turned round a projecting part of the height, and suddenly I stood in full view of the inaccessible mountain. Between the place where I stood and the base of the mountain

[p. 8]

there was a well-nigh treeless plain, and the soil was almost without any vegetation. Everywhere the ground was covered with stones and rocks, many of which seemed to have fallen down from the mysterious mountain and to have been broken in the fall. Here and there was a small spot covered with moss or small vegetation, sending fantastically-shaped branches of green upwards along the sides of the inaccessible mountain towards the bare gray walls of the summit, where giant sentinels of a forbidding mien stood eternal and immovable, and seemed to defend their strongholds against the aggressive vegetation, crowding the latter back into the valley. Thus the everlasting combat which had been raging for untold ages still continued; but the front lines of the contending armies changed from year to year. Everlasting, like the eternal truths, stand the bare gray rocks upon the summits; here and there the vegetation invades their kingdom, like illusions approaching the realm of the real; death is victorious; the green spots are buried each year under the descending rocks; but again life is the victor, for those rocks decay, and a new life appears upon their withered faces.

In the limestone formation of the Alpine ranges, the rocks decomposed by wind and rain assume often the most fantastic shapes,

[p. 9]

which suggest the names which are given to the mountains. Very little power of imagination is required to behold in the shape of the summits of the Wilden Kaiser mountain the figure of the Emperor Barbarossa, with his long red beard, with crown and sceptre, lying in state, unaffected by the cold of the winter or the summer's heat, waiting to be resurrected; or we may see in the shape of the Hochvogel the form of an eagle spreading its wings; in the Widder-horn, the shape of the horns of a ram, &c. At the base of the mountains and in the valleys the soil is covered with small loose rocks and piles of sand, in the midst of which the coltsfoot plant (Tussilago farfara) spreads its large green leaves, and the blue bell-shaped flowers of the monkshood (Aconitum napellus) wave their heads. In some secluded spots grows the celebrated edelweiss (Gnaphalium leontopodium), resembling in size those which grow on the Popocatepetl in Mexico, and on the Cordilleras of South America. There may also be found the mountain gentian, the Alpine rose, the mandrake, Arnica montana, the mysterious Hypericon, and other curious plants full of healing powers and strange virtues. Wherever a sufficient quantity of soil has accumulated to enable a tree to grow, a larger kind of vegetation appears; but the little crust of earth is not deep enough

[p. 10]

to afford a solid footing to large trees. They may grow to a certain height, but some day a storm will arise and sweep down the mountain sides, and then the work of destruction begins. Grand old tree-corpses, whose roots have been torn from the soil, are lying about, their barkless, bleached branches like so many skeleton arms stretched up towards heaven, as if they had been calling for help in the hour of their death, but no help had arrived. Smaller growths of dwarf-trees surround them, and cover the ground or feed like parasites upon the substance of the dead.

The spring had advanced; but among these mountains the seasons are interlaced with each other. The red and yellow leaves painted by autumn were seen among the green foliage of the stunted pines. The moss clinging to the steep precipices shows the reddish colour obtained in the fall, and in many clefts and caverns linger the snow and ice of the past winter; but above the red and green and the pure white snow the gray masses of the summits rise in a succession of pillars and points, with domes and spires and pinnacles, like a city built by the gods; while in the background spreads the gray or blue canopy of heaven. Thin streams of water run down from these heights over the precipices, and as they splash

[p. 11]

over the projecting rocks they are reduced to vapour before reaching the ground below. The rocks themselves have been hollowed out, forming large caves, and indicating how powerful those little veins of water may become, if swelled by the floods from the melting snows of the summits.

After enjoying for a few minutes the sublimity of this scenery, I continued my way and approached a little stream coming from a waterfall in the distance. I wandered along its border; the water was deep, but so clear that even the smallest pebble could be distinctly seen at the bottom. Sometimes it appeared as motionless as if it were liquid crystal penetrated by the rays of the sun, and again, meeting with obstacles in its way, it foamed in its rocky bed as if in a sudden fit of rage, while in other places it tumbled in little cascades over pretty pebbles and stones, forming miniature cataracts which exhibited manifold colours.

In these solitudes there is nothing to remind one of the existence of man, except occasionally the sawn-off trunk of a tree, showing the destructive influence of human activity. In some old, rotten, and hollow trunks rain-water has collected, sparkling in the sun like little mirrors, such as may be used by water nymphs, and

[p. 12]

around their edges little mushrooms are growing, which our imagination transforms into chairs, tables, and baldachinos for fairies and elves.

Where I now stood, the ground was covered with moss, and occasionally there was to be seen a great, white thistle, whose sharp-pointed leaves sparkled in the sunlight. At a short distance I saw a small grove of pines, looking like an island in the desert, and to that grove I directed my steps. There I resolved to rest and enjoy the beauty of nature. I laid myself down upon the moss in a place which was overshadowed by a mighty pine. The music of the mountain stream was heard at a distance, and opposite to the place where I rested there was to be seen a waterfall, spreading into a vapour as it fell over the rocks, and in the vapour appeared the colours of the rainbow. The mist fell into a basin formed of rock, and from a rent in this basin, overgrown with moss, the water foamed and rushed, hastening down towards the valley, to become united with the main body of the river.

For a long time I watched the play of the water, and the longer I watched the more did it become alive with forms of the most singular shape. Supermundane beings of great beauty seemed to dance in the spray, shaking their heads in the sunshine and throwing showers of liquid silver from their streaming curls and

[p. 13]

waving locks. Their laughter sounded like that of the falls of Minnehaha, and from the crevices of the rocks peeped the ugly faces of gnomes and kobolds watching slyly the dance of the fairies. Above the fall the current seemed to hesitate before throwing itself down over the precipice; but below, where it left the basin, it appeared to be irritated by the impediments in its way and impatient to leave its home; while far down in the valley, where it became united to its brother, the river, it sounded as if the latter was welcoming it back to its bosom, and as if both were exulting over their final union in a glad jubilee.

What is the reason that we imagine such things? Why do we endow "dead things" with human consciousness and with sensation? Why are we in our moments of happiness not satisfied to feel that we live in a body, but our consciousness craves to go out of its prison-house and mix with the universal life? Is our consciousness merely a product of the organic activity of our physical body, or is it a function of the universal life, concentrated--so to say--in a focus within the physical body? Is our personal consciousness dependent for its existence on the existence of the physical body, and does it die with the latter; or is there a spiritual consciousness, belonging to a higher, immortal,

[p. 14]

and invisible self of man, which is temporarily connected with the physical organism, but which may exist independent of the latter? If such is the case, if our physical organism is merely an instrument through which our consciousness acts, then this instrument is not our real self. If this is true, then our real self may exist independently of the latter. If we mentally float along the curves of the mountain tops, sinking gradually downwards, rising suddenly upwards, and examining in our imagination the things upon their surface, why do we feel such a sense of exhilaration and joy, as if we were really there, but had left our material body behind, because too heavy to accompany the spirit to the top of the inaccessible mountain? It is true, a part of our life and consciousness must remain with the physical form, to enable it to continue to live during our absence and to attend to the functions of life; but we have read of somnambules and persons in an ecstatic condition, whose inner spiritual self, with all its powers of consciousness, sensation, and perception, was absent from their apparently dead forms, and who visited distant places, going and returning with the velocity of thought, and bringing descriptions of such places which were afterwards verified and found to be true.

[p. 15]

Why do we find life in all things, even in those which are considered "dead," if we merely put ourselves in a condition in which we can perceive that they are living? Can there be any dead matter in the universe? Is not even a stone held together by the "cohesion" of its particles, and attracted to the earth by "gravitation"? But what else is this "cohesion" and "gravitation" but energy, and what is "energy" but the Soul, an interior principle called force, which produces an outward manifestation called matter; but which must ultimately be identical with force or substance, or by whatever name we may call a thing of which we have no conception. If this view is correct, then all things possess life, all things possess soul, and there may be soul-beings, whose outward forms are not so gross as ours, and who are therefore invisible to our physical senses, but may be perceived by our own soul.

In the silence of nature thoughts grow to be waking dreams, and dreams become visions. I imagined how in this solemn solitude I might remain all the rest of my life, perhaps sharing my habitation with a few congenial friends. I imagined how, united by common interests and having identical objects in view, we might be happy and obtain knowledge together. Here, far away from the superficiality and shallowness

[p. 16]

of common life, a far greater clearness of mental perception, a much deeper concentration of thought, a much higher conception of the truth regarding the mysteries of nature and man might be obtained. How much would our senses be sharpened for the perception of external and internal things! how much would our knowledge of self increase! What should we care about the tomfooleries of what is called "society"; what should we care to know of what is going on in that great insane asylum called "the world"? Here we could live undisturbed within our own selves, unpestered by the necromantic practices of "society," which daily and hourly force us to go out from within our own selves, to appear where we do not desire to be, compel us to act as we do not desire to act, to bow down before the goddess of fashion, whom we despise in our hearts.

Would such a life be useful for us and useful for others? If it is true that the world and we ourselves are made up of ideas, then it is just in such solitudes that the best conditions might be found in which to grasp and remodel ideas. Thoughts and ideas cannot be merely illusions; they must have a real existence, as real and perhaps more lasting than the objective things of this world; for we know that ideas outlive the death of the forms in which they are represented; we know

[p. 17]

that ideas, like other fruits, are born and become mature, and whenever an idea is mature it appears on the mental horizon of the world, and is often grasped at the same time by some receptive minds. A man who is able to grasp and remodel exalted ideas, and give them material expression, may do much more for the benefit of the world by living alone and in solitude, than by living among the world where his work is continually impeded by affairs of minor importance. The ideas which he shapes will not die with his body. They will be thrown upon the great mirror, the Astral Light, and be preserved in the memory of the world, to be grasped and utilised by others.

What is that being we call man, after all? What is this living animal organism of flesh, blood, and bones, nerves and mind, which lives for a while and then dies, and which the great majority of people esteem so highly, as if it were their own immortal self, and for the comfort of which they often sacrifice their self-respect, their dignity, honour, and virtue? Is it anything else than an animal in whom an intellectual activity of a higher order than in other animals predominates? Can this mental activity be the product of the mechanical, chemical, and physiological activity of gross matter? If not, what is the cause of this activity, and can this cause exist independently of the form? What is a

[p. 18]

man without any intelligence? If intelligence, as it necessarily must be, is an attribute of the spirit, what is a man without any spirit and without spiritual intelligence?

While I was meditating about this question a stupid laughter sounded close by my side. I had been so much engaged with my own thoughts that I had not noticed the approach of the stranger; but looking up I saw close by my side one of those half-idiotic human beings whom they call cretins, and who are often found in the mountainous countries of Switzerland and Savoy. I was somewhat surprised and startled, and not a little annoyed at the unwelcome interruption, and I asked him rather abruptly, "What do you want?"

A broad grin passed over the face of the dwarf, for such he certainly was, as he answered, "Master says I should guide you to his house." I was somewhat astonished by his reply, but remembering that the dwarf was an idiot, and that no intelligent answer was to be expected from him, I asked, "Who is your master?" His answer was, "Imperator"; and as he spoke that word a spark of intelligence seemed to shine in his eyes, and the tone of his voice seemed to indicate that this Imperator, whoever he might be, was undoubtedly somebody to whom the cretin rendered implicit obedience. I attempted

[p. 19]

to ask the dwarf more questions, and to find out who his Imperator was, or where he lived, but all my efforts to obtain information from one who was evidently an idiot were unavailing, and he merely grinned and repeated the words which he had already said before. I therefore at last made up my mind to go with him and see how the adventure would end.

The cretin walked ahead and I followed him; he led me towards the base of the inaccessible mountain. While we were walking on, and the idiot often turned back to see whether I was following him, I had a good opportunity to study his dress and features. He was not over three feet high, and evidently a hunchback. His clothing consisted of a brown gown, to which a hood was attached, which made him appear like a small Capuchin monk of the order of St. Augustine. An immense big head and a comparatively large body rested upon very thin and small legs, while his feet seemed again to be extraordinarily large. Perhaps on account of his small size and the healthy colour of his face, he appeared to be almost a child; but this opinion was contradicted by a gray beard of considerable length which adorned his face. In his hand he carried a staff made of a dead limb of a tree, which he had evidently picked up on his way.

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

II

  

THE MONASTERY

I FOLLOWED my weird companion, and soon we regained the path running along the bed of the creek, which flowed tranquilly over a bottom covered with white pebbles, and the shallowness of the water seemed to indicate that we were not far from its source. As we approached the mysterious mountain the stone walls appeared to rise perpendicularly before us, and there was no place visible where any other being but a bird could have ascended; but as we came still nearer, I noticed a rent or break in the side of the wall, opening like a cave or a tunnel. This tunnel we entered, and, as we proceeded, I saw that it penetrated the giant wall and led into another valley beyond. We arrived at the other end of the tunnel, and an exclamation of joy and surprise escaped my lips as I beheld the beautiful sight which presented itself to my view.

Before me was a valley surrounded by mountains of evidently inaccessible height, and this

[p. 21]

valley nature and art seemed to have combined to endow with an almost superterrestrial beauty. Like a vast ocean bay it opened before my sight, closing in the distance with a kind of natural amphitheatre. It was covered with short grass and planted with maple trees, and on all sides there were forests and groves, small lakes and lovely creeks. Immediately in front of me, but still at a considerable distance, rose the vault of a sublime mountain peak high into the blue ether of space, presenting a cavity with overhanging rocks, looking like the hollow space under a gigantic wave, which had been petrified by some magic spell. The sides of the mountain sank sheer towards a lower declivity, and then again rose abruptly to an imposing height.

In the presence of so much sublimity I became dumfounded. My companion seemed to comprehend my feeling; for he, too, stood still and laughed, as if he were pleased to see how full of admiration I was. The stillness which surrounded us would have been complete if it had not been for the noise of a cataract, at a distance to the left, falling over a steep precipice and appearing like a string of fluid silver backed by the dark gray rock. The monotonous rush of that fall in contradistinction to the surrounding stillness seemed to me like the rush of the river

[p. 22]

of time in the realm of eternity; another world than the one to which I had been accustomed seemed to have descended upon me; the air seemed more pure, the light more ethereal, the grass more green than on the other side of the tunnel; here seemed to be the valley of peace, the paradise of happiness and content.

Looking towards the high peak in the distance, I noticed what seemed to be a palace, a fortress, or a monastery of some kind, and as I came nearer, I saw it was a massive building of stone. Its high walls rose above the tops of the surrounding trees, and a dome, as if of a temple, crowned the top of the building. Its exterior appearance indicated the solidity of the walls. It was built in rectangular form, but its architecture was not of a regular style; it presented many projecting windows, turrets, balconies, and verandas.

On the other side of the valley nature was not less sublime and inspiring. Gray giant cliffs, standing out prominently against the steel-blue background of the sky, rose up to an extraordinary height. Below the highest peaks long strips of white clouds had settled around the mountain, and seemed to separate the top of the latter from its main body. The part below the cloud was partly covered by the shadow and partly illuminated by a pale ghostly light,

[p. 23]

producing a glamour. There, where the masses of clouds rested against the bulk of the mountain, it seemed to me that I was looking into a world of destruction. It was as if the entrails of the mountain had been torn up, and the uniformity of the desolate jumble of rocks was only interrupted by a few remnants of snow situated in the caverns and on the crags of the mountain.

As we advanced we came into a broad avenue leading to the building, and I beheld a man of noble and imposing appearance approaching. He was clad in a yellow robe, his head covered with black flowing hair, and he walked with an elastic step. When the cretin saw this man he hurried towards him, prostrated himself before him, and suddenly vanished, like an image of a dream.

I was struck with astonishment by this extraordinary occurrence, but I had no time to reflect, for the stranger approached me and bid me welcome. He appeared to be a man of about thirty-five years of age, of tall and commanding stature; and his mild and benevolent look, full of spiritual energy, seemed to penetrate my whole being and to read my innermost thoughts. "Surely," I thought, "this man is an Adept!"

"Yes," answered the stranger, as if he had been reading my thought, "you have fallen

[p. 24]

into the hands of the Adepts, of whom you have thought so much and whose acquaintance you often desired to make, and I will introduce you into our temple and make you acquainted with some of our Brothers of the Golden and Rosy Cross."

I scanned his face, and now it seemed to me as if this man were not a stranger to me. There was something so familiar about him, as if I had known him for years, and yet I could not find a place for him in my memory. In vain I tortured my brain to find out when or where I had met this man, or at least some other one resembling him in appearance. But again the Imperator of this "Rosicrucian Society," for such he proved to be, answered my unspoken thought by saying: "You are right; we are not strangers, for I have often been in your presence and stood by your side, although you did not see me. I have directed the flow of ideas which streamed into your brain, while you elaborated them and put them down in writing. Moreover, this place has often been visited by you while your animal body was sleeping, and you have conversed with me and with the brothers; but when your soul returned to its house of flesh and blood, it could not impress the memory of the brain with the recollection of the events through which you had

[p. 25]

passed, and you could remember none of your transcendental experiences when you awoke. The memory of the animal form retains only the impressions which are made upon it by the avenues of the external senses; the memory of the spirit awakens when we are in the spiritual state."

I told the Imperator that I considered this day the happiest one in my life, and only regretted that I should not be permitted to remain here for ever, as I felt that I was not yet worthy to remain in the society of beings so far exalted above my own state.

"We shall not permit you to go away very soon," answered the Master. "You will have ample time to see how we live. But as to your permanently remaining here, this is at present an impossibility. You have other duties to perform, and, moreover, there are still too many of the lower and animal elements adhering to your constitution and forming a part of yourself. They could not resist long the destructive influence of the pure and spiritual air of this place; and as you have not yet a sufficient amount of truly spiritual elements in your organism to render it firm and strong, you would, by remaining here, soon become weak and waste away like a person in a state of consumption; you would

[p. 26]

become miserable instead of being happy. You would die."

"Master," I said, "then I can at least hope to learn, while I am here, the mystery of those great spiritual powers which you possess; by which you are said to be able to transform one thing into another, and transmute base metals into gold?"

"There is nothing mysterious or wonderful about it, my friend," said the Imperator. "Such things are not more wonderful than the ordinary phenomena of nature which we see every day. They are only mysterious to those whose own prejudices and misconceptions hinder them from seeing the truth and knowing the power the spirit possesses to subjugate matter by means of the soul. We need not be surprised about them any more than about seeing the moon revolve around the earth, or watching the growth of a tree. It is all merely the effect of that one primordial power which is called the Will, and which called the world into existence. It manifests itself in various ways as mechanical force or as a spiritual power; but it is always the same divine power of Will, acting through the instrumentality of the organism of man, who directs it by his intelligence."

"Then," I said, "the principal requirement

[p. 27]

would be to learn how to strengthen the Will?"

"Not so," said the Imperator. "The Will is the law, the universal power holding together the worlds in space and causing the revolutions of planets; it pervades and penetrates everything, and does not require your strengthening it, for it is already strong enough to accomplish everything. You are only an instrument through which this spiritual power may act and manifest itself, if you do not attempt to oppose it."

"Then," I said, "how can we accomplish anything at all? If we can do nothing through the power of our own will, we may as well never attempt to do anything."

"We can accomplish nothing useful," answered the Master, "by attempting to employ any separate will of our own; but we may employ our Reason and Intelligence to guide and conduct the already existing universal Will-power in Nature which constitutes the life of all things, and thus we may accomplish in a few moments certain things which it would require unconscious nature much longer periods of time to accomplish without our aid. The miller who employs the water of a river to set his mill in motion does not create water, nor does he attempt to make the river run upwards towards

[p. 28]

its source; he merely leads the stream into certain channels and uses the already existing current in an intelligent manner to accomplish his purpose. He knows the law of nature and acts in accordance with it. Being obedient to that law he is able to employ it. Nature obeys those who act in obedience to her laws. In the same manner acts the Adept. He guides the existing spiritual power by his intelligence, and thereby causes it to accomplish certain things in accordance with the law of nature."

"Do you see yonder cloud which has settled below the top of the mountain?" continued the Adept. "It will remain there until some current of air blows it away, or until a change of temperature causes it to rise or to fall. If we disperse it by causing the universal forces of nature to act upon the dense masses, we do not act against the law of nature, but guide it by our intelligence."

While the Master spoke these words, he extended his hands toward the mountain, below whose top the clouds had collected, and immediately it seemed as if life had been infused into the dense mass. It began to whirl and to dance, and finally it rose like a column of smoke up to the top of the mountain, ascending from there high up into the air, giving the

[p. 29]

mountain the appearance of a volcano. At last it collected again far above the top, in the air, forming a little silvery cloud, through which the sunshine was streaming.

I wondered at this manifestation of life in a cloud; but the Adept, reading my thoughts, said: "Life is universal and everywhere; it is identical with the Will."

During our conversation we had slowly approached the building, and I had now an opportunity to examine its exterior in all its details. It was only two stories high, but the rooms seemed to be lofty. It was built in a quadrangular form, and surrounded by oaks and maple trees, and a large garden or park. Seven steps of white marble led up to the main portal, which was protected by two massive pillars of granite, and over the door appeared in golden letters an inscription, saying: You, who enter here, leave all evil thoughts behind.

We entered through the portal into a large vestibule paved with flagstones. In the midst of this room was a statue of Gautama Buddha on a pedestal, and the walls were ornamented with golden inscriptions representing some of the most important doctrines of the ancient sages. To the right and left, doors opened into long corridors leading to the various apartments of the Brothers; but the door opposite the entrance

[p. 30]

led into a beautiful garden, where I beheld many plants and trees such as are usually only to be found in tropical climes. The back of this garden was formed by a building of white marble, surrounded by the dome which I had seen from the distance, after entering through the tunnel, and on the top of the dome was a silver dragon resting on a golden globe.

"This," said the Imperator, "is the sanctuary of our temple; in this you cannot enter. If you were to attempt it, the immediate death of your personality would be the consequence; nor would it serve you even if you were able to enter and live, for in that sanctuary everything is dark to all who do not bring with them their own spiritual light, the inextinguishable lamp of divine intelligence, to illuminate the darkness."

We walked into one of the corridors. On our left there were numerous doors leading into the cells or apartments of the Brothers, but to the right was a wall, occasionally opening into the tropical garden, and the interstices between these openings were filled out with beautifully painted landscapes. One of these landscapes represented Indian scenery, with the white snow-covered Himalaya Mountains in the background, while the fore-part of the picture represented what appeared to be a Chinese pagoda, with a small lake and wooded hills at a distance.

[p. 31]

"These pictures," the Master explained, "represent the various monasteries or lamaseries of our order. The one before you is situated near a lake in the interior of Tibet, and is occupied by some of the highest Adepts of our order. Each of these pictures shows also a part of the country in which the monastery is placed, so as to give a correct idea of the general character of the locality. But these pictures have an occult quality which will become apparent to you if you concentrate your mind upon some part of the picture."

I did as directed, and concentrated my attention upon the grand portal of the lamasery, and to my astonishment the door opened, and the tall form of an Indian, dressed in shining white robes, with a turban of pale yellow silk upon his head, stepped out of the door. I immediately recognised him to be one of the Tibetan Adepts whom I had seen in my waking dreams. He, too, seemed to recognise me, and smilingly nodded his head, while I bowed reverentially before him. A fine-looking horse was brought forward by some attendant, and he mounted and rode away.

I was speechless from astonishment, but the Imperator smiled and drew me away, quoting a passage of Shakespeare, with a little modification; for he said, "There are many things in

[p. 32]

[paragraph continues] Heaven and Earth which are not understood by your philosophers."

We passed on to another picture, representing Egyptian scenery, with a convent in the foreground and pyramids at a distance; it was of a more gloomy character than the former, probably on account of the desert places by which it seemed to be surrounded. The next picture represented a similar building, situated in a tropical and mountainous country, and the Adept told me it was one situated somewhere in the Cordilleras of South America. Another one showed a Mohammedan temple, with minarets and the half-moon upon their tops. I expressed my surprise to see all the various religious systems in the world represented in these Rosicrucian orders; for I had always believed that the Rosicrucians were an eminently Christian order.

The Imperator, again reading my thought, corrected my mistake. "The name 'Rosicrucian Order,' or the 'Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross,'" he said, "is a comparatively modern invention, and was first used by Johann Valentin Andreae, who invented the story of the knight Christian Rosencreuz for the same purpose as Cervantes invented his 'Don Quichote de la Mancha,' namely, for the purpose of ridiculing the would-be Adepts, reformers, and gold-makers

[p. 33]

of his age, when he wrote his celebrated 'Fama Fraternitatis.' Before his pamphlet appeared, the name Rosicrucian did not mean a person belonging to a certain organised society of that name, but it was a generic name, applied to occultists, adepts, alchemists of a higher order, in possession of some occult knowledge and acquainted with the secret signification of the Rose and the Cross; symbols which have been adopted by the Christian Church, which were, however, not invented by her, but used by occultists thousands of years before Christianity was known. These symbols do not belong exclusively to the Christian Church. They are as free as the air for any one who can grasp their meaning, but unfortunately very few of your Christians know that meaning; they only worship the external forms, and know nothing about the principles which those forms represent."

"Then," I said, "a spiritually enlightened man may become a member of your order, even if he did not believe in any of the so-called Christian dogmas?"

To this the Imperator answered: "No man can become a member of our exalted order whose knowledge is merely based upon dogmas, beliefs, creeds, or opinions which have been taught to him by somebody, or which he has

[p. 34]

accepted from hearsay or from the reading of books. Such imaginary knowledge is no real knowledge; we can know nothing real except that which we realise within ourselves. That which is usually called knowledge is merely a matter of memory. We may store our memory with innumerable things, and they may be true or false; but even if they are true, opinions do not convey real knowledge. Real knowledge cannot be imparted by one man to another; a man can only be guided to the place where he may obtain it; but he must himself grasp the truth, not merely intellectually with his brain, but also intuitionally with his heart.

"To obtain real knowledge we must feel the truth of a thing, and understand its true nature. To believe in the truth of anything without having real knowledge is merely a superstition. Many of your scientific, philosophical, and theological speculations are based upon superstition and not upon real knowledge or self-consciousness. The science and knowledge of your modern philosophers and theologians rest upon opinions, and are continually in danger of being overthrown by some new discovery which will not amalgamate with their artificial systems. The truth cannot be overthrown; it needs no argumentation, and if it is once perceived by the spiritual power of perception and understood

[p. 35]

by the spiritual intelligence of man, it conveys real knowledge and cannot be disputed away.

"Our order has, therefore, nothing to do with beliefs in creeds or opinions of any kind. We care nothing for them. If we were all sufficiently perfect to recognise all truths by direct perception, we should not need any books or instruments; we should not need to use logic or make any experiments. As it is, we are still men, although far above the intellectual animal which is usually called man. We still use our books and have a library, and study the opinions of thinkers; but we never accept such books or opinions--even if they came from Buddha himself--as our infallible guides, unless they receive the seal from our reason and understanding. We venerate them and make use of them; they serve us, but we do not serve them."

During this conversation we walked into the library, where thousands of books were standing upon a great number of shelves. I noticed many ancient books of which I had heard, but which I had never seen. There were the sybilline books, which are said to have been destroyed by fire; the books of Hermes Trismegistus, of which only one is believed to be in existence; and many others of priceless value for the antiquary or the student of hermetic philosophy. While I wondered how these Brothers came into

[p. 36]

possession of such treasures, the Imperator said:

"Well may you be surprised how we came into possession of books which are supposed to exist no more; but the secret of this is, that everything, and consequently every book which ever existed, leaves its imperishable impression in the Astral Light, and that by certain occult means these impressions may be reproduced from that universal storehouse, the memory of nature, and be put in a visible, tangible, and material shape. Some of our Brothers are to a great extent engaged in making such reproductions, and thus we have without any financial outlay obtained these treasures, which no amount of money could have procured."

I rejoiced to hear these words, because they confirmed my opinion that life in a solitude was not necessarily a life of uselessness, and that ideas are real things, which may be seen and grasped far more easily in a tranquil place than while we are surrounded by the turmoil and the petty cares of life in "society."

In answer to this thought, the Imperator said: "Our monastery has been founded by spiritually enlightened people who had the same thought which I read in your mind. They therefore selected this spot in a secluded valley, whose existence is known only to a few, and by

[p. 37]

making use of certain elementary forces of nature, which are as yet unknown to you, they created an illusion which renders this place safe against all unwelcome intruders. Here those in whom the germ of divinity, being latent or dormant in the heart of mortal man, has awakened into life and activity, may find the conditions required for its further development. Here we live in peace, separated from the outer world by a barrier which none can surmount; for even if the existence of our retreat were known, it would be an easy matter for us to create other illusions which would prevent the intrusion of those who attempted to enter it. We are, however, not excluded from that outer world, although we seldom enter it with our physical forms. By the exercise of our clairvoyant and clairaudient powers, we may at any moment know what is going on in that world; and, if we desire to come into personal contact with it, we leave our physical forms and go out in our astral bodies. We visit whomsoever we wish, and witness everything without our presence being perceived. We visit the statesman, the minister, the philosopher, the inventor; we infuse thoughts in their minds which are useful, and they do not know from whence those thoughts come. If their prejudices and predilections are very

[p. 38]

strong, they may reject those thoughts; but, if they are reasonable people and know how to discriminate, they will follow the silent advice and profit by it."

"In that case," I said, "your order can exercise a tremendous influence in the politics of the world; but why, then, did you not try to abolish some of the greatest evils that afflicted the world in the history of the past? Why did you permit such monsters as Nero and Caligula to exist? Why did you permit the horrors of the Inquisition? Why did you allow the terrors of the French Revolution to take place? Why did you not destroy such villains as Louis XI of France, and others of that class?"

"Alas!" answered the Adept, "there is a certain law of justice, whose action causes evils for individuals, which we are not permitted to oppose, because its working is necessary for the evolution of the race. As the surgeon sometimes has to inflict pain for the purpose of removing a cancerous growth and saving the life of the patient, so it is often necessary to purge the organism of a nation for the purpose of restoring its health. It is said that evils are blessings in disguise, and God may execute His purpose even through instruments full of wickedness and depravity."

"Nevertheless," I interposed, "it seems to

[p. 39]

me that you might interfere in individual cases to protect people from committing acts of imprudence which will cause them to suffer."

To this he replied: "It is true that we might handle mankind as if they were merely automata, and we could cause them to do what we please, while they would still imagine that they were following their own inclination. But to do so would be against the rules of our order and against the great Law, for the latter decides that each man shall be the creator of his own Karma. We are permitted to advise our followers, but we are not permitted to interfere with their mental freedom."

"Still," I persisted, "there are innocent people who have to suffer for actions not done by themselves; there were martyrs who underwent torture and death for the sake of some great cause. Why did you not save them? Why did you permit Hypatia to be torn to pieces by a fanatical mob, or Jeanne d'Arc to die an ignominious death upon the stake?"

"Such people will have their reward. From the blood of a martyr springs fruit in abundance. Their bodily sufferings are as nothing in comparison with the joy they earn. Nothing is useless, although you narrow-sighted mortals cannot always see the use of a thing. Moreover,

[p. 40]

it often happens that worthy people are saved in a manner appearing to you miraculous."

A strong desire to become a member of the Rosicrucian Society entered my mind; but I did not dare to express it. The Master, however, reading my mind, continued to say:

"We accept in our circle every one who has the necessary qualifications to enter it, but you will perceive that these qualifications are not in everybody's possession; they cannot be conferred by favour, and it is a well-known saying, even among the lowest grades of occultists, that the Adept cannot be made, but that he must grow to become one."

"Master," I said, "would it not be well for those who desire to develop spiritually, and to become Adepts, to imitate your example and to select some secluded places where they could reside undisturbed and give their time to interior meditation and concentration of thought? I know that there are at present a great many people in various parts of the world, belonging to various nationalities and having various creeds, who have become convinced of the fact that the conditions, under which the majority of men and women of our present civilisation exist and live, are not conducive to the quick attainment of a higher spiritual state. They believe that the objects which people usually strive to

[p. 41]

attain during their comparatively short life upon this globe, such as the gratification of pride and ambition, the hoarding of money, the enjoyment of sexual love, the obtaining of bodily comfort and pleasure, &c., cannot be the true objects of life; but that our present life is only one of the many phases of our eternal existence, and that terrestrial life is only a means to an end, namely, to afford the conditions by which the divine element, germinally contained in every man, may grow and develop, whereby man may attain a higher life like yours, which is not subject to transformation and death, and is therefore of permanent value."

The Adept, who had patiently listened to my outburst of enthusiasm, smiled and said: "If those people are ripe enough to be able to bear a life of seclusion, let them enter it; but to do so it is above all necessary that they possess real knowledge. As long as men move merely on the plane of beliefs and opinion, each man's opinions and tastes will differ from those of the others to a certain extent, and I am afraid that your proposed harmonial society would prove in the end to be a very inharmonious one.

"I have, however, no doubt that even under such unfavourable auspices considerable advantage might be derived from the establishment of theosophical academies in secluded places. If you

[p. 42]

had any colleges, seminaries, schools, or societies where the truth could be taught without all the accompanying rubbish of scientific and theological misconceptions and superstitions, which have accumulated through the ages, great progress would undoubtedly be made. As the present civilisation now stands, there are two methods adopted for the education of the people. One is by means of what is called Science, the other by means of what is called Religion. As far as science is concerned, her deductions and speculations are based upon observation and logic. Her logic may be good enough; but her powers of observation, upon which the fundamentals of her logic rest, are restricted to her very imperfect faculties of sensual perception, and therefore your science is based entirely upon external illusions, and is consequently a superficial and illusive science. Knowledge of the inner life of nature is far more important than the study of external phenomena.

"You must not misunderstand me," he continued, seeing that I did not fully grasp the meaning of his words. "I do not mean to say that your modern science knows nothing about natural laws. She knows what she sees and understands, but knows little or nothing about the invisible spiritual causes which are the fundamental causes of visible effects. She

[p. 43]

knows a great deal about the little details of existence which are the ultimate effects of the action of universal Life; but she knows nothing about the Tree of Life, the eternal source from which all these transient phenomena spring.

"As far as your modern theology is concerned, it is based upon an entire misconception of terms which were originally intended to signify certain spiritual powers, of which your priests and laymen can have no correct conception because they have not the spiritual powers necessary to conceive of such things. Being narrowminded, the universal principles and powers which are active within the great workshop of nature have, in their conceptions, become narrowed down to personal and limited beings; the divine universal and infinite power which men call God, has been reduced in the minds of the ignorant to an extra-cosmic deity of some kind, who can be persuaded by mortals to change His will, and who needs substitutes and deputies upon this earth to execute His divine laws. Your religion is not the religion of the living God who executes His own will; it is the religion of a dead and impotent god, who died long ago and left an army of clergymen to rule in his stead.

"Your theology should above all be based

[p. 44]

upon the power spiritually to perceive the truth. But where can you find a clergyman who has any spiritual perceptions, and who dares to trust to his intuition more than to the dogmas prescribed by his Church? If he dared to have an opinion of his own, and to assert it, he would cease to be a minister of his Church and be considered a heretic. In your "intellectual" age everything is left to intellectual investigation alone; little is done to develop the intuitive power of the heart. The consequence is, that your present generation is like people looking at everything by means of a telescope; they may see, but they do not feel and grasp the truth, and the consequence is an entirely false conception of nature and man."

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

III

  

UNEXPECTED REVELATIONS

THE Adept paused, and my mind was invaded by a multitude of questions to which I could find no answer: "What is nature, and what is man? Why am I in this world? Did I exist before, and, if so, where did I come from? What is the object of my existence, and how will it end?"

Again the Adept, reading my thoughts, answered: "Mortal man, as you know him, is an intellectual animal, living a sort of dream-life among dream-pictures which he mistakes for realities. Real man is a celestial being, a soul dwelling temporarily within a material body. Within this organism the spiritual, divine spark finds the proper soil to generate and develop the immortal man, as has been described by Saint Paul, who speaks of that spark of divine consciousness as being sown in corruption and raised in incorruption. This spiritual man is in each person his or her personal God and Redeemer. While a man is

[p. 46]

unacquainted with the processes going on in his invisible organism, he will have little power to guide and control these processes; he will resemble a plant, which is dependent for its growth on the elements which are unconsciously brought to it by the winds and the rains, or which may accidentally be found in its surroundings; it has neither the power to prevent nor to promote its own growth. But when man obtains a knowledge of the constitution of his own soul, when he becomes conscious of the processes going on in its organism and learns to guide and control them, he will be able to command his own growth. He will become free to select or to reject the psychic influences which come within his sphere, he will become his own master and attain--so to say--psychic locomotion. He will then be as much superior to a man without such knowledge and power as an animal is superior to a plant; for while an animal may go in search of its food and select or reject what it pleases, the plant is chained to its place and depends entirely on the conditions which that one place affords. The ignorant depends on the conditions prepared for him; the wise can choose his conditions himself."

"And what will be the end and object of this?" I asked.

[p. 47]

"The end of it," was the answer, "is that the soul of man enjoys supreme bliss in realising that she herself is everything and that there is nothing beyond her. The object is that mortal man shall become immortal, and a perfect instrument for the manifestation of divine wisdom."

I heard the answer of the Master, but I could not grasp its meaning. What could that "soul" be of which he spoke as being as big as the universe, and could my soul possess any other vehicle or organism than my visible material body?

While I was meditating, the Adept stepped with me to a window where the inaccessible mountain was seen, and pointing it out to me, he said: "Behold there the door by which you entered our stronghold; concentrate your attention upon the way you came, and seek with the eye of your soul to penetrate to the other side of the mountain."

I did so, and suddenly I found myself standing at that other side, upon the place where I had lain down to rest. Before me, upon the ground, was stretched out an apparently lifeless human figure, and to my horror I recognised it as being my own bodily self. At first everything seemed a dream, but then the thought came to me that I must have died.

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] There was my body; and nevertheless I was myself, and saw myself such as I had always been, with all my organs and limbs and even the same clothing which the corpse before me wore. The hat of the corpse was drawn over its eyes, and I attempted to lift it; but I might just as well have tried to lift the inaccessible mountain. There was no physical strength within my arms. I realised that my present body consisted of a state of matter differing from that of the physical plane.

I thought I must have died, and a feeling of disgust came over me, thinking that I had ever inhabited that now lifeless, grossly material form; I was so glad to be free, and had no wish to re-enter it.

But an inner voice seemed to speak to me, saying that the time of my labouring in the mundane sphere had not yet ended, and that I must return. I even felt a sort of pity for that helpless body, and the sympathy caused thereby created a strong attraction. I felt myself drawn towards that body, and was about losing my consciousness when I was called away by hearing the voice of the Master. I started as one who awakes from a dream; the Adept stood by my side, and the vision was gone.

"Know now, my friend!" he said, "the

[p. 49]

difference between your physical and your psychical or astral organism. The divine soul has many vehicles through which it may act and manifest its powers."

"But why," I asked, "are these things not recognised by academical science?"

"On account of self-conceit," answered the Adept. "The scientists, up to a very recent date, used to discard such questions as being unworthy of their consideration, and they preferred annihilation rather than confess that there was something in the wide expanse of nature which they did not already know. The theories advanced by the theologians were not more satisfactory than those of the scientists, for they believed--or professed to believe--that man was a complete being, in a finished state, with perfect freedom of will, and, as a punishment for his subsequent bad behaviour, made a prisoner upon this planet. Furthermore, they were of the opinion that, if a man were leading a pious life, or, after leading a wicked life, obtained pardon for his sins and the favour of God, he would after his death become a celestial being, be ushered into a paradise, and live there for ever in a state of never-ending enjoyment.

"It will be acknowledged now by every independent thinker, that these theories were not

[p. 50]

very satisfactory to those who desired to know the truth. But there was nothing either to prove or to contradict such assumptions, and, moreover, the multitude did not think; they paid their clergy to do their thinking for them.

"Since the publication of 'The Secret Doctrine' the opinions of the scientists and those of the theologians have been equally shaken to their foundations. The old truth which was known to the ancients, but which had been almost entirely forgotten during our modern age of materialism, that man is not a finished being, incapable of any further organic development, but that his body and his mind are continually subject to transformation and change, and that no transformation can take place where no substance exists, because force cannot exist without substance, has become almost universally known. It was demonstrated to the scientists that their science extended only to a very small portion of that mysterious being called Man; that they only knew his outward appearance, his shell, but nothing of the living power acting within that mask which is called the physical body. It was demonstrated to the presumptuous theologians who believed that man's eternal welfare or damnation depended on their blessings or curses, that justice cannot

[p. 51]

be separated from God, and that man's salvation depends upon his own spiritual evolution. It was made logically comprehensible to the intellect that God in man will continue to live after all the lower and imperfect elements are dissolved, and that therefore a man in whom God did not exist in a state of divinity could not, after the death of his body, jump into a higher state for which lie was not fit, and which he was not able to attain while alive.

"The exposition of the essential constitution of Man, known to the Indian sages, described three hundred years ago by Theophrastus Paracelsus, and again set forth more fully and clearly than ever before by H. P. Blavatsky and other theosophical writers, is calculated to humble the pride of the scientists and the vanity of the priests. When it is once more known and digested, it will prove to the learned how little they know, and it will draw the line for the legitimate activity of the clergyman as an instructor in morals. It proves that man is not already a god, as some had imagined themselves to be. It proves that he may look like an intellectual giant, and still be, spiritually considered, only a dwarf. It demonstrates that the law which governs the growth of organisms on the physical plane is not reversed when it acts upon the corresponding organisms on the

[p. 52]

psychical plane. It shows that out of nothing nothing can grow; but that wherever there is the germ of something, even if that germ is invisible, something may grow and develop.

"The growth of every germ and of every being, as far as we know it, depends on certain conditions. These conditions may be established either by means of the intellectual activity of the being itself, which has the power to surround itself by such conditions, or they may have been established by external causes, over which the being has no control. A plant or an animal cannot grow unless it receives the food and the stimulus which it requires; the intellect cannot expand unless it is fed with ideas and stimulated by reason to assimilate them; the soul cannot become strong unless she finds in the lower principles the nutriment required for the acquisition of strength, and is stimulated by the light of wisdom to select that which she requires."

Here again the thought occurred to me, how agreeable and profitable it would be to live in such a Rosicrucian convent, where everything was rendered comfortable, no disturbing elements being admitted. To this the Master answered:

"One element necessary for the development of strength is resistance. If we enter one of the vast pine forests of the Alps, or of the

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Rocky Mountains in the United States, we find ourselves surrounded by towering trees, whose main trunks have very few branches. Upwards they rise like the masts of a ship, covered with a gray bark, naked, and without foliage. Only near the tops, that reach out of the shadows which they throw upon each other, the branches appear and spread up to the highest points, which wave their heads in the sunlight. These trees are all top-heavy; their chiefly or only well-developed parts are their heads, and all the life which they extract from the ground and the air seems to mount to their tops; while the trunks, although increasing in size as the tree grows, are left undeveloped and bare of branches. Thus they may stand and grow from year to year, and reach a mature age; but some day, sooner or later, some dark clouds collect around the snowy peaks and assume a threatening aspect; the gleam of lightnings appears among the swelling masses, the sound of thunder is heard, bolts of liquid light dart from the rents in the clouds, and suddenly the storm sweeps down from the summit into the valley. Then the work of devastation begins. These top-heavy trees, having but little strength in their feet, are mowed down by the wind like so many stems of straw in a field of wheat; there they lie rank after rank, having tumbled

[p. 54]

over each other in their fall, and their corpses encumber the mountain sides. But at the edge of the timber, and outside of the main body of the forest, looking like outposts or sentinels near the lines of a battle, there are still here and there some solitary pines to whom the storm could do no harm. They have, on account of their isolated positions, been exposed to winds all their lives; they have become used to it and grown strong. They have not been protected and sheltered by their neighbours. They are not top-heavy, for their great strong branches grow out from the trunk a few feet above the soil, continuing up to the tops, and their roots have grown through the crevices of the rocks, holding on to them with an iron grasp. They have met with resistance since the time of their youth, and, by resisting, have gained their strength.

"Thus intellectual man, growing up protected by fashion and friends in a school, college, university, or perhaps within the walls of the convent, finds himself isolated from contrary influences and meets with but little resistance. Crowded together with those who think like him, he lives and thinks like the others. Over their heads waves the banner of some accepted authority, and upon that banner are inscribed certain dogmas in which they believe without

[p. 55]

ever daring to doubt their veracity. There they grow, throwing upon each other the shadow of their ignorance, and each prevents the others from seeing the sunlight of truth. There they cram their brains with authorised opinions, learning details of our illusory life which they mistake for the real existence; they become top-heavy, for all the energy which they receive from the universal fountain of life goes to supply the brain; the soul is left without supply; the strength of character, of which the heart is the seat, suffers; the intellect is overfed and the spirit is starved. Thus they may grow up and become proud of their knowledge; but perhaps some day new and strange ideas appear on the mental horizon, a wind begins to blow, and down tumbles the banner upon which their dogmas have been inscribed, and their pride tumbles down with it.

"But not only on the physical and the intellectual plane; in the realm of the emotions, too, the same law prevails. He who desires to develop strength must not be afraid of resistance; he must obtain strength in his feet. He must be prepared to meet the wind of the lower emotions, and not be overthrown when the storms of passion arise. He should force himself to remain in contact with that which is not according to his taste, and even to harmonise

[p. 56]

with that which appears inimical, for it is really his friend, because it can supply him with strength. He should learn to bear calumny and animosity, envy and opposition; he should learn to endure suffering, and to estimate life at its true value. The contrary influences to which he has been exposed may cause a tempest to rage through his heart; but when he has gained the power to command the tempest to cease and to say to the excited waves: be still! then will the first gleam of the rising sun appear in his heart, and before its warm glow the cold moonlight thrown out by the calculating and reflecting brain will grow pale; a new and still larger world than the external one will appear before his interior vision, in which he will be contented to live, and where he will find an inexhaustible source of happiness, unknown to those who live a life of the senses. Henceforth he will require no more to speculate reflectively about the truth, for he will see it clear in his own heart. Henceforth he will not be required to be exposed to storms, but may seek shelter in a tranquil place; not because he is afraid of the storms, which can do him no harm, but because he wants to employ his energies for the full development of the newly awakened spiritual germ, instead of wasting them uselessly on the outward plane.

[p. 57]

"What the disciple ought to seek is to strengthen his character, which constitutes his real individuality; keeping it always in harmony with the law of divine wisdom and love. A man without strength of character is without true individuality, without self-reliance, moved only by the emotions which arise in his mind and which belong to powers foreign to his divine nature.

"Only after the attainment of a certain state of maturity, life in a solitude, isolated from contrary influences, becomes desirable and useful, and those who retire from the world as long as they need the world are attempting to ascend to the kingdom of heaven by beginning at the top of the ladder. Let him who needs the world remain in the world. The greater the temptations are by which he is surrounded, the greater will be his strength if he successfully resists. Only he who can control his mind and within his own mental sphere create the conditions which his spirit requires, is independent of all external conditions and free. He who cannot evolve a world within his own soul needs the external world to evolve his soul.

"Unspiritual men, therefore, who retire from the world because they are afraid of the world, cannot be considered to be heroes who

[p. 58]

have renounced the world; they deserve rather to be regarded as cowards who have deserted their ranks at the beginning of the battle with life. Such people sometimes retire into convents for the purpose of having a comfortable life, and in addition to that a ticket to heaven. They imagine they do a service to God by leading a harmless and useless life; for which imaginary service they expect to obtain a reward at the end of life. But the reward which they will receive will also exist merely in their imagination. As the sensualist wastes his time in the prosecution of useless pleasures, so the bigot wastes his time in useless ceremonies and prayers. The actions of the former are instigated by a desire for sensual pleasure in this life, those of the latter by the hope for pleasure in another life; both are acting for the purpose of gratifying their own selfish desires. I am unable to see any essential difference between the motives and morals of the two.

"But with spiritually developed man the case is entirely different. The divine spark in man exists independent of the conditions of relative space and time; it is eternal and self-existent. It cannot be angered by opposition, nor irritated by contradiction, nor be thrown into confusion by sophistry. If it

[p. 59]

has once become conscious of its own power, it will not require the stimulus needed by the physical organism and afforded by the impressions which come through the avenues of the senses from the outer world; for it is itself that stimulus which creates worlds within its own substance. It is the Lord over all the animal elemental forces in the astral body of man, and their turmoil can neither educate nor degrade it, for it is Divinity itself in its pure state, being eternal, unchangeable, and free."

"Do you mean to say," I asked, "that all asceticism and self-denial is useless?" And the Master answered:

"It all depends upon the motive. All that the egotist does for his own selfish progress and aggrandisement is useless; it is done for an illusion, and increases his self-conceit. But this you will understand only when the consciousness of the divine state awakens within you, and you begin to realise the difference between your true and your illusive self.

"He in whom this divine principle has once awakened, he who has once practically experienced the inner life, who has visited the kingdom of heaven within his own soul, he who stands firm upon his feet, will no more need the educating influences of the contending storms of the outer world, to gain strength

[p. 60]

by resistance; nor will he experience any desire to return to the pleasures and tomfooleries of the world. He renounced nothing when he retired into the solitude; for it cannot be looked upon as an act of renunciation if we throw away a thing which is a burden to us. He cannot be called an ascetic; for he does not undergo any discipline or process of hardening; it is no act of self-denial to refuse things which we do not want. The true ascetic is he who lives in the world, surrounded by its temptations; he in whose soul the animal elements are still active, craving for the gratification of their desires and possessing the means for their gratification, but who by the superior power of his will conquers his animal self. Having attained that state, he may retire from the world and employ his energies for the employment and the further expansion of the spiritual power which he possesses. He will be perfectly happy, because that which he desires he can create in his own interior world. He expects no future reward in heaven; for what could heaven offer to him except happiness which he already possesses. He desires no other good but to create good for the world.

"If you could establish theosophical academies where intellectual and spiritual development

[p. 61]

would go hand in hand, where a new science could be taught, based upon a true knowledge of the fundamental laws of the universe, and where at the same time man would be taught how to obtain mastery over himself, you would confer the greatest possible benefit upon the world. Such a convent would, moreover, afford immense advantages for the advancement of intellectual research. The establishment of a number of such places of learning would dot the mental horizon of the world with stars of the first magnitude, from which rays of intellectual light would stream and penetrate the world. Standing upon a far higher plane than the material science of our times, a new and far greater field would be laid open for investigation and research in these centres. Knowing all the different opinions of the highest accepted authorities, and not being bound by an orthodox scientific creed, having at their service all the results of the investigations of the learned, but not being bound to their systems by a belief in their infallibility, such people would be at liberty to think freely. Their convents would become centres of intelligence, illuminating the world; and if their power of self-control would grow in equal proportion with the development of their intellect, they would soon be able to enter adeptship."

[p. 62]

The Adept had spoken these words with unusual warmth, as if he intended to appeal to my sympathy and to induce me to use my efforts to establish such convents; there was a look of pity in his eyes, as if he exceedingly regretted the state of poor ignorant humanity, with whose Karma he was not permitted to interfere forcibly, according to the established rules of his order. I, too, regretted my own inability to establish such academies, and for once I wished that I were rich, so as to be able to make at least an attempt with one such establishment. But immediately the Imperator saw my thought in my mind, and said:

"You mistake; it is not the want of money which prevents us from executing this idea; it is the impossibility of finding at present the proper kind of people to inhabit the convent after it is established. Indeed, we would be poor alchemists if we could not produce gold in any desirable quantity, if some real benefit for humanity could be effected thereby, and of this I shall convince you, if you desire it. But gold is a curse to mankind, and we do not wish to increase the curse from which humanity suffers. Distribute gold among men, and you will only create a craving for more; give them power, and you will transform them into devils. No; it

[p. 63]

is not gold that we need; it is men who thirst after true wisdom. There are thousands who desire knowledge, but few who desire wisdom. Intellectual development, sagacity, craftiness, cunning, are to-day mistaken for spiritual development, but this conception is wrong; animal cunning is not intelligence, craftiness is not wisdom, and most of your learned men are the last ones who can bear the truth. Even many of your would-be occultists and so-called Rosicrucians have taken up their investigations merely for the purpose of gratifying their idle curiosity, while others desire to pry into the secrets of nature to obtain knowledge which they hope to employ for the attainment of selfish ends. Give us men or women who desire nothing else but the truth, and we will take care of their needs. How much money will it require to lodge a person who cares nothing for comfort? What will it take to furnish the kitchen for those who have no desire for dainties? What libraries will be required for those who can read in the book of nature? What external pictures will please those who wish to avoid a life of the senses and to retire within their own selves? What terrestrial scenery shall be selected for those who live within the paradise of their souls? What company will please those who converse with their

[p. 64]

own higher self? How can we amuse those who live in the presence of God?"

Here the Adept paused for a moment, and then continued, saying: "Verily the theosophical monastery of which I dream is even superior to ours. It is located far away from this earth, and yet it can be reached without trouble and without expense. Its monks and nuns have risen above the sphere of self. They have a temple of infinite dimensions, pervaded by the spirit of sanctity, which is the common possession of all. There the differentiation of the Universal Soul ceases, and Unification takes place. It is a convent where there exists no difference of sex, of taste, opinion, and desire; where vice cannot enter; where none are born, or marry, or die, but where they live like the angels; each one constituting the centre of a power for good; each one immersed in an infinite ocean of light; each one able to see all he desires to see, to know all he wants to know, growing in strength and expanding in size, until he embraces the All and is one with it."

For a moment it seemed as if the soul of the Adept had gone and visited that blissful state of Nirvana, a state of which we mortals cannot conceive; but soon the light returned into his eyes, and he smilingly excused himself, saying that he had permitted himself to be carried

[p. 65]

away by the sublimity of this idea. I ventured to say that probably millions of ages would pass away before mankind would arrive at that state.

"Alas!" he answered, "the conditions which our present state of civilisation imposes upon its followers are now such as to force the vast majority of humanity to employ nearly all their time and energy in an outward direction, instead of employing them for their inward growth. Each man has a certain amount of energy which he may call his own. If he wastes his energy on the outward plane, either for the attainment of sensual gratification or in intellectual pursuits, he will have nothing left to nourish the divine germ in his heart. If he continually concentrates his mind outwardly, there will be no inward concentration of thought, which is absolutely necessary for the attainment of self-knowledge. The labouring classes, men of commerce, scientists, doctors, lawyers, and clergymen are all actively engaged in outward affairs, and find little time for the inward concentration of their powers. The majority are continually occupied in running after shadows and illusions, which are at best only useful as long as they last, but whose usefulness ceases when the heart ceases to beat. Their time and energy are taken up in procuring what they call

[p. 66]

the 'necessaries of life,' and they excuse themselves by saying that it is their misfortune to be so situated as to be forced to procure them. Nature, however, cares nothing for our excuses; the law of cause and effect is blind and inaccessible to argumentation. A man climbing over a mountain top and falling over a precipice, is as much in danger of breaking his neck as if he had jumped down voluntarily; a man who is not able to progress will be left as far behind as one who does not desire to progress. But nature is not so cruel as she appears to be to the superficial observer. That which man requires for the purpose of living is very little indeed, and can usually be easily obtained; for nature has amply provided for all of her children, and if they cannot all obtain their proper share then there must be something seriously wrong, either with them individually or with the social organisation as a whole. There is undoubtedly a great deal wrong in our social organisation, and our philosophers and politicians are continually trying to remedy it. They will succeed in their task when they succeed in making the laws of the human world harmonise with the laws of nature, and not before. That event may take place in the far distant future. We have not the time to wait for it. Let each one attempt to restore harmony in his own individual 

[p. 67]

organism and live according to natural laws, and the harmony of the social organism as a whole will be restored."

The words of the Adept caused me some irritation, for I loved the comforts of life. A spirit of contradiction arose within me and caused me to say: "Would you, then, do away with all luxuries, which at our present stage of civilisation have become necessities? Would you have us return to the semi-animal state of our forefathers, living as savages in the woods? I know there are certain cranks that harbour such views."

"Not so," answered the Adept. "The great bulk of those things which are said to be the necessities of life are only artificially created necessities, and millions of people lived and attained old age long before many of the things which our modern civilisation considers as absolutely necessary had been discovered or invented. The term 'necessity' has a relative meaning; and to a king a dozen of palaces, to a nobleman a carriage and four, may appear as much a necessity as to a beggar a bottle of whisky, or to a fashionable man a new swallowtail coat. To get rid at once of all such fancied necessities and the trouble which is imposed upon us to attain them, the shortest and surest way is to rise above such necessities and to

[p. 68]

consider them not to be necessary at all. Then a great amount of our energy would become free, and might be employed for the acquisition of that which is really necessary, because it is eternal and permanent, while that which serves merely temporal purposes ends in time.

"There are thousands of people engaged in prying into the details of the constitution of external objects and in learning the chemical and physiological processes going on therein, and some are sacrificing their soul and extinguishing the spark of divinity within themselves by perpetrating the most inhuman cruelties upon their fellow-beings for the purpose of gratifying their scientific curiosity and making useless discoveries for the promotion of their ambition; but they do not manifest the least desire to know their own real self, although it would seem that such a knowledge is far more important. Modern science says that she wants to know the laws of nature in all their minute ramifications, and yet she pays no attention whatever to the universal and fundamental law from which all these ramifications spring; and thus she resembles an insect crawling over a fallen leaf and imagining thereby to learn the qualities of the tree. It is surely the prerogative of intellectual man to investigate intellectually all the departments

[p. 69]

of nature; but the investigation of external things is only of secondary importance to the attainment of knowledge of our own interior powers. All primary powers act from within; effects are secondary to causes. He who considers the knowledge of external things to be more important than the knowledge of God, possesses very little wisdom indeed."

"God?" I exclaimed. "What can we know about God? How can you prove that such a being exists?"

To this answered the Adept: "I am sorry for a man who is so far backward in his course of spiritual evolution that he is not yet able to recognise the presence of God in everything. The supreme spirit which pervades, embraces, and penetrates everything, being the very essence, soul, and life of all things in the universe, from the atom up to the whole solar system, is beyond all mental conception. If He could be grasped by the human intellect, that intellect would have to be greater than God. There is nothing real but God. Nature itself is only a manifestation of His power. Let no man expect that somebody will prove to him the existence of God; but let every one seek to be himself a living witness of His presence and power by becoming god-like and divine by His divine grace. Man is destined

[p. 70]

to restore within himself the divine image. When he realises the divine ideal within his heart, his pilgrimage through manifold incarnations will have ended and the object of his existence be accomplished. Peace be with you!"

As the Adept finished this sentence, a sound as if produced by the tinkling of small silver bells was heard in the air above our heads. I looked up, but nothing was to be seen from which that sound could have proceeded.

"This is the signal," said the Adept, "that the members of our order are assembled in the Refectory. Let us go to join their company. Some refreshment will undoubtedly be welcome to you."

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

IV

  

THE REFECTORY

WE stepped out into the corridor and entered the garden. The palm trees and exotic plants, by which we were surrounded, formed a strong contrast to the weird and desolate scenery, with its fields of ice and scrub-pines, which I had seen before entering this enchanted valley. High bushes of fuchsias alternated with rose-bushes, and all were covered with the most beautiful flowers; the air was perfumed with the odour of many varieties of hyacinths, heliotropes, and other plants whose names I do not remember. Nevertheless the place was not a hot-house, for there was no other roof over it than the clear blue sky. I wondered whether perhaps the garden was heated from below the surface, and the thought came into my mind that so much luxury seemed not to agree with the view, expressed by the Adept, that those who live within the paradise of their own souls do not care for external sensual gratification. But again the

[p. 72]

[paragraph continues] Imperator seemed to know my thought even before it had taken a definite form in my mind, and said:

"We have created these illusions to make your visit to this place an agreeable one in every respect. All these trees and plants which you see require no gardener, and are inexpensive; they cost us nothing but an effort of our imagination."

I went up to one of the rose-bushes and broke one of the roses. It was a real rose, as real as I had ever seen before; its odour was sweet, and it had just unfolded its leaves in the rays of the midday sun.

"Surely," I said, "this rose which I hold in my hand cannot be an illusion, or an effect of my imagination?"

"No," answered the Adept, "it is not produced by your own imagination, but it is a product of the imagination of nature, whose processes can be guided by the spiritual will of the Adept. The whole world, with its solid planets, its mountains of granite, its oceans and rivers, the whole earth with all its multifarious forms, is nothing else but a product of the imagination of the Universal Mind, which is the creator of forms. Forms are nothing real, they are merely illusions or shapes of substance; a form without substance is unthinkable 

[p. 73]

and cannot exist. But the only substance of which we know is the universal primordial element of matter, constituting the substance of Universal Mind, the A'kasa. This element of matter is invisibly present everywhere; but only when it assumes a certain state of density, sufficient to resist the penetrating influence of the terrestrial light, does it come within the reach of your sensual perception, and assume for you an objective shape. The universal power of will penetrates all things. Guided by the spiritual intelligence of the Adept, whose consciousness pervades all his surroundings, it creates in the Universal Mind those shapes which the Adept imagines; for the sphere of the Universal Mind is his own. By an occult process, which cannot be at present explained to you, but which exists principally in a motion of will, the shapes thus created in the mind-substance of the Adept are rendered dense, and thereby become objective and visible to you."

"I acknowledge," I said, "that this is still incomprehensible to me. Can an image formed in your head come out of your head and assume a material form?"

The Adept seemed to be amused at my ignorance, and smilingly answered: "Do you believe that the sphere of mind in which man

[p. 74]

lives exists only within the circumference of his skull? I should be sorry for such a man; for he would not be able to see or experience anything whatever beyond the processes going on in that part of his mind contained within his skull. The whole world would be to him nothing but impenetrable and incomprehensible darkness. He would not be able to see the sun or any external object; for man can perceive nothing except that which exists within his own mind. Fortunately for man, the sphere of the mind of each individual man reaches as far as the stars. It reaches as far as his power of perception reaches. His mind comes in contact with all things, however distant they may be from his physical body. Thus his mind--not his brain--receives the impressions, and these impressions come to his consciousness within his physical brain, which is merely the centre in which the messages of the mind are received."

After giving this explanation, the Adept, evidently still seeing some doubts in my mind, directed me to look at a magnolia tree which stood, at a short distance. It was a tree of perhaps sixty feet in height, and covered with great, white, beautiful flowers. While I looked, the tree began to appear less and less dense. The green foliage faded into gray, so that the

[p. 75]

white blossoms could hardly be distinguished from the leaves; it became more and more shadowy and transparent; it seemed to be merely the ghost of a tree, and finally it disappeared entirely from view.

"Thus," continued the Adept, "you see that tree stood in the sphere of my mind as it stood in yours. We are all living within the sphere of each other's mind, and he in whom the power of spiritual perception has been developed may at all times see the images created in the mind of another. The Adept creates his own images; the ordinary mortal lives in the products of the imagination of others, either in those of the imagination of nature, or in those which have been created by other minds. We live in the paradise of our own consciousness, and the objects which you behold exist in the realm of our consciousness; but these spheres are not narrow. They may be expanded far beyond the limits of the visible objects around us, and continue to expand until they become one with the whole Universe.

"The power of the imagination is yet too little known to mankind, else they would better beware of what they think. If a man thinks a good or an evil thought, that thought calls into existence a corresponding form or power within

[p. 76]

the sphere of his mind, which may assume density and become living, and continue to live long after the physical body of the man who created it has died. It will accompany his soul after death, because the creations are attracted to their creator."

"Does, then," I asked, "every evil thought, or the imagination of something evil, create that evil and cause it to exist as a living entity?"

"Not so," answered the Imperator. "Every thought calls into existence the form or power of which we think; but these things have no life until life is infused into them by the Will. If they do not receive life from the Will, they are like shadows and soon fade away. If this were not the case, men could never read of a crime without mentally committing it, and thereby creating most vicious Elementals. You may imagine evil deeds of all kinds; but, unless you have a desire to perform them, the creations of your imagination obtain no life. But if you desire to perform them, if your will is so evil that you would be willing to perform them if you had the external means to do so, then it may perhaps be as bad for you as if you had actually committed them, and you create thereby a living although invisible power of evil. It is the Will which endows the creations 

[p. 77]

of imagination with life, because Will and Life are fundamentally identical."

Seeing a doubt arise in my mind, he continued: "If I speak of the Will as a life-giving power, I am speaking of the spiritual will-power which resides in the heart. A willpower merely exercised by the brain is like the cold light of the moon, which has no power to warm the forms upon which it falls. The life-giving will-power comes from the heart, and acts like the rays of the sun which call life into action in minerals, plants, and animals. It is that which man desires with his heart, not that which he merely imagines with his brain, which has real power. Fortunately for mankind in general, this spiritual power which calls the creations of the imagination into objective visible existence is in the possession of very few, else the world would be filled with living materialised monsters, which would devour mankind; for there are in our present state of civilisation more people who harbour evil desires than such as desire the good. But their will is not spiritual enough to be powerful; it comes more from the brain than from the heart; it is usually only strong enough to harm him who created the evil thought, and to leave others unaffected. Thus you see how important it is that men

[p. 78]

should not come into possession of spiritual powers until they become virtuous and good. These are mysteries which in former times were kept very secret, and which ought not to be revealed to the vulgar."

We entered through a Gothic portal into a hall. The light fell through four high windows into the room, which was of an octagonal form. In the midst of this room stood a round table surrounded by chairs, and the corners formed by the sides of the octagon were provided with furniture of various kinds. There were quite a number of the Brothers assembled, some of whom I recognised from having seen their pictures in historical representations; but what astonished me above all was that there were two ladies present--one appearing very tall and dignified, the other one of smaller stature and of a more delicate, but not less noble, appearance, and exceedingly beautiful. To find ladies in the monastery of the Brothers of the Golden and Rosy Cross was a fact which surprised and staggered me, and my confusion was evidently observed by all present; but after I had been introduced to all the persons present--or, to express it more correctly, after they had all been introduced to me, for they all seemed to know me and not to need my introduction--the

[p. 79]

tall lady took my hand and led me to the table, while she smilingly spoke the following words:

"Why should you be so surprised, my friend, to see Adepts inhabiting female forms in company of those whose forms appear to be of a male character? What has intelligence to do with the sex of the body? Where the sexual instincts end, there ends the influence of sex. Come, now, and take this chair by my side, and have some of this delicious fruit."

The table was covered with a variety of excellent fruits, some of which I had never seen before, and which do not grow in this country. The illustrious company took their seats, and a conversation ensued in which all took part. I only too deeply felt my own inferiority while in this place, but every one seemed to exert his powers to reassure me and to make me imagine that I was their equal. The Brothers and Sisters hardly tasted the food, but they seemed to be pleased to see me enjoy it, and in fact my morning walk and the pure air of the mountain had given me a very good appetite. The noble lady next to whom I was seated soon succeeded in making my embarrassment vanish, answered my questions in regard to the causes of certain occult phenomena, and made a few practical experiments 

[p. 80]

to illustrate her doctrines. The following may serve as an example of the powers she possessed to create illusions.

We came to speak of the intrepidity and undaunted courage which he must possess who desires to enter the realm of occult research: "For," she said, "the whole elemental world, with all its monstrosities and animal elements, is opposed to man's spiritual progress. The animals (Elementals) in the animal principle of man's constitution live on his life and on the substance of his animal elements. If the divine spirit awakens within the heart of man and sends its light into those animal elements, the substance on which these parasites live becomes destroyed, and they begin to rage like other famished beasts. They fight for their lives and for their food, and they are therefore the greatest impediments and opponents to the spiritual progress of man. They live in the lower regions of the soul of man, and are, under normal conditions, invisible to the external senses, although under certain conditions they may even become visible and objective. They live in families, and reproduce their species like our terrestrial animals; they fight with each other and eat each other up. If a man's selfish desires, such as are of a minor type, are all swallowed up by some

[p. 81]

great master-passion, it merely shows that a monster elemental has grown in his soul and devoured all the minor elementals."

I answered that it was impossible for me to believe that man was such a living and walking menagerie, and said I wished I could see one of these elementals, so as to realise what it was.

"Would you not be afraid," she asked, "if such a vicious thing were to appear?"

I began to boast of my bravery, and said that I was never afraid of anything which I could see with my eyes and reach with my hands; that fear was the outcome of ignorance, and that knowledge dispelled all fear.

"You are right," she answered; "but will you be so kind as to hand me that basket with pears."

I stretched forth my hand after the basket with pears, which stood in the midst of the table, and as I was about to grasp it, a horrible rattlesnake rose up between the fruit; rearing its head and making a noise with its rattles as if in great anger. Horror-struck, I withdrew my hand, barely escaping its venomous bite; but while I stared at it, the serpent coiled itself up again among the pears, its glistening scales disappeared in the basket, and it was gone.

[p. 82]

"If you had dared to grasp the snake," said one of the Brothers, who had witnessed the scene, "you would have found it to be merely a shadow."

"The Will," remarked the Imperator, "is not merely a life-giving power; it is also a destroyer. It causes the atoms of primordial matter to collect around a centre; it holds them together, or it may disperse them again into space. It is Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva in one; the creator, maintainer, and destroyer of form."

"These Elementals," said the beautiful lady, "master us if we do not master them. If we attack them without fear, they can do us no harm; our thought is destructive to them; because they are the creations of our own thoughts."

The conversation during our breakfast turned to occultism and kindred subjects. "Occultism and alchemy," said one of the Brothers, "are at once the most difficult and the easiest things to grasp. They are indeed easy to comprehend, if we only look at the mysteries of nature by the light of wisdom, with which each human being, except an idiot, has been endowed by nature at the time of his birth. But if in the place of the sun of divine wisdom, the artificial candlelight of false logic, sophistry, and

[p. 83]

speculation has been lit by irrational education, man steps out of his natural state and becomes unnatural. The images of the eternal truths--which were mirrored in his mind while he was a child and innocent, and not sufficiently intellectually developed to understand them--become, by the time that his intellect is developed, so distorted and perverted by prejudices and misconceptions that their original forms are no more recognisable, and, instead of seeing the real, man only sees the hallucinations which his fancy has created."

"Do you mean to say," I asked, "that man can possibly know anything about the nature of things, besides that which has been taught to him by his books?"

"Does the child," asked the Adept, in answer to my question, "need an instructor to explain to it the use of its mother's breasts? Do the cattle require books on botany to know which herbs are poisonous and which are wholesome? Those artificial systems which have been created by man, and which are therefore unnatural, cannot be found in the book of nature; to know the name of a thing which has been invented for it by man, the child needs man's instructions; but the essential attributes of a thing are independent of the name given to it.

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] Shakespeare says that a rose would have an agreeable odour, even if it were called by some other name. At the present stage of education, natural philosophers know all about the artificial names and classifications of things, but very little about their interior qualities. What does a modern botanist know about the signatures of plants, by which the Occultist recognises the medicinal and occult properties of plants as soon as he sees them? The animals have remained natural, while man became unnatural. The sheep does not need to be instructed by a zoologist to seek to escape if a tiger approaches; it knows by his signature, and without argumentation, that he is his enemy. Is it not much more important for the sheep to know the ferocious character of the tiger, than to be informed that the latter belongs to genus Felis? If by some miracle a sheep should become intellectual, it might learn so much about the external form, anatomy, physiology, and genealogy of the tiger, that it would lose sight of its internal character and be devoured by it. Absurd as this example may appear, it is nevertheless the true representation of what is done in your schools every day. There the rising generation receive what they call a scientific education. They are taught all about the external form of man, and how that

[p. 85]

form may be comfortably fed, lodged, and housed, but the sight of the real man who occupies that form is entirely lost, his needs are neglected, he is starved, ill-treated, and crucified, and some of your 'great lights of science' have become so short-sighted that they even deny that he is."

"But," I objected, "is it not a great prerogative which intellectual man enjoys over the animal creation, that he possesses an intellect by which he is able to understand the attributes of things which the animal merely instinctively feels?"

"True," said the Brother; "but man should use his intellect in accordance with reason, and not oppose his intellect to the same. Instinct in animals is the activity in the animal organism of that principle whose action in human beings is called reason. It is the faculty of the soul to feel the truth; while the function of the intellect is to understand that which is instinctively or intuitively felt by the soul, or perceived by the exterior senses. If the intellect were to act only in harmony with reason, all intellectual human beings would not only be intellectual, but would also be wise; but we know from our daily experience that intellectuality is not necessarily accompanied by wisdom, that often those who are most cunning are also

[p. 86]

most vicious, and the most learned often the most unreasonable."

"The first and most important step," continued the Brother, "which man must take, if he desires to obtain spiritual power, is to become natural. Only when he has thrown off all his unnatural qualities can he hope to become spiritually strong. If he were to become spiritual before he becomes natural, he would be an unnatural spiritual monster. Such monsters have existed and still exist. They are the spiritual powers of evil acting through human forms; they are the Adepts of Black Magic, sorcerers and villains of various grades."

"Then," I said, "I presume that great criminals are to a certain extent black magicians."

"Not necessarily so," answered the Brother. "The majority of evil-doers do evil, not for the love of evil, but for the purpose of attaining some selfish purpose. The villains who are on the road to Black Magic do evil because they love it, in the same sense as those who are on the road to true adeptship perform good merely because they love good. But whether man performs good or evil acts, a constant or frequent repetition of such acts causes him finally to perform them instinctively, and thus his own nature becomes gradually either identified with

[p. 87]

good or with evil. He who merely tortures a fly for the sake of torturing it, and because he is pleased to do so, is farther progressed on the road to villainy and absolute evil with consequent destruction, than he who murders a man because he imagines it to be necessary for his own protection that he should murder him."

Here the conversation began to turn about White Magic and the wonderful powers of certain Tibetan Adepts. The Imperator, who had recently visited them, gave a detailed account of his visit. But, strange as it may appear, while all the details of the other part of our conversation remained deeply engraven in my memory, the account given by the Imperator about that visit is entirely effaced from my recollection, and I cannot remember anything whatever about it. It is as if its recollection had been purposely eradicated from my mind.

After our breakfast was over, the Imperator recommended me to the care of the two Lady-Adepts, and told me that he would soon rejoin us to show me his alchemical laboratory. I then accompanied my two protectors into the beautiful garden.

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

  

V

  

RECOLLECTIONS OF PAST LIVES

WE passed through an alley formed by oleander bushes in full bloom, and arrived at a small round pavilion standing upon a little eminence, which afforded a beautiful view of the country and the tall mountain tops in the distance. The roof of the pavilion was supported by marble columns surrounded by ivy, which grew around the pillars and nearly covered the roof, hanging down at intervals in the open spaces. We seated ourselves, and after a short pause, my friend, whom I will call Leila, said: "I owe you an explanation in regard to the remarks I made when I saw your astonishment at seeing the female sex represented among the Brothers of the Golden and Rosy Cross. Your intuition told you right. It does not indeed very often happen that an individual attains adeptship while inhabiting a female organism, because such an organism is not as well adapted as a male one to develop energy and strength, and it is, therefore frequently the case that those

[p. 89]

women who have far advanced on the road to adeptship must reincarnate in a male organism, before they can achieve the final result. Nevertheless, exceptions are found. You know that the organism of a man is not fundamentally different from that of a woman, and in each human being are male and female elements combined. In women usually the female elements preponderate, and in men the male ones are usually most active, although we meet with women of a masculine character, and with men who are of a womanish nature. In a perfect human being the male and female elements are nearly equally strong, with a slight preponderance of the male element, which represents the productive power in nature, while the female element represents the formative principle. This occult law, which to explain at present would lead us deep into the mysteries of nature, will become comprehensible to you if you will study the laws of harmony. You will then find that the Moll-accord is the harmonious counterpart of the Dur-accord, but that the greatest beauty finds its expression in Dur. Other and numerous analogies may be found, and we shall leave it to your own ingenuity to find them out.

"If you therefore find an Adept inhabiting a female organism, you will be right in concluding that such an abnormal circumstance is due to some extraordinary conditions and experiences

[p. 90]

through which such an Adept has passed during his last incarnation. A plant in a hot-house will grow faster than one which is not cared for, and, likewise, extraordinary suffering may cause the early development of the flower of spirituality, which without such suffering would have taken place, perhaps, much later in some other incarnation."

This revelation stirred my curiosity, and I begged the lady to give me an account of her past life, as it was before she became an Adept.

"It is sometimes painful," answered Leila, "to dwell on the memories of the past, but perhaps our sister Helen will give you such an account of her life."

The lady addressed smiled, and said: "I will certainly do so to afford a pleasure to our visitor, but my life in comparison with yours has been very uninteresting. If you will proceed with your history, I will add mine at the end."

"Very well, then," answered Leila; "but to simplify matters, and to save time, I will show you its pictorial representation in the Astral Light. Look upon the table before you."

I looked upon the polished surface of the round marble table standing in the centre of the pavilion, and, as I looked, there appeared upon its surface the life-like image of a battlefield. 

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] There were the contending armies fighting with swords and spears, men on horseback and men on foot, knights in glistening armour, and common soldiers. Hot grows the fight; the dead and wounded cover the ground, and the soldiers to the left begin to give way, while those to the right press forward. Suddenly there appears at the left a beautiful woman, dressed in armour, carrying a sword in one hand and in the other a banner. Her features resemble those of the Lady-Adept. At sight of her the men to the left seem to become filled with strength, while their enemies seem to be stricken with terror. The latter flee, pursued by the men on the left, and a shout of triumph arises, and the picture fades away.

Now there appears another picture upon the table. It seems to be the interior of a Catholic church. There is a great assembly of dignitaries of church and state, of knights and nobles, bishops and priests, and a multitude of people. In front of the altar kneels an armoured knight, who seems to be the king, and a bishop, ornamented with the insignia of his office, puts a golden crown upon his head; but by the side of the king stands again that noble-looking woman, with a smile of triumph upon her face and holding a banner. A solemn music is heard, but as the crown rests upon the

[p. 92]

head of the king and he arises, a thousand voices hail him, and the picture fades away.

The next picture represents a dungeon filled with instruments of torture, such as were used at the time of the Inquisition. There are some men dressed in black, and in their eyes burns the fire of hate; there are others dressed in red; they are evidently the executioners. Some people with torches appear, and in their midst is Leila bound with chains. She looks at the men in black with pity and contempt. They ask her some silly questions, which she refuses to answer, and then they begin to torture her in a most cruel manner. I averted my sight, and when I looked again, the picture was gone.

In its place appeared another. There is a pile of wood, and in its midst a stake to which a chain is fastened. A procession approaches, led by villainous-looking monks and guarded by soldiers. Crowds of people surround the pile, but they give way as the procession approaches. In the midst of the monks and hangmen walks Leila, looking pale and emaciated from torture and sufferings; her hands are tied, and a rope is fastened round her neck. She mounts the pile and is fastened to the stake. She attempts to speak, but the praying monks dash water into her face to force her to remain silent. A

[p. 93]

hangman appears with a brand of fire; the wood begins to burn; the flames touch the body of the beautiful woman. I desired to see no more; I buried my face in my hands; I knew who Leila was.

After I had recovered from the impression which this horrible sight had made upon my mind, I expressed to Leila my admiration for her valour and virtue. I had always admired her as a historical character, and desired to see her portrait. Now she stood before me, the living original, youthful and strong, noble and beautiful, and yet, according to history, over 450 years of age.

It is useless to attempt to conceal a thought in the presence of the Adepts. Leila observed my thought, and answered it.

"No," she said, "I am much older than you think. I and you, and we all, are as old as creation. When the spirit began to breathe after the Great Pralaya was over, sending out of the centre the light of the Logos, which called the world into existence, we lived already, and we shall continue to live until this light returns to its source. God in us knows no age; He is eternal and independent of the conditions of time. Nor can our spiritual bodies be destroyed by fire."

[p. 94]

"But," I said, "your body was destroyed by fire."

"That which was destroyed," answered Leila, "was merely the grossest material substance of my physical organisation. As the fire consumed the gross matter, my ethereal form arose above the fire and the smoke; it was invisible to the multitude present, whose senses are so gross that they can only perceive gross matter; but it was visible to the Adepts who were present in their ethereal forms, and who took care of me, and after a short period of unconsciousness I awoke again to external life. Gradually my body hardened again by the action of the influences prevailing in my new home, and therefore I am now as visible and tangible to you as if I were still inhabiting my material form."

"Then, I presume," I said, "that the astral body of every human being or animal could be so hardened, after having left the physical form, and thus the spirits of the dead could be made to appear in a tangible and visible form."

"It could be done, and it has often been done," answered Leila, "by the vile practices of the necromantic art. It can be done with the earth-bound astral shades of some who have suddenly died by accident or murder,

[p. 95]

and in whose astral forms is therefore still a great deal of molecular adhesion; but the astral forms of those who have died long ago cannot be thus evoked, because their astral corpses have already been decomposed by the influences of the astral plane. But those materialised' forms have no life of their own, and cannot endure. They only live by the life-principle infused into them by the necromancer who performs such acts consciously, or by the medium who performs them unconsciously. To enable an astral form to continue to live after the death of the physical form, it must have attained spiritual life during the life of the physical body."

"Surely," I said, "in every human being the astral form contained within the physical body has life."

"True," she answered, "but not in every human being is it the centre of life and of consciousness. In ordinary mortals the seat of life is in the blood contained in the veins and arteries of the physical form, and the astral form lives only, so to say, from the reflex of that physical life. In the Adept, the centre of life and consciousness has been established in the organism of his soul, clothed with the astral form, and is therefore self-conscious and independent of the life of the

[p. 96]

physical body. I had already during former incarnations acquired that life and consciousness of the spirit. I was on the way to adeptship before I was born in a peasant's hut. During my childhood I had spiritual intercourse with Adepts, although I knew them not intellectually, because my intellectual activity, the result of my physical organisation, was then not sufficiently perfect to understand that which my spirit perceived. But," she continued, "let us drop these metaphysical speculations, which I see fatigue your brain, and which are still more difficult of comprehension, in that there is no rule without some exception, and the laws of nature are liable to produce endless varieties."

"Many thanks for your kindness in giving me so much information," I said; "but permit me to ask one more question. What were the voices you heard and the apparition you saw? Was it truly the archangel Michael who gave you your mission and aided you in your victories?"

"No," was the reply. "Angels do not interfere personally in mundane matters; spiritually developed man is higher than they. It was the influence of one of our Brothers, who was formerly a great warrior and patriot, whose power entered within myself and took

[p. 97]

the shape of a knight, representing the archangel for whom I always had a great veneration and whose image was foremost in my mind . . . But see. . . ."

To my great astonishment Leila became suddenly transformed into the luminous shape of a knight in a brilliant armour, which shone like the sun, so that I had to avert my eyes for fear of getting blinded. The apparition disappeared within a few moments, and Leila stood there again in her previous form.

I had for a long time observed the features of the other Lady-Adept; and it seemed to me as if I had seen her somewhere, perhaps in my dreams. Yes, I remember that when I was a mere child I once had a vision, while in a state between sleeping and waking, when it seemed to me as if an angel or a super-terrestrial being, clad in white and holding a white lily in her hand, were floating in the air over my head, extending the lily towards me. How often had I prayed in my heart to see that beautiful form again; and now, if I did not mistake, this lady was the form I had seen in my dream.

She was of exceeding great beauty; her long, black, waving hair formed a strong contrast to her plain, white, and flowing robe, covering her form with graceful folds. Her

[p. 98]

tint was pale and delicate, her profile was pure Greek; her dark eyes seemed to penetrate to the innermost centre of my soul, and to kindle there a fire of pure love and admiration without any admixture of the animal element.

"My life," said Helen, "was one of little importance. I was born at St. Petersburg, and my father was an officer in the imperial army. He died while I was very young, and left his family in great poverty. Besides the company of my mother, my relatives, and a teacher, there was nothing to attract me to earth. My mind unfolded and revelled in superterrestrial joys; I loved poetry; I loved to look at the clouds sailing in the sky, and to see in them objects of beauty; I communicated in spirit with the heroes of the past. But the development of my physical form could not keep step with the unfoldment of the mind. Cold, starvation, and want hastened its dissolution. After having reached my eighteenth year, I left my wasted, consumptive form, and was kindly received by the Brothers."

Her plain and modest tale filled my heart with pity. "And was there no one," I said, "among your country people intelligent enough to perceive your genius and to give you support?"

"They erected a costly monument to my

[p. 99]

memory," she answered, "after my body had succumbed. A part of the money expended for it would have procured me the necessaries to prolong my life. Those who knew me while living admired my poetry and my talents, but they were poor like myself. But let that pass. The conditions under which men live are the effects of previously acquired Karma. My poverty and suffering were my gain. I have cause to be well satisfied with my lot."

While the lady spoke, I scanned her features. Was it really she who had appeared to me years ago in a dream? Was it she who waved that lily as if pronouncing a blessing? Was it the magnetic current which seemed to stream through that symbol into the depths of my heart, and to call there a higher life into activity? Could that event have been a dream? Did it not fill my whole being with happiness at the time when it happened? Did its memory not remain deeply engraved in my heart, when thousands of other dreams had faded away?

Helen rose, and reaching out through one of the open spaces between the pillars, she broke a white lily flower which grew close by the wall. This she gave to me, and said, "Keep this flower; it will not fade like a dream; and when you see it you will know that I am not a product of hallucination."

[p. 100]

I thanked her and begged her to remain my protector in the future, as she had been in the past. To this she answered: "We can only assist those who protect themselves. We can only influence those who are ready to receive our influence. We can only approach those who spiritually approach our own sphere. Love causes mutual attraction; the pure will be attracted to the pure, the evil ones to that which is evil. To give presupposes the capacity to receive on the part of him who is to receive. The sunlight is open to all, but not all are able to see it. The eternal fountain of truth is inexhaustible and universal; but those who open their hearts to the sunshine of truth are few. Seek continually to rise above the sphere of selfishness, and you will be in company of those who have thrown off their animal elements and live in the spirit."

As the lady finished speaking, another Adept approached the pavilion. He was a man of small stature, but with a highly intellectual expression upon his face which at once indicated that he must be a Master. His head was almost bald on the top, and showed a most remarkable formation of his skull; at each side, however, there were gray locks of hair, and I immediately recognised in him one whose picture I had often seen and whose presence I

[p. 101]

had often felt, and whom I will call Theodorus. He had been a great Adept and Rosicrucian during his earthly life; he had been a great physician, and performed most wonderful cures. He had been a great alchemist, and knew the secret of the Cross and the Rose, of the Red Lion and the White Eagle.

As he entered, he announced that the Imperator had been called away to attend to some important affairs connected with politics on the mundane plane. He jocularly remarked that he had gone to prevent a certain statesman from committing an act of imbecility, which would, if he did not succeed in stopping it, be productive of a great war. He was therefore deputed by the Imperator to show me the alchemical laboratory and to correct some of my misconceptions in regard to alchemy. I was rather reluctant to leave the presence of the ladies, and I would have been willing to die at that moment to enable my soul to remain in their presence; but I could not with propriety decline the invitation. The ladies permitted me to retire, and I went with Theodorus into the halls of the Monastery.

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

  

VI

  

THE ALCHEMICAL LABORATORY

WE went through a beautiful and broad corridor, all along whose sides stood finely executed marble statues representing the gods and goddesses of antiquity, and busts of the heroes of olden times. "These statues," my companion remarked, "represent the elemental principles and powers of nature, and they were thus personified by the ancients to bring the attributes of these principles within the conceptive power of the mind. None of the old Greeks and Romans, except the most ignorant, ever believed that Zeus, Pluto, Neptune, &c., were existing personalities; nor did they ever worship them as such. They were merely symbols and personifications of formless powers. Likewise, every man's form and body is not the real man; it is merely a symbol and personification of the character and attributes of the real man, a form of matter in which the thoughts of the real man have found their external expression. The ancients knew these things; it is

[p. 103]

only the modern wiseacres who mistake the external illusions for internal truths, and the form for the principle. It is modern materialistic religion which has degraded the Universal Spirit into a limited being, and the great powers of nature into Christian saints."

We entered into a circular hall in the form of a temple. It had no windows, but received its light from a cupola of clear glass. High over our heads, below the cupola, was a large interlaced double triangle made of gold and surrounded by a snake biting its tail. In the midst of the room, and directly under that symbol, stood a round table with white marble top, in the centre of which was a smaller representation of the figure above, executed in silver. The walls were ornamented with bookcases, in which were a great number of books on alchemy. At one side of the room there was a kind of altar upon which stood a burning lamp. A couple of crucibles, a few bottles upon a side-table, and some armchairs completed the furniture of the room.

I looked around, expecting to see some furnaces, stoves, retorts, and other implements, such as are described in books on alchemy, but could see none. My instructor, reading my thoughts, laughingly said: "Did you expect to find here an apothecary's shop? You

[p. 104]

mistake, my friend. All this array of bottles and pots, of furnaces, stoves, retorts, mortars, filters, strainers, distilling, purifying, and refining apparatus, &c., described in books on alchemy, is nothing but nonsense, written to mislead the selfish and vicious, and to prevent them from prying into mysteries which they are not fit to receive. The true alchemist requires no ingredients for his processes, such as he could buy in a chemist's shop. He finds the materials which he needs within his own organisation. The highest processes of alchemy require no mechanical labour; they consist in the purification of the soul, and in transforming animal man into a divine being."

"But," said I, "did not the ancient alchemists treat real metals and transform them into others of a higher order?"

To this Theodorus replied:

"The invisible principles of which the constitution of man is made up are called his metals, because they are more lasting and enduring than flesh and blood. The metals which are formed by his thoughts and desires will continue to exist after the perishing elements constituting his physical body have been dissolved. Man's animal principles are the base metals of which his animal organisation consists; they must be changed into nobler metals by trans-

[p. 105]

forming his vices into virtue, until they pass through all colours and turn into the gold of pure spirituality. To accomplish this it is necessary that the grossest elements in his astral form should die and putrefy, so that the light of the spirit penetrate through the hard shell and call the inner man into life and activity."

"Then," I said, "all those alchemical prescriptions which we find in the books are only to be taken in a figurative sense, and have nothing to do with material substances, such as salt, sulphur, mercury, &c."

"Not exactly so," answered the Adept. "There are no hard lines separating the various kingdoms in nature, and the actions of laws manifested in one kingdom find their analogies in other kingdoms. The processes taking place in the spiritual planes are also taking place  the astral and material planes, subject, of course, to such modifications as are imposed by the conditions existing upon these planes. Nature is not, as your scientists seem to believe, an agglomeration of fundamentally different objects and elements; nature is a whole, and everything in the organism acts and is acted on by every other thing contained therein. This is a fact which the ancient alchemists knew, and which the modern chemists would do well

[p. 106]

to remember; for we find already in the book of Sohar the following passage, which I advise you to note down in your book, so that you will not forget it: Everything that exists upon the Earth has its ethereal counterpart above the Earth (that is to say, in the inner realm), and there is nothing, however insignificant it may appear in the world, which is not depending on something higher (or more interior ); so that if the lower part acts, its presiding higher part reacts upon it."

"It has been taught by the ancients," I interjected, "that man is a little world, constituted in a manner similar to the big world, which he inhabits."

"This is true," said the Adept; "but you should not merely know it as a theory, but realise it. Within yourself is contained the universe with all its powers, heaven and hell, angels and devils, and all the kingdoms with their inhabitants, and you may call them into life at your pleasure. You are the god and creator within your own universe. You continually people that world with forms, coming into existence by your thoughts, and you infuse them with your life by the power of will. In each human being are contained germinally the essences which constitute the mineral, vegetable, animal, or human kingdom; in each man are contained

[p. 107]

powers which may be developed into a tiger, a snake, a hog, a dragon, into a sage or a villain, into an angel or devil, into an Adept or a God. Those elements which are made to grow and to be developed will become the man's alter ego and constitute his "self." Look at the double interlaced triangle over your head; it represents the Macrocosm with all the forces contained therein, the interpenetration and union of Spirit and Matter, within the never-ending circle of eternity. Look at the smaller symbol upon the table before you; it represents the same elements within the constitution of Man. If you can bring the double interlaced triangles existing within your own body into harmony with those existing in the Universe, the powers of nature will be yours, and you will be able to guide and control them."

I thought of the nature of the many different ingredients necessary to make an alchemical experiment, and of the manner in which they must be mixed; but Theodorus perceived my thought and replied:

"The universal process, by which all the processes of life take place, is the unfoldment of Life. He who can guide and control the power of life is an alchemist. He can create new forms and increase the substance of those forms. The chemist creates nothing new; he merely

[p. 108]

forms new combinations of the substances in his possession; the alchemist causes the substance to attract corresponding elements from the invisible storehouse in nature, and to increase. The chemist deals with matter in which the principle of life is inactive, that is to say, in which it manifests itself merely as mechanical or chemical energy; the alchemist deals with the principle of life, and causes living forms to come into existence. The chemist may transform sulphur into invisible gas and cause that gas to become sulphur again, and the sulphur obtained at the end of the experiment will be just as much in quantity as it was at the beginning; but the gardener who puts a seed in the ground, and prepares the conditions necessary for that seed to grow into a tree, is an alchemist because he calls something into existence which did not exist ready-made in the seed, and out of one seed he may thus obtain a thousand seeds of the same kind."

"But," I objected, "it is said that the Rosicrucians possessed the power to turn iron, silver, or mercury into gold. Surely there is no gold in pure silver or mercury; how, then, could they cause something to grow which did not exist?"

The Adept smiled, and said: "Through your lips speaks the learned ignorance of

[p. 109]

your modern civilisation, which cannot see the truth, because it has created a mountain of misconceptions and scientific prejudices which now stand between itself and the truth. Let me then tell you once more that Nature is a Unity, and that consequently each particle of matter, even the smallest, is a part of nature in which the possibilities of the whole are hidden. Each speck of dust may under favourable conditions develop into a universe in which all the elements existing in nature can be found. The reason why your scientists are unable to comprehend this truth is because their fundamental doctrines about the constitution of matter and energy are entirely wrong. Your Dualism in theology has been the cause of untold misery, creating a continual quarrel between God and the Devil; your Polytheism in science blinds the eyes and obstructs the judgment of the learned, and keeps them in ignorance. What do you know about the attributes of primordial matter? What do you know about the difference between matter and force? All the so-called "simple substances" known to your science are originally grown out of primordial matter. But this primordial matter is a Unity; it is only One. Consequently each particle of this primordial matter must be able to grow under certain

[p. 110]

conditions into gold, under other conditions to produce iron, under others mercury, &c. This is what the ancient alchemists meant when they said that each of the seven metals contains the seeds of the other seven; and they also taught that, for the purpose of transmuting one body into another, the body to be transmuted would have to be reduced first into its Prima Materia.

"But," he continued, "I see that you are anxious to have the truth of these doctrines demonstrated by an experiment; let us then see whether it is possible that we can make gold grow out of its seed."

Without rising from the big armchair in which Theodorus was seated, he then directed me to take one of the crucibles upon the table, to see that it was empty, and to put it upon a tripod over the flame burning upon the altar. I did as directed. He then said: "Now take some of the silver pieces which you have in your pocket, and throw them into the crucible." I took seven pieces which I had with me, and did as he said. After a few minutes they began to melt, and, as I saw the silver in the crucible had become fluid, I told the Adept that it was molten. He then indicated a small bottle containing some red powder, which stood upon the table, and requested me to take some

[p. 111]

of that red powder and to throw it into the crucible. There was a little silver spoon lying upon the table, and with this I took what seemed to be about one or two grains of the red powder from the bottle, and was going to throw it into the crucible, but Theodorus stopped me, saying that this was too much powder, and it should not be wasted. He told me to throw the powder back into the bottle and to wipe the spoon with a piece of paper, and then to throw the paper into the crucible. The quantity of powder which adhered to the spoon after I had returned the former to the bottle was so little as to be hardly visible; nevertheless, I did as he told me, and threw the little piece of paper upon the molten silver. Immediately the paper burned, and the molten metal began to foam and to rise, so that I was afraid that it would run over the sides of the crucible; but each bubble burst as it reached the top, and exhibited a variety of the most beautiful colours.

This play lasted for about fifteen minutes, when the boiling ceased, and the foaming mass sank back to the bottom of the crucible. Theodorus noticed that it had become quiet; he directed me to take the crucible from the fire and to pour the contents upon a marble slab. I did as he told me, and directly the

[p. 112]

mass became solid, and appeared to be the finest gold.

"Take this gold with you," said Theodorus, "and let it be examined, so that you will be convinced that you have not been the victim of an hallucination."

I was very much astonished, and I thought how much our people would give to become acquainted with the secret of this red powder. I desired to ask the Adept how this powder could be prepared, but I did not dare to ask the question aloud, because I was afraid that Theodorus would think I desired to know the secret for the purpose of enriching myself. But the Adept saw my thought, and said:

"The secret of how this red powder is prepared cannot be explained to men until they become more spiritual; because it is a secret whose knowledge must be practically acquired. How can we teach mankind to employ powers which they do not possess, and of which they do not even know the existence? Nevertheless, the germs of these powers are contained in a latent condition within the organism of every human being.

"It would be foolish to suppose that gold could be made out of any other substance than gold; but every substance contains the germ of gold in its own primordial state.

[p. 113]

"In the alchemical laboratory of nature, iron-pyrites and other substances produce gold in the course of ages, because the principle of gold contained in their primordial element grows by the action of the life-principle of nature, and becomes visible gold. This process, which it may require unconscious nature millions of years to accomplish, can be accomplished by nature in a few minutes if her will-power is guided by the spiritual consciousness and intelligence of the Adept. It is as impossible to make gold grow out of anything containing no gold as it is impossible to make an apple tree grow out of a cherry stone. But if we wish to see an apple tree grow out of a seed we do not insert it in a hole bored into a rock, but we select a proper piece of soil where it can grow by the aid of sunlight and moisture. Likewise, if we desire gold to grow out of the 'seed' or principle of gold, we must add the proper soil which it requires; and this 'soil' is furnished by the red powder, which contains the life-principle for the production of gold. Know that there is no 'dead' substance in the universe, and that even a stone or a metal contains life in a latent form. If the life-principle within such a substance becomes active, this substance will begin to form and to produce the various

[p. 114]

colours which you saw in the crucible. If the mass were cold and solid, the power of life would be slow to penetrate below the surface of the metal; nevertheless, the transmutation would gradually take place; but in the molten mass the life-giving substance becomes thoroughly mixed with the metal, ebullition takes place, and the transmutation is quickly performed.

"Why should growth and development and transmutation of form be possible only in the vegetable and animal kingdom? It is equally possible in the mineral kingdom; the only difference is that in the former it takes place within a sufficiently short period of time, so as to come within the observation of man; while in the latter these processes take place very slowly, and many generations of men may pass away before any progress in the growth of metals can be observed.

"The seed for the production of plants grows in the plants themselves; the seed for the production of animals grows in the animals; the 'seed' for the production of metals rests in the metals. It is not sufficient merely to melt a metal, to make it grow; it must be made subject to the power of life. This is done by the addition of the red powder, of which an almost imperceptible quantity is

[p. 115]

sufficient to cause the growth of a great quantity of gold. The few atoms of powder which you used were enough and to spare to transmute your silver, as you will see if you now examine your gold, which has not absorbed all of the red powder which adhered to the paper."

I looked at the gold, which had now become cold enough to be handled, and, indeed, upon its surface there were some little red pearls like rubies, which seemed to indicate that they were parts of the red powder which had not been absorbed by the molten mass.

"Master! "I exclaimed, "teach me this secret, and I promise you that I will never use the knowledge obtained for any selfish purpose whatever. I have learned enough of occultism to know that worldly possessions and riches are useless for the purpose of spiritual development, and that they are in truth the greatest obstacles which can be put in the way of those who desire to progress. I only desire to know the truth for the sake of the truth, and not for the purpose of obtaining any selfish advantage. Teach me these secrets, and I will forget my own self, and devote my life to benefit the universal brotherhood of humanity."

"Very well," answered the Adept. "I will do all I can to show you the way, but you must

[p. 116]

do your own walking. To teach you the secret of how to make gold is identical with teaching you all the secrets of the constitution of nature, and of its counterpart, the microcosm of man. This cannot be done in a few hours, or within a few days, and it would be against the rules of our order to retain you here longer than after sunset. But to enable you to study this science of alchemy, I will lend you a book which you may read and study; and if you keep your intuitional faculties open and your mind unclouded, I will be invisibly near you and assist you to understand the meaning of the secret symbols contained therein."

With these words Theodorus handed me a book containing a number of coloured plates with symbols and signs. It was an old book, and its title was "The Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries."

"The size of the book," continued the Adept, "renders it rather inconvenient for you to carry it on your descent from the mountain, but I will send it to your hotel at the village, where you will find it on your arrival."

I thanked the Adept, and looked once more at the mysterious book. I glanced at the titles of the pages, and saw that they treated about the greatest of mysteries, of the Macrocosm and

[p. 117]

[paragraph continues] Microcosm, of Time and Eternity, of Occult Numbers, the Four Elements, the Trinity of All, of Regeneration, Alchemy, Philosophy, and Cabala; it was indeed a book on Universal Science.

"If you practically understand the contents of this book," said Theodorus, "you will not merely know how to produce gold out of the baser metals, which is one of the lowest, most insignificant, and comparatively worthless parts of our art, but you will know the mystery of the Rose and the Cross; you will know how to come into possession of the Philosopher's Stone and the Universal Panacea, which renders those who possess it immortal. You will then not merely know how to direct the processes of life, so as to make pearls and diamonds and precious stones grow, but you will know how to make a man out of an animal, and a god out of a man. This last alchemical process is the one thing which is needed, and in comparison all other arts are merely playthings for children. What will it serve us to run after illusions, which will vanish in time, if we can obtain within ourselves that which is eternal and real?"

I asked the Adept whether I would be permitted to show that book to others, or to have it copied and printed; upon which he replied:

[p. 118]

"There are at present few people in the world who would be able to comprehend this book to its fullest extent; but there are some who desire to know the truth, and for the sake of these few you may risk to throw pearls before the swine. The symbols contained in these pages must be not merely seen and studied with the intellect, they must also be grasped by the spirit. To make this plain to you, know that each occult symbol and sign, from a mere point up to the double-interlaced Triangle, to the Rose and the Cross, has three significations. The first is the exoteric meaning, which is easily understood; the second is the esoteric or secret signification, which may be intellectually explained; the deepest and most mysterious one is the third, the spiritual meaning, which cannot be explained, but which must be spiritually experienced within yourself. This practical, internal experience is arrived at by the power of intuition, or the faculty by which the soul feels the presence of things which one cannot see with the bodily senses. If a person once feels interior things with his heart, sees them by his internal sight, and understands their attributes, then such a person has become illuminated, and is practically an Adept.

"As the number Three grows out of the One, likewise the Seven grows out of the Three; 

[p. 119]

because by a combination of three numbers or letters four complications arise, forming with the original Three the number Seven; and thus there are not merely three, but seven explanations of each symbol. You see, therefore, that the matter is very complicated, and requires deep study. Nor would it benefit you if I were to explain to you all the various meanings of these symbols; for you must learn to realise that you yourself are a symbol. These symbols represent the mysteries of the universe and of man. You are that universe, you are the man, and these things are representing yourself. What good would the explanations do to you if you do not realise that they are true?"

"But," I interposed, "if this is so, it will be useless to read any such books."

"Those who know these things themselves," said Theodorus, "do not need them, and those who do need them do not understand them. Books of that kind are like mirrors in which a man sees the things reflected which are existing in him. A monkey stands before a looking-glass and sees his own image, but he thinks it is another monkey aping his motions. If you know the contents of a book, describing a truth, you only know the description but not the very truth itself. You may know the

[p. 120]

contents of the Bible by heart from beginning to end, together with all the commentaries, and still not realise the truth of one iota of it. Self is the man. That which he finds out by his own experience, that he knows, and nothing more.

"When I was an inhabitant of your world, I had many a hard rub with your doctors of medicine and of divinity, because they lived upon the ignorance of the people, and the more I enlightened the latter, the less flattering grew the bread-and-butter prospects of the former. I usually found that the more learned your doctors were, the more did they lose their own common sense. I live here in peace, and care little about their disputations and argumentations; but I take occasionally a glance at the world, and I do not see much change for the better."

"Nevertheless," I said, "you will agree that science has made a great deal of progress since those days?"

"True," he answered, "she has progressed in some things and retrograded in others. She has made many inventions to increase the physical comforts of man and to gratify his desires; but in proportion as man's desires have been gratified, they have also grown, and new necessities have been created. Many

[p. 121]

of your most useful inventions, however, have not been made by the help, but rather in spite of the opposition, of your professional scientists.

"Moreover, if the psychical faculties of man were developed, many of your most useful inventions would be perfectly useless; they would be displaced by far better methods, in the same sense as bows and arrows have become useless since the invention of gunpowder and guns. You are very proud of your railroads and telegraphs, but of what use are they to a man who is able to travel with the velocity of thought from one place to another, however distant that place may be. Learn to chain the elemental spirits of nature to the chariot of your science, and you may mount like an eagle and ride through the air."

"I should be very glad," I said, "if you would inform me how a person can travel with the velocity of thought from one place to another. It seems to me that the weight of the physical body would present an insurmountable impediment."

"Neither would psychically developed man need to take that cumbrous form along on such travels," answered Theodorus. "What or who is Man? Is he that semi-animal mechanism, which eats, drinks, and walks, and wastes nearly half of its life in unconscious

[p. 122]

sleep; that mass of bones and muscles, of blood and sensitive nerves, which hinders the free movements of the spirit who is chained to it; or is the man that invisible something which thinks and feels, and knows that it exists?"

I said: "Undoubtedly the real man is the thinking principle in man."

"If you admit this," answered the Adept, "you will also agree that the real man is in that place and locality wherein he thinks and perceives; in other words, he is there where his consciousness exists. Thinking is a faculty of the mind, and not a faculty of the physical body. It is not my brain which thinks; but I myself do my thinking by means of my brain. Wherever our mind exercises that faculty, there is our true habitation; whether our physical form is there, too, is a circumstance which need not concern us any more than it would concern us to carry a warm and. heavy coat which we are accustomed to wear in winter along with us while we are making a summer excursion. Thinking is a faculty of the mind, and Mind is universal. If we learn to think independently of our physical brain, we may as well exercise that faculty in one place of the universe as in another, without taking our physical body along."

[p. 123]

"But," I objected, "how can a universal and therefore unorganised principle think, without using for that purpose an organised brain?"

"Short-sighted mortal!" exclaimed Theodorus. "Who says that Mind is without an organisation? Who has so little judgment as to suppose that the highest organised living and conscious principle in the universe is without an organisation, if even the inferior kingdoms upon the face of the earth, such as crystal, plant, and animal, cannot exist without an organisation? Surely the air does not think; it has no firm organisation; but the Universal Mind is not air, nor is it empty space; it has nothing in common with either, except its being everywhere present. It is the highest organised principle in the universe.

"Inferior man, in whom the consciousness of his higher spiritual self has not awakened, cannot think without the aid of the physical brain; he cannot experience a consciousness which he does not yet possess; he cannot exercise a faculty which is merely latent within his organisation. But the man who has awakened to the consciousness of his higher self, whose life has been concentrated into his higher principles, which exist independently of the physical form, constitutes a spiritual centre of

[p. 124]

consciousness, which does not require the physical brain to think, any more than you require the use of your hands and feet for the purpose of thinking. If a person in a somnambulic condition travels in spirit to a distant place and reports what he has seen there, and his observations are afterwards verified, must we not conclude that he has been at that place, and would it be reasonable to suppose that he has taken his physical brain with him and left the empty skull behind? How absurd is such an idea; but verily its absurdity does not surpass that of your suggestion, that the universal mind is without an organisation."

I was somewhat confused at having inconsiderately expressed an opinion about a subject of which I could not know anything, and the Adept, noticing my regret, continued in a mild manner: "If you desire to know the organisation of nature, study your own constitution, not merely in its physical, anatomical, and physiological aspect, but especially in its psychological aspect. Study what may be called the physiology of your soul. If your foot were not an organised substance intimately connected with your brain by means of the nerves and the spinal cord, you would never be able to feel any sensation in your foot; the latter might be

[p. 125]

burned or amputated, and you would not be aware of it unless you should see its destruction. You do not think with your foot, you think with your brain; or, to express it more correctly, you think by means of your brain. But if you were more spiritually developed, you would be able to sink your thought and consciousness from your brain down into your feet, or into any other part of your body, and, so to say, live in that part and be entirely unconscious of any other part. It has already come to the comprehension of some of your more advanced scientists that sensation and consciousness may be withdrawn from any part of the body, either by an effort of the will and imagination of the person who undertakes the experiment, or by the aid of the will and imagination of a 'magnetizer' or 'mesmerizer.' In the same manner the opposite thing can be done, and a person may concentrate himself, so to say, in any part of his own organism, or in any part of the great organism of nature with which he is intimately and inseparably, although invisibly, connected. A man who believes that he exists independently of nature and separated from it, labours under a great delusion. The fundamental doctrine of occultism is that nature is only one, and that all beings in nature are intimately connected together, and that everything 

[p. 126]

in nature acts upon every other thing therein. The feeling of isolation and separateness existing in individuals is only caused by the illusion of form. Man's form is not man; it is merely a state of matter in which man for the time being exists, and which is continually subject to change. It may be compared to an image in a mirror in which the character of man is imperfectly reflected, and although it differs from the image in a mirror in so far as it is temporarily endowed or infused with life, sensation, and consciousness, nevertheless it is nothing else than an image; for life, sensation, and consciousness do not belong to the form; they are functions of the invisible but real man who forms a part of the invisible organism of nature, and whose mind is a part of the universal mind, and who, therefore, if he once realises his true character and learns to know his own powers, may concentrate his consciousness in any place, within or beyond his physical form, and see, feel, and understand what takes place in such a locality."

"These ideas," I said, "are so grand that I am not yet fully able to grasp them; but I fear that they will never be accepted by our scientists, who cannot see beyond the narrow systems which they themselves have created."

"True," answered the Adept; "they will not

[p. 127]

be accepted or understood by our present generation of scientists; but they will be known in the future to those who are not merely learned, but wise, as they were known to the wise men of the past. Ignorance and self-conceit are twin-brothers; and it flatters man's vanity to believe that he is something superior to and different from the rest; and the more a man is learned in superficial science, the more does he believe in his own imaginary superiority and separateness. The consciousness of the great majority of intelligent people in our intellectual age is nearly all concentrated within their brains; they live, so to say, entirely in the top-storey of their houses. But the brain is not the most important part of the house in which man resides. The centre of life is the heart; and if consciousness does not take its residence in the centre of life, it will become separate from life, and finally cease to exist. Let those who desire to develop spiritually attempt to think with their hearts, instead of merely studying with their brains. Let them attempt to sink day after day their power of thought down to the centre of life in the heart, until their consciousness is firmly established there. At first they will see nothing but darkness; but, if they persevere in their efforts, they will behold a light at that centre which illuminates the mind. This inextinguishable

[p. 128]

light will send its rays to the brain and carry them as far as the stars; and in it they may see the past, the present, and the future.

"The greatest mysteries in nature are by no means difficult to understand, if we only prefer to look at them instead of looking at our own delusions. The grandest ideas are easy to grasp, if we merely prefer to grasp them instead of holding on to our fancies. Man's mind is like a mirror in which the ideas floating in the universal mind are reflected, comparable to a tranquil lake in which you may see the true images of the passing clouds. If the surface of the lake is disturbed, the images become distorted; if the water becomes muddy, the reflections cease altogether. Likewise, if the mind of man is in a tranquil state and clear of foreign elements, he will reflect the grandest and noblest ideas existing within the world of mind. If we desire to think reasonably, we should allow the goddess of Reason to do her thinking within our brain; but if we attempt to be wiser than Reason, our mind becomes filled with our own fancies and those which we have acquired from others, and we cannot see the truth as it is, but we see it as we imagine it to be.

"This truth you will find symbolically or

[p. 129]

allegorically represented in all the principal mythologies and religious systems of the world. It is the old story of the 'Fall of Man.' As long as man remained in a state of purity--that is to say, as long as his will and imagination were one and identical with the will and the imagination of the spiritual creative power in nature--he knew the truth and was all-powerful; but when he began to think and to imagine in a way different from that universal power, he lost sight of the truth and could see only his own fancies. If man wants to see the truth again, he must give up his own way of reasoning and let Reason act in him. But you may as well ask a miser to give up the treasure which he has collected and hoarded during a lifetime as to ask a modern scientist or philosopher to give up his own crooked ways. I see in your heart a desire to establish a secret society; but let me warn you that if you attempt to accomplish this by appealing to those who are clever and cunning, vainglorious and proud of their own attainments, full of ambition and anxious to come into possession of occult or magical powers for the purpose of gratifying their scientific curiosity or to employ them for the fulfilment of some selfish desire, you will certainly fail; for it is written: "Whosoever 

[p. 130]

hath, to him shall be given and he shall have more in abundance, but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath."

"I know that quotation," I answered, "but its meaning is not quite clear to me."

"It means," replied Theodorus, "that to him who has the love of wisdom in his heart, abundant light will be given; but from him who is filled with selfish desires, what little understanding he has will be taken away."

"I acknowledge," I said, "that I have been thinking of finding means to establish a society, or a school for spiritual development, where those who desire to progress might be able to spend their energies for the purpose of that which is useful and lasting, instead of being forced to run after the illusions of the world. I have been mentally seeking for a place in a solitude where the members of such a society might lead an interior life. I should like to establish a theosophical monastery, where we could live like yourself, surrounded by all the grandeur, sublimity, and stillness of nature, escape the servitude of fashionable society, and step on the path to adeptship. But surely I could not think of selecting our members from the ranks of the uneducated and ignorant."

[p. 131]

"Select them among those who are strong and virtuous," answered Theodorus, "and your choice will be well made. Choose those who have overcome preconceived opinions and prejudices; select them among those who have no desire to obtain knowledge for their own personal benefit and do not wish to shine, but to let the light grow within themselves. Such persons are very rare; but if you find any, and if they join you in your efforts, you will soon have the most enlightened society in the world. That which is to-day called learning and education is merely a very laborious method of acquiring a little superficial knowledge which mankind is forced to adopt because they do not know how to develop their spiritual perception. If this method were taught and practised, real knowledge would soon occupy the place of mere learning, certainty the place of belief, conviction the place of opinion, true faith the place of creed. If the inhabitants of your proposed convent were pure-minded men and women, great souls and living mirrors in which Divine Wisdom could be reflected without any adulteration, such a monastery would be the greatest ornament of the world. Such centres of spiritual intelligence would be like suns of the first magnitude on the mental horizon of the world. One such centre

[p. 132]

would be sufficient to illuminate the world with its wisdom and to send its intellectual rays to the utmost limits of the planet."

"And what is to hinder the establishment of such a centre of intelligence?" I asked.

"Nothing but the imperfections of man and the abundance of his selfish desires. There are two sources from which the obstacles arise that are in the way of those who desire to attain self-knowledge and immortality. One class of obstacles arises from man's interior self, the other from the external conditions in which he lives. The internal obstacles are caused by his acquired scientific or theological prejudices and misconceptions regarding the constitution of man, and by the living elemental forces active within the animal principle in his constitution. As they are fed and grow strong by external influences, they manifest themselves in various ways, producing animal impulses, and in combination with the intellectual acquirements they grow into the more dangerous class of vices, such as ambition, vanity, greed, intolerance, selfishness, &c. Each of these animal elements, or Elementals, may grow into an intellectual but unreasonable being, and finally constitute the very alter ego of man. Man may have a great many such false egos within him, until

[p. 133]

perhaps one of these overmasters the others and becomes a king in the realm of his soul. Each such "self" absorbs a share of the life and consciousness of the man in whose soul it exists, and may finally even occupy all space within his intellectual sphere, so as to paralyse reason or drive it away. The world is crowded with such intellectual or semi-intellectual Elementals in human shape, in whom reason has been paralysed to a greater or lesser extent. You see them every day in the streets, in the pulpit, the forum, in the halls of learning, as well as upon the market-place. Man's principal object in life should be to keep the realm of his mind free from such intruders, so that the king Reason may rule therein without being impeded. His duty is to fight the herculean battle with those animal and intellectual Elementals, so that they will become servants of the king, and not become his masters. Can this be accomplished if all our energies are continually employed on the outward plane; if we are never at home within ourselves; if we are continually engaged with the illusions of life, either in the pursuit of sensual gratification or entirely absorbed in scientific pursuits, which tend to give us knowledge of outward things but convey no knowledge of self? Can we expect to accumulate

[p. 134]

our energy and employ it at the centre within ourselves, if we continually spend it at the periphery? Can we hope to be able to waste all our power, and at the same time to be able to retain it? An affirmative answer would be as irrational as unscientific."

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 135]

  

VII

  

THE HIGHER LIFE

IT would be too tedious to some of our readers if I were to report all the instructions that were given to me by my kind guide Theodorus, who, for all I know, may have been known as the celebrated Theophrastus Paracelsus during his life in the physical body. I do not, however, feel myself justified in omitting to tell what he said in regard to the importance of practising self-control and developing firmness of character and individuality. Previously to my visit to the Rosicrucian convent I had been made to believe that occultism and mysticism were things only for dreamers; adapted to persons living continually in the clouds, enjoying their superstitions and vagaries by building castles in the air; but now, I found, that self-reliance is a most necessary quality for a disciple of this sacred science, and that no science can be more exact than the one based upon our own exact spiritual knowledge and

[p. 136]

realised within our own soul. Thus Theodorus said:

"A power to become strong at a centre must be directed towards the centre; for it is only by resistance that it can accumulate and become strong. A king who goes away from his kingdom and leaves it without protection may find other rulers there when he attempts to return. To become conquerors over nature we must fight our own battles, and not wait until nature fights them for us. The more the animal elements within man's constitution are stimulated into life and activity by the temptations coming from the external world through the avenues of the senses, the hotter will be the battle, and the stronger will man's power grow if he successfully resists. This is the battle which the great Gautama Buddha fought and from which he came out victorious, because he was overshadowed by the Bo-tree of Wisdom.

"I will attempt to give you a rational explanation of the effects of inward concentration, to show you how you may become a creator of your own world.

"According to the teachings of the sages the Universal Spirit called the world into existence by the power of His own thought. All great religions speak of a divine Triunity, according

[p. 137]

to Christianity called the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The will or intention is the Father, the thought or idea the Son, and the creative power of the Father acting through the Son is the Holy Ghost. By this power the thoughts of the Father become manifest, and thus visible objective worlds are called into existence."

"But," said I, "where does the Father find the material or substance to render these thoughts visible and objective?"

"Within Himself," answered my guide, and, looking at me as if to make sure that I understood the meaning of what he said, he continued: "Allah il Allah, says the Mohammedan; God is God, and there is nothing beside Him. He is the All; matter and motion and space, consciousness, intelligence, wisdom, spirit, substance, energy, darkness, and light. The worlds are His outspoken thoughts; but there is nothing outside of Himself of which He might think, He being the All, including and penetrating everything. Thus everything exists within Him, who is the life and soul of all things. In Him we live and move and have our being, and without Him we are nothing.

"Man is the god and creator of his own little world, and therefore similar processes take place when a person, by the power of introspection,

[p. 138]

directs his thoughts towards his own centre of consciousness within his 'heart.' Now this activity going towards the centre could never of itself have created an external world, because the external world belongs to the periphery, and it requires a centrifugal power to call it into existence. The introspective activity of the Mind is a centripetal power, and could therefore not act from the centre towards the periphery. But you know that every action is followed by a reaction. The centripetal power, finding resistance at the centre, returns and evolves a centrifugal activity, and this centrifugal power is called Imagination. This Soul-energy is the medium between the centre and the periphery, between Spirit and Matter, between the Creator and His creations, between God and Nature, or whatever names you may choose to give to them. The Soul-consciousness is the product of the centrifugal activity of the Mind, put into action by the centripetal activity of the Will.

"If these plain facts, expressed in plain language, without any scientific jargon, without circumlocutions, philosophical intricacies and modern gibberish, are comprehensible to you, all you have to do is to apply it to yourself. If you direct the power of your mind inwardly towards your centre, instead of letting

[p. 139]

it fly off at a tangent, the resistance which it finds at the centre will cause a reaction, and the stronger the centripetal power which you apply, the stronger will be the centrifugal power created; in other words, the stronger will your Soul become, and, as she grows strong, her invisible, but nevertheless material, substance will penetrate your physical, visible body, and serve to transform it into a higher kind. Thus you may at the end become all Soul, and have no gross physical body. But long before that time arrives you will be able to act upon matter by the power of your soul, to cure your own bodily ills and those of other people, and to do many wonderful things, even at distances far away from your visible form; for the activity of the soul is not limited by the circumference of the physical form, but radiates far into the sphere of the Universal Mind."

I told Theodorus that these ideas were as yet too grand and too new to me, to be grasped immediately; but that I would attempt to remember them and to meditate about them in the future.

"You will do well if you do so," said the Adept, "and I will take care that they remain in your memory."

"If the doctrines of the sages are true," I

[p. 140]

replied, "it would seem that the vast majority of our thinkers are continually thinking the wrong way; because they are engaged all their lives in prying into the manifestations of life on the outward plane, and do not seem to care a straw about what is taking place within the inner life of the soul."

"Therefore," answered Theodorus, "they will perish with their illusions; and the Bible is right in saying that the ways of the worldly-wise are foolishness in the eyes of the Eternal.

"What will it serve you, if your head is full of speculations about the details of the phenomenal illusions of life, and you become a senile imbecile in your old age? What will it serve you, roaming about the world and gratifying your curiosity in regard to its details, when, after that world has vanished, they for ever disappear from your memory? Perhaps it would be better for the learned if they knew less of scientific theories and had more soul knowledge. It would be better if they had fewer theories and more experience. If they were to employ, for instance, some of their time and energy for the development of the spiritual power of clairvoyance, instead of spending it to find out the habits of some species of African monkey, they would fare better by it. If they were to obtain the power to heal the sick by the touch of their

[p. 141]

hands, instead of seeking new methods to poison humanity by inoculations of injurious substances, humanity would be the gainer. There are thousands of people who work hard all their lives, without accomplishing anything which is really useful or enduring. There are thousands who labour intellectually or mechanically to perform work which had better be left undone. There are vastly more people engaged in undermining and destroying the health of man than in curing his ills, more engaged in teaching error than in teaching the truth, more trying to find that which is worthless than that which is of value; they live in dreams and their dreams will vanish; they run after money, and the money will remain while they themselves perish and die.

"The obstacles which arise from the external world are intimately connected with those from the inner world, and cannot be separated; because external temptations create inward desires, and inward desires call for external means for gratification. There are many people who do not crave for the illusions of life, but who have not the strength to resist them; they have a desire to develop spiritually and to gain immortality, but employ all of their time and energy for the attainment of worthless things, instead of using it to dive down into the depths

[p. 142]

of the soul to search for the priceless pearl of wisdom. Thousands of people have not the moral courage to break loose from social customs, ridiculous habits, and foolish usages, which they inwardly abhor, but to which they nevertheless submit because they are customs and habits to act against which is considered to be a social crime. Thus thousands sacrifice their immortality to the stupid goddess of fashion.

"Who dares to break loose from the bondage imposed upon him by the fashion which at present dominates religious thought? Who has the courage to incur the sneers of the imbecile, the ridicule of the ignorant, the laughter of the fool, and gain thereby a light of whose existence those who live in eternal darkness know nothing? The vast majority of people drown the voice of reason and dance with the fool. Rather than have their vanity suffer, they allow the spirit to starve; rather than be crucified and rise into immortal life, they submit to the galling chain; they lose their appreciation of liberty, and, becoming used to their chains, begin to love them and impose them upon others.

"I am not a believer in the total depravity of human nature; I know that man's animal energies, on account of their inherent instinctive efforts for the preservation of their existence, are opposed to the development of his higher

[p. 143]

principles, because the life of the higher involves the death of the lower; but I also know that in each human being is contained a power for good, which may be made to develop if the proper conditions are given. There are elements of good and elements of evil in every man, and it depends on ourselves which class we desire to develop. From a cherry stone nothing can grow but a cherry tree, from a thistle seed nothing else than a thistle; but man is a constellation of powers in which all kinds of seeds are contained; you may make him grow to be a hog or a tiger, an angel or a devil, a sage or a fool, according to your own pleasure.

"The continual rush after more money, more comfort, more pleasure, after we already possess all we require, which characterises our present civilisation, is not necessarily a sign of viciousness and moral depravity; but it is rather caused by the instinctive impulse, inherent in the constitution of man, to reach some higher and better condition, which expresses itself on the mundane plane. Man intuitively knows that, no matter how rich in money or fame he may be, he has not yet reached a state in which he will be contented to rest; he knows that he must still keep on striving for something, but he does not know what that something is. Not knowing the higher life, he strives for more of

[p. 144]

those things which the lower life affords. Thus we may see a bug or a butterfly falling into a lake, and in its vain efforts to save itself from drowning swimming away from the shore, because it does not know in which direction the means for salvation exist. The curse of the world and the root of all evil is ignorance. The curse of man is his ignorance of his higher nature and final destiny, and the efforts of a true system of religion and science ought to be above all to remove this stupidity.

"But it is also true that ignorance and conceit are closely connected together, and that the ignorant hate him who is wiser than they. If one man, knowing more about the requirements of his nature, and desirous to employ all his energies for the attainment of a higher state, were to dare to assert his manhood and to rebel against the chains of fashion, could he continue to live unmolested in his community? and if he were to emigrate to another, would he not be exposed there to the same troubles? He would still come in contact with men who hated freedom because they were educated in chains, who would misunderstand him, suspect his motives, and persecute him; and woe to him if he had any human failings upon which the snake of slander could fasten its poison fangs. Wherever darkness exists, there exists abhorrence of light.

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] Wherever ignorant man enters, there enter his imperfections. Wherever ignorance resides, there are her attending angels, suspicion, envy, and fear. Would it not be more within the scope of a true science to enlighten man about his higher nature, than to dig for worms in the bowels of the material plane?

"That which is almost impossible to accomplish by the unaided efforts of a single individual, may often easily be accomplished by the co-operation of many, and this law seems to prevail in all departments of nature. If a sufficient number of people were determined to retire from the harlequin stage of the world and to turn away from the tomfooleries of a fashionable existence, they might, if they could harmonise with each other, form a power sufficiently strong to repel the attacks of the monster which would devour them all if they were separated and unaided by each other. Those who are not yet progressed far on the ladder of evolution need those who are upon a higher step to assist them on their upward way, and the higher ones need the lower for their support, in the same sense as a rock needs a solid ground to rest upon and maintain its position.

"There have been at previous times, as there are now, numerous people who became convinced that there is a higher and inner life, and who

[p. 146]

desired to surround themselves with such conditions as were most favourable for its attainment. Such people were not merely to be found in Christian countries, but also among the 'heathen.' Lamaseries and lodges, orders, monasteries, convents, and places of refuge have been established, where people might strive to attain a higher life, unimpeded by the aggressions and annoyances of the external world of illusions. Their original purpose was beyond a doubt very commendable. If in the course of time many such institutions have become degraded and lost their original character; if instead of being places for the performance of the noblest and most difficult kind of labour, they have become places of refuge for the indolent, idle, and superstitious; it is not the fault of that principle which first caused such institutions to be organised, but it is the consequence of the knowledge of the higher nature of man and his powers and destiny having been lost, and with the loss of that knowledge, the means for the attainment, the original aim, was naturally lost and forgotten.

"Such a degradation took place in Europe, especially during and after the Middle Ages, when, enriched by robberies and endowed by dying thieves who wanted to buy salvation, the clergy amassed great wealth and lived a

[p. 147]

luxurious life, feasting on the fat of the land. They then knew nothing more of the conditions of a higher existence; they became centres of attraction for the hypocrite and the idle. They passed away their idle hours in apparently pious amusements, and in striving to gain more material wealth. Instead of being centres from which blessings should spread over the country, they became a plague to the land. They robbed the rich, and, vampire-like, they sucked the last drop of blood out of the poor. They continued in this manner until the cup of their crimes was full, when the great Reformation caused the downfall of many and a certain reform of the rest.

There are still numerous convents existing in Europe, and in America their number is on the increase. The modern reformer, the socialist and materialist, looks upon them with an evil eye; but the unprejudiced observer will not deny that some of them are doing a great deal of good in their own way. Some have established schools, others opened hospitals; and above all are the Sisters of Charity unsurpassed in their usefulness in the care for the sick. Thus some of these orders serve the noble purpose of benefiting humanity, and their usefulness could be increased a thousandfold if the light of spiritual knowledge--the Holy Ghost,

[p. 148]

to whom they pray--were to be permitted to descend upon their ranks.

"Do the religious orders as they are now fulfil their original purpose of raising man up into a higher and spiritual state of existence, or are they merely centres around which pious and benevolent people have collected who teach schools and nurse the sick--occupations which might perhaps equally well be performed without professing any particular creed? If the religious convents are calculated to develop true spirituality and to produce truly regenerated men and women, they will be the places where we may find some manifestation of spiritual powers; for a latent power which never manifests itself is of no use; it cannot exist in an active state without manifesting itself. Let us therefore be permitted to ask: Do the inhabitants of our convents consciously exercise any spiritual powers? Can they knowingly cure the sick by the touch of their hands? Are their inner senses sufficiently opened, so that they may see and hear, taste, smell, and feel things which are imperceptible to the senses of average man? Can they prophesy, with any degree of certainty, future events, except by the conclusions of logic? Are there any among them who have become Adepts? What do they actually know about the conditions 

[p. 149]

required to enter a higher state of consciousness than that of ordinary mortals? What do they know about the means to enter adeptship and to obtain a conscious existence as souls? What do our monks and nuns know about the constitution of the human soul, and especially of those souls who are entrusted to their care? What are their experiences when in that higher state called ecstasy? If there is one among them who enters into a state of trance, or is levitated into the air, or able to produce a simple mediumistic phenomenon, do they know the occult causes which produce such effects, or is not such an occurrence considered to be an unexplainable or supernatural miracle?

"It is idle for the priests to assert that they can forgive sins, or that sins can be forgiven through them. If they do not possess any spiritual powers, we cannot believe that they are able to communicate them to others; and if they convey such powers to others, where are their effects to be seen? Do the ignorant become wise after having been baptized with water? Do those who have submitted to the ceremony of confirmation obtain firmness of faith? Does the sinner become innocent after having the load taken off from his conscience by means of absolution? Can

[p. 150]

our clergymen change the laws of nature? Can they by any external ceremony cause the growth of an inner principle? or does he who enters a church an animal, come out an animal still?

"These are perplexing questions, and I would not like to be understood as if I desired to throw any discredit upon the motives of any of the inhabitants of our convents and nunneries. I am personally acquainted with many of them, and found them to be good and kind and well-meaning people, without that priestly pride and arrogance which unfortunately often characterise the clergymen of the world; but I believe that all the good which they do they could perform as well, and even a great deal better, if they were to undertake the study of the soul, its organisation and functions, and if they were qualifying themselves for that study. They would then be able to develop consciously those higher faculties which have spontaneously developed among some of their members, who, on account of such an unexpected and abnormal development, were called miracle-workers or saints.

"How can any one be a true spiritual guide who has no spiritual powers, and who, perhaps, does not even know that such powers exist? What would you think of a surgeon who knew

[p. 151]

nothing whatever of anatomy? what of a physician who did not know his patient? what of a blind painter, a deaf musician, an imbecile mathematician? What shall we think of a physician of the soul who knows nothing at all about the soul or its attributes, who has never seen it, and is merely of the opinion that it exists? Have we not a right to doubt the usefulness of such a physician, and exclaim with Shakespeare--

"Throw physic to the dogs; I'll none of it"?

[paragraph continues] If the inhabitants of our convents and monasteries, instead of employing the time and energy which they need for the performance of their customary ceremonies, for the saying of rosaries and the repetitions of litanies, &c., were to employ them for the purpose of acquiring self-knowledge, for the study of the essential constitution of man and of nature, and for the acquisition of spiritual power, their usefulness might be extended to an enormous degree. Their knowledge would be no longer restricted to earthly things, but expand to heaven; they would not need to nurse the sick, for they could cure them by the touch of their hands; they would not need to baptize people with water, for they could baptize them with the spirit of sanctity; they would not

[p. 152]

need to listen to confessions, for they would be able to read the thoughts of the culprit. Why should they not be able to do their duties much better if they were wise instead of ignorant; if they knew the truth instead of blindly accepting a creed; if they had the power to accomplish that which they now expect an invisible and unknown power to accomplish in response to their prayers? If the public believe that there is one miracle-working saint at a convent, do they not rush there to receive his or her blessings? What would be the fame of a convent composed entirely of saints whose powers could not be doubted?

"But how can monks and nuns acquire such powers? How can they qualify themselves for such a study? It has been said that it is ten times more difficult to remove an old error than to find a new truth; and there lies the difficulty. A page which is already full of writing will have to be cleaned before it can be written upon again. They would have to purge their minds of all dogmatism and sophistry before they can see the light of truth; they would have to become like children before they can enter the kingdom of heaven within their own souls. They would have to remove the mountain of rubbish which has accumulated

[p. 153]

in time in the vestibule of the temple, consisting of errors and superstitions, and of the corpses of forms from which the spirit has fled. Ages of ignorance have contributed to its growth, and it has become venerable by age. The inhabitants of the convent bare their heads and bend their knees when they approach that pile, and they do not dare to destroy it. To become wise, they would have to learn the true meaning of their own doctrines, symbols, and books, of which they at present merely know the outward form and the dead letter. They would have to form a much higher and nobler conception of God than to invest Him with the attributes of semi-animal man. They would have to base their moral doctrines upon the intrinsic dignity of the divine principle in man, instead of appealing to the selfish desires of man and to his fear of punishment, to induce him to seek his salvation.

"This may be accomplished in the far-distant future, but not at the present time. Ages and centuries may roll away before the sunlight of truth will penetrate through the thick veil of materialism and superstition which, like an icy crust, covers the true foundation of human religions. Look at the ice-fields of the Alps, covering the sides of the mountains, sometimes many miles in area. They extend in solid

[p. 154]

blocks, perhaps more than a hundred feet thick, down to the valley. They are the products of centuries; and firm as the rock the ice appears; and yet these rigid and apparently immovable masses move and slowly change from year to year. They grate the rocks upon which they rest, and they throw out that which is foreign. There may cracks and fissures be seen at the top, and if, as happens sometimes, a man falls into one of these fissures, his remains will be found many years afterwards at the foot of the glacier, below the field of ice, having been spewed out by the same.

"Change, slow change, is going on everywhere in nature. Even in the most rigid and orthodox religious systems, in the most benighted hearts and heads, there is going on a continual change. Already the doctrines which were expounded in the pulpits of the Middle Ages have been modified to a certain extent. The proportions of the devil have shrunk so much that the people have almost ceased to fear him, and in the same degree as clerical power has diminished, the conception of God has assumed a grander aspect. Already the necessity of performing humanitarian labours has been more fully recognised, and is by some considered to be of almost equal importance to the performance of the prescribed ceremonies.

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] Still the change goes on, gradually but slowly; for there is a powerful giant who by his negation resists the decay of the pile of rubbish, and the name of this giant is Fashion. It is fashionable to support certain things, and therefore the masses support them.

"Is the progressive part of the world going to wait until the legally appointed guardians of the truth have found out the true value of the treasure in their possession? Have we to wait until they have cleaned the jewel from the dark crust which they have permitted to accumulate around it for centuries? Messengers have arrived from the East, the land of light, where the sun of wisdom has risen, bringing with them costly moonlight pearls and treasures of liquid gold. Will their untold wealth be intrusted to the safe keeping of those who possess the old and empty forms, or will the new wine be filled in new casks, because the old ones are rotten?

"But why should those who have begun to see the dawn of the day close their eyes and wait until the blind would inform them that the sun is rising over the mountains? Is love of the truth not strong enough to accomplish that which the fear of a dread hereafter has been able to accomplish? Cannot the enlightened classes establish academies, which

[p. 156]

would offer all the advantages of orthodox convents without their disadvantages? Could they not establish a garden, where the divine lotus flower of wisdom might grow and unfold its leaves, sheltered against the storms of passion raging beyond the walls, watered by the water of truth, whose spring is within; where the Tree of Life could unfold without becoming encumbered by the weeds of credulity and error; where the soul could breathe the pure spiritual air, unadulterated by the odour of the poison-tree of ignorance, unmixed with the effluvia of decaying superstitions; a place where this Tree of Life, springing from the roots of the Tree of Knowledge, could grow and spread its branches, far up in the invisible realm where Wisdom resides, and produce fruits which cause those who partake of them to become like gods and immortal?"

Here the Adept paused, as if in deep meditation; but after a moment of silence he said: "Yes, by all means establish your theosophical monastery, if you can find any inhabitants duly prepared to enter it; for it will be easier to introduce the truth into a house which is not occupied, than into one which is occupied by its enemies.

"But," I objected, "such an institution

[p. 157]

would require an Adept as a teacher. Would you consent to teach?"

To this Theodorus answered, "Wherever there is a want, the supply will not fail to come, for there is no vacuum in nature."

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 158]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

BLACK MAGIC

AT this moment I heard again the sound of the invisible silver bell in the air, and the Adept, rising, said that he was called away for a few minutes, and invited me to remain until he should return. He left the laboratory, and I remained alone. I amused myself by looking over the book containing the Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians, and my attention was attracted by the sign of a Pentagram turned upside down, so that the two points of the lower triangles pointed upwards. Suddenly a voice sounding behind my chair said: "In this symbol is contained eternity and time, god and man, angel and devil, heaven and hell, the old and the new Jerusalem with all its inhabitants and creatures."

I turned, and I saw by my side a man with an extremely intelligent face, dressed in the habit of a monk. He excused himself for causing an interruption in my thoughts, and said that I seemed so deeply engaged in

[p. 159]

meditating over those figures that I had not observed his entrance.

The open countenance, the pleasant looks, and the intelligent expression of the face of my visitor at once gained my confidence; and I asked him who he was with whom I had the honour to speak.

"I am," said the stranger, "the Famulus, or, as you well may call it, the Chela, of Theodorus. They call me jocularly his intellectual principle, because I have to do his work when the old gentleman is asleep."

I found his remark very funny, and answered in a jocular way: "If you are called his intellectual principle, you are perhaps only a creation of his thought. I have seen so many strange things in this place, that I would not be surprised at anything, not even if you were to vanish before my eyes or turn into a snake or a devil."

To this the apparition replied: "As far as our external appearance is concerned, we are all forms produced by thought, and it is the privilege of men of a higher order to assume whatever form they find convenient for their purpose. Thus it may sometimes happen that the very devil appears in the shape of a saint for the purpose of deluding some gullible fool, and I know of cases where some jolly spirits

[p. 160]

of nature have assumed the shapes of Christ and the apostles for the purpose of amusing themselves by misleading some ignoramus. They usually succeed in such cases; but I am neither a devil nor an elemental spirit, and you are neither an ignoramus nor a fool."

I found myself highly flattered by the favourable opinion expressed by my visitor, and I did not wish to appear suspicious and thus to weaken his faith regarding my power of judging the character of a person at first sight. Moreover, he had such a look of benevolence that I did not wish to distrust him. I therefore made him my bow, and said: "I have not the least doubt about your honourable intentions, and am quite sure that you are a reliable guide."

"One cannot be careful enough in selecting one's guides," continued the stranger. "There are at present so many false prophets and guides. All the world is at present crazy for poking their noses into the mysteries of the astral world. Everybody wants to be taught witchcraft and sorcery. Secrets, which for thousands of years have been wisely kept hidden before the eyes of the unripe and profane, are now bawled out from the housetops and sold at the market-place as objects of trade. Hundreds of self-appointed "masters" and guides

[p. 161]

speculate upon the selfishness and ambitions of their disciples, and, the blind leading the blind, they both come to grief. If only all the seekers for truth were like you, they would not be deluded by false promises held out to them for attaining adeptship."

"I am really glad," I answered, "that you have discovered my purity and unselfishness of purpose, and I hope that, in consideration of my merits, you will be kind enough to show me some more of your occult secrets. Theodorus has already been preaching long sermons to me, and I listened to him with great patience; but now I want to see something substantial, and if possible learn how to perform some occult feats."

"Most willingly," said my companion. "I will do all I can for you, because you deserve by your unselfishness the patronage of all the Adepts."

So saying, he began to show me some of the curiosities of the laboratory, which contained many strange things. Of some of those I had read in books on alchemy; others were entirely new to me. At last we came to a closed shrine, and my curiosity led me to ask what it contained.

"Oh!" answered the monk, "this shrine contains some powders for fumigations, by the

[p. 162]

aid of which a man may see the Elemental Spirits of Nature."

"Indeed!" I exclaimed. "Oh, how I should like to see these lovely spirits! I have read a great deal about them in the books of Paracelsus; but I never had an opportunity of seeing them."

"They are not all of them lovely," said the monk. "The Elementals of earth have human forms. They are small, but they have the power to elongate their bodies. These gnomes and pigmies are usually ill-humoured and cross; and it is just as well to leave them alone, although sometimes they become very good friends of man, and may even show him hidden treasures and mines. The Elementals of air, the sylvans, are of a more agreeable nature; still we cannot rely upon their friendship. The salamanders, living in the element of fire, are ugly customers, and it is better to have nothing to do with them. But the nymphs and undines are lovely creatures, and they often associate with man."

"I wish I could see those beautiful water-sprites," I said; "but I am inclined to believe that they belong to the realm of the fable. For many years, accounts given by seafaring men spoke of mermen and mermaids, which they insisted on having seen at a distance. They

[p. 163]

said that those people were like human beings, of whom the upper part resembled a man or a woman, while the lower part of their body was a fish. They told great stories about their beauty, their waving hair, and how finely they could sing; and they called them sirens, because it was said they could sing so well that men who heard their voices would become oblivious of everything else but their songs. At last, such a siren was caught; and it proved to be nothing else than a curious fish of the species called Halicore catacca, which at a distance may be mistaken for a man, on account of its colour, and which barks somewhat like a dog. Perhaps those undines and nymphs are also nothing but fishes."

"This is a most erroneous opinion, my dear sir," answered the monk. "The halicore is a fish; but the nymphs and undines are Elemental spirits of nature, living in the element of water, being, under ordinary circumstances, invisible to man, and not being able therefore to be caught in this manner. 'They are almost like human beings, but far more ethereal and beautiful; and under certain circumstances they may be seen by man. They may even attain a permanent material form and remain on land; and a case is even known in which a certain Count Stauffenberg married such a nymph on

[p. 164]

account of her beauty and lived with her for more than a year, until some stupid theologian frightened him by telling him that his wife was a devil. The count at that time had fallen in love with some good-looking peasant-girl, and so the interference of the preacher was welcome, and he took this as a pretext to drive his true wife away. But she revenged herself; and on the third day after his second marriage the count was found dead in his bed. These nymphs are very beautiful. They are strong in love, and are constant; but they are also said to be very jealous."

The more the monk spoke about the water-nymphs, the stronger grew my desire to see them. I asked him to put me in communication with those beautiful spirits; but he made all sorts of excuses, which, however, only served still more strongly to excite my curiosity.

"We are living here in this sinful world, and ought not to meddle with the inhabitants of another. We are all sinners and liable to succumb to temptations. These water-nymphs are continually seeking to be united with men, and they have good reason for it, because they have no immortal souls. Becoming united with man they form a link with his soul, and thus partake of his immortality."

"Why, then," I exclaimed, "do you hesitate

[p. 165]

to conjure these beings? I would only be too happy to convey the gift of immortality to one of these beautiful spirits. Moreover, I would consider this as an act of charity and duty, and if such a nymph should insist upon marrying me, I can see no reason why I should object if she were amiable. Besides, it would be quite an extraordinary thing to have a water-nymph for a wife."

"They are not only very amiable," said the monk, "but they are also very obedient to their husbands. Such a water-nymph has no will of her own; she regards her husband as her saviour and god, never contradicts or scolds him, but is always ready to obey his commands, fulfil his wishes, and gratify his desires. She is very modest in her demands, needs no luxuries, and requires nothing except occasionally a short excursion to the seashore, which will cause you no expense whatever, because she has her own method of travelling."

I could restrain myself no longer, and earnestly begged the monk to make a fumigation with the mysterious powder. At last he consented. Putting a few pieces of dry maple tree bark and some dried leaves of laurel into a brazier, he added pieces of charcoal and lighted them. He then strewed some of the

[p. 166]

mysterious powder, and a white smoke arose, filling the room like a mist and with a very sweet odour. The objects in the laboratory could soon be seen only dimly through that mist, and finally disappeared altogether. The walls of the chamber were no more to be seen. The air seemed to take on a vibratory motion and to become more dense; but, far from feeling oppressed by this, I felt a great exhilaration and satisfaction. At last I knew I was in the element of water, and was supported by it. I was swimming, but my body was as light as a feather, and it required no effort whatever to keep me from sinking; it seemed as if the water was my own element, as if I were born in it. A light shone directly above my head. I rose up to the surface and looked around. I was in the midst of the ocean, dancing up and down with the waves. It was a bright moonlight night. Right above me stood the full moon and threw her silvery rays upon the water, causing the ripples and the foamy crests on the tops of the waves to sparkle like liquid silver or diamonds. Far in the distance appeared the coast with a mountain range, which seemed familiar to me. At last I recognised it as the coast of the island of Ceylon, with the range of mountains beyond Colombo and Galle;

[p. 167]

surely I could not mistake, for I recognised the Adam's Peak.

Never shall I forget the agreeable sensation caused by that ethereal bath in the moonlit sea in the Indian Ocean. It seemed to me that at last my wish had been fulfilled, and that I was free of my mortal body and its weight; and yet I was myself. I could see no difference between the body I inhabited now and the one I inhabited before the fumigation was made, only my present body was so light that it seemed as if it would float in the air as easily as it did upon the water.

Listen! some faint sound is brought by the breeze; it seems to be a human voice. It comes nearer, and now I hear it plainly; it is the melodious song of a female voice. I look in the direction from which the sound seems to come, and I see three forms floating upon the waves, rising and sinking and coming nearer. They seem to play with each other, and as they approach I behold three beautiful females with long, waving hair; but the one in the middle surpasses the others in beauty. She seems to be the queen, for she wears a wreath of water-plants upon her head. Still nearer they come. Now they see me and stop. They consult together, but curiosity conquers

[p. 168]

their fear. They come quite close and speak to me. Their voices are full and melodious; their language is foreign to me, and yet I understand what they say. Having discovered that I am a mortal, they appear as anxious to cultivate my acquaintance as I am anxious to be on friendly terms with them.

They invite me to go with them to their home; they speak of their palace constructed of beautiful shells among the coral-reefs in the depths of the ocean; of the milk-white pearls with which they have ornamented the walls; of the azure blue of the waves shining through the transparent walls of their houses; and the curious things which no mortal had ever seen. I object, and tell them that I am mortal and that I could not live in their own element; but the beautiful queen, rising out of the water up to her waist, smiles and shakes her charming head, and fluid diamonds seem to stream from her waving locks. "Come," she whispers; "no harm will befall you, for my love shall protect you." She extends her beautifully shaped arms towards me and touches my shoulder, and at her touch my consciousness fades away. A voluptuous sensation pervades my whole being. I feel that I am dissolving in the element of

[p. 169]

water; I only dimly hear the distant thunder of the breakers as they roll upon the sandy beach. I feel that my desire has been fulfilled--a moment, and I know nothing more.

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170]

  

IX

  

THE END

I HAVE little more to add to my tale. I awoke, and opening my eyes, I found myself stretched upon the moss, in the shadow of that mighty pine, where I had evidently fallen asleep. The sun stood still high above the western horizon, and far up in the sky two vultures described long drawn spirals in the air; and in their cries I seemed to recognise the voice of the queen of the nymphs. On the opposite side of the valley was still the rushing waterfall with the foaming basin, and the spray still rose in the air, and the water still sped over the moss-covered edge.

"Alas!" I exclaimed, "has all I have seen been nothing else than a dream? Has that which seemed so beautiful and real been merely an illusion of my brain, and have I now returned to real life? Why did I not die in the arms of the queen, and thus save myself this horrid awakening?"

[p. 171]

I rose, and, as I rose, my eye fell upon the bud of a white lily sticking in a buttonhole of my coat. 1 could not believe my eyes, and suspected that I was again the victim of a hallucination. I grasped the lily. It did not vanish in my grasp; it was as real as the earth upon which I stood; it was of a kind which does not grow in these cold mountainous regions; it only grows where the air is mild and warm. I remembered the gold; I put my hand into my pocket, and there, among the few remaining silver pieces, I found a solid lump of gold as bright as the purest; but the little ruby pearls had dropped off from its surface and were lost. I then recollected the precious book which the Adept had promised to send to my room in the village inn; but somehow it seemed to me that I had committed an indiscretion during the absence of Theodorus by prying into the secrets of his laboratory and listening to the temptations of the Nymphs. I felt as if I did not deserve the favour, and was doubtful whether or not he would send me the book.

I flew rather than walked down the mountain, along the road leading toward the village. Little did I now care for the scenery; neither for the mountain tops, which were

[p. 172]

gilded by the rays of the setting sun, nor for the murmuring river. It grew dark; and the full moon arose over the hills, looking exactly like the moon I had seen some hours before in the Indian Ocean. I calculated about the difference of time between Germany and Ceylon, and I found that indeed I might have seen the moon shine in the Bay of Bengal while the sun was shining in the Alps.

I arrived at O., little heeding the astonished looks of the villagers, who may have believed me insane as I hurried through the streets. I entered the inn, rushed upstairs to my room, and, as I entered, I saw upon the table the precious book, "The Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries." On the fly-leaf were written a few lines in pencil, saying:--

 

"Friend, I regret that you left our home so abruptly, and I cannot invite you to visit us again for the present. He who desires to remain in the peaceful valley must know how to resist all sensual attractions, even those of the Water Queen. Study this book practically; bring the circle into a square. Mortify the metals; calcinate and purify them of all residua. When you have succeeded, we shall

[p. 173]

meet again. I shall be with you when you need me.--Yours fraternally,

"THEODORUS."

It may be imagined that, in spite of my fatigue, I did not go to sleep very early. I walked up and down in my room, thinking over the events of that memorable day. I tried to find the line between the visible and the invisible, between the objective and subjective, between dreams and reality, and I found that there was no line, but that all these terms are merely relative, referring not merely to the conditions of things which appear objective or subjective to ourselves, but to our own conditions, and that while in one state of existence certain things may appear real to us and others illusive, in another state the illusions become real, and that which before seemed to be real is now merely a dream. Perhaps our whole terrestrial life will seem to be at the end nothing else than a hallucination.

As I walked about the room I observed a Bible belonging to my host lying upon a cupboard. I felt an impulse to open it at random and to see what it said. I did so, and my eye fell upon the twelfth chapter of

[p. 174]

the second epistle of the Apostle Paul, written to the Corinthians, where it said:--

"I knew a man in Christ, above fourteen years ago (whether in the body or whether out of the body I cannot tell; God knoweth); such a one was caught up into paradise and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter."

With the Adepts, An Adventure Among the Rosicrucians, by Franz Hartmann [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 175]

  

APPENDIX

  

A ROSICRUCIAN INSTITUTION IN SWITZERLAND

SOME time after the first edition of the foregoing pages appeared, an attempt was made in republican Switzerland to carry into effect these ideas. In the midst of the mountains, among the most sublime and picturesque scenery, upon a secluded hill near the shore of the most beautiful Italian lake, extensive grounds were purchased, and it was proposed to build a house whose object it was to serve as a refuge for those who wanted to cultivate spirituality pure and simple, without any admixture of priestcraft and superstition. It has not yet been finally decided whether this undertaking will be a success or a failure; but the latter is more than probable, as the method of thinking in old dilapidated and dying Europe is too narrowminded to permit of grasping such an exalted idea.

We have asked the question whether there would be any use or necessity for such

[p. 176]

an institution, and received the following answer.

Upon the wide expanse of our social sea of life there is at present no dry spot to be found where the white dove of truth may rest her weary feet. The waves of contending self-interests clash together, being blown into fury by the storms of passion that rage in the human heart. Selfishness, deceit, and the follies of fashion are the kings that rule over the peoples of Europe, claiming as their tribute the immortality of their souls. The battle for superiority in the struggle for existence forces nations and individuals to use evil means; conventionalism forces men and women to be hypocritical; to be honest and unselfish means starvation and ruin; to be true and sincere means to incur social ostracism; sharpness, cunning, and policy are the vermin that infest the seat of divine wisdom; every social unit seeks to live and to thrive upon the ignorance of the rest. Thus man's whole time and attention is taken up with running after the worthless baubles and pleasures of this grossly material world, and the only redeeming angel, the true living faith--meaning the spiritual power to recognise spiritual truth--is fast driven away, taking with it the true light and leaving the world in darkness and despair.

[p. 177]

Is there no one whose aspirations go higher than to enjoy the comforts of life, to eat and to drink, to be merry to-day and to die tomorrow, and who has ever been longing to find some way of escape from this great carnival, and to throw off the mask which he is forced to wear and which prevents him from seeing the truth? Do such persons never wish for a place where they might find refuge and enjoy communication with the God whose temples they are? Is such a desire to escape selfish, and is it necessary to hold out in the whirling dance that ends in the abyss of death?

It is truly said that spiritual strength grows only by resistance to temptations, but there must be a certain amount of strength before these temptations can be resisted and overcome by the power of the spirit. Is it selfish to seek to gain strength before the battle is entered? Is it selfish to wish for the possession of a certain amount of truth before one enters into an atmosphere filled with lies? Is it selfish if the gardener shelters a delicate plant in the hot-house until it grows strong enough to be set out in the garden and to encounter the vicissitudes of the climate? and is not spirituality such a delicate plant? Is it selfish for a child to remain in the mother's womb until it has gained strength to support

[p. 178]

its own life, and is not the spiritual regeneration of man most difficult to accomplish? The world is full of spiritual miscarriages which have entered the battle with the devils that rule the world prematurely, and without being prepared for the fight; neither will the means for such a preparation be found in our churches and schools as they are constituted at present; where what is miscalled "religion" is carried on as a social amusement, and where not even the meaning of the term "spirituality" seems to be known. Those who wish to find the true light must rise up and embrace it with their whole heart and their whole being; they have no time to dream or to amuse themselves with the illusory treasures of the  plane.

It is often said that people with spiritual aspirations should remain in the world and teach others, and do all the good they can; but what good can anyone do, if he has no knowledge of the consequences of his acts, and what knowledge can anyone teach to another if he knows nothing himself? Spiritual aspirations alone do not constitute spiritual knowledge; we must not only feel the truth but see it before we can know it ourselves. How can anyone teach the truth if the truth does not itself teach in and through him? There

[p. 179]

is already an abundance of preachers and teachers in the world who know the truth only from hearsay and from the reading of books; but it is only their light that shines, and not the light of the truth. What man needs is the Light itself, and not merely a description of it. There is no necessity to start a new sect with a new set of opinions and creeds; but there is a great necessity that a way should be found to teach mankind how they may open their eyes, so as to be able to perceive the truth themselves.

To those who know nothing about the possibility of attaining self-knowledge, imagining that God is incapable of teaching anything to the soul and that divine wisdom like manmade science is to be learned from man, the object of our institution will be incomprehensible. To those we can only say that it is not the object of this enterprise to furnish a retreat for misanthropes and hypochondriacs, where they may lead a lazy life, amusing themselves with bemoaning the wickedness of this sinful world; neither is it to be an infirmary for ghost-seers, visionaries, or dreamers, where they may revel to their hearts' content among the creations of their own fancy; nor is it to be a "school for occultism," where magic arts are taught to the fool; but it is intended to

[p. 180]

be a place where those who earnestly aspire to spirituality may find the external conditions necessary to cultivate it and to acquire the true "magic staff" that will securely support them on their voyage through eternity; namely, the power to recognise divine truth within their own selves--not by any capacity of their own, but by the power of the Light itself, which comes to all men if they are willing that the darkness should be driven away.

    


===== BOOK: wwe.txt =====



The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

The Well at the World's End

by William Morris

London ; New York : Longmans, Green, and Co.

[1896]

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

Book One: The Road Unto Love

[*Chapter 1: The Sundering of the Ways]

[*Chapter 2: Ralph Goeth Back Home to the High House]

[*Chapter 3: Ralph Cometh to the Cheaping-Town]

[*Chapter 4: Ralph Rideth the Downs]

[*Chapter 5: Ralph Cometh to Higham-on-the-Way]

[*Chapter 6: Ralph Goeth His Ways From the Abbey of St. Mary at Higham]

[*Chapter 7: The Maiden of Bourton Abbas]

[*Chapter 8: Ralph Cometh to the Wood Perilous. An Adventure Therein]

[*Chapter 9: Another Adventure in the Wood Perilous]

[*Chapter 10: A Meeting and a Parting in the Wood Perilous]

[*Chapter 11: Now Must Ralph Ride For It]

[*Chapter 12: Ralph Entereth Into the Burg of the Four Friths]

[*Chapter 13: The Streets of the Burg of the Four Friths]

[*Chapter 14: What Ralph Heard of the Matters of the Burg of the Four Friths]

[*Chapter 15: How Ralph Departed From the Burg of the Four Friths]

[*Chapter 16: Ralph Rideth the Wood Perilous Again]

[*Chapter 17: Ralph Cometh to the House of Abundance]

[*Chapter 18: Of Ralph in the Castle of Abundance]

[*Chapter 19: Ralph Readeth in a Book Concerning the Well at the World's End]

[*Chapter 20: Ralph Meeteth a Man in the Wood]

[*Chapter 21: Ralph Weareth Away Three Days Uneasily]

[*Chapter 22: An Adventure in the Wood]

[*Chapter 23: The Leechcraft of the Lady]

[*Chapter 24: Supper and Slumber in the Woodland Hall]

Book Two: The Road Unto Trouble

[*Chapter 1: Ralph Meets With Love in the Wilderness]

[*Chapter 2: They Break Their Fast in the Wildwood]

[*Chapter 3: The Lady Telleth Ralph of the Past Days of Her Life]

[*Chapter 4: The Lady Tells of Her Deliverance]

[*Chapter 5: Yet More of the Lady's Story]

[*Chapter 6: The Lady Tells Somewhat of Her Doings After She Left the Wilderness]

[*Chapter 7: The Lady Tells of the Strife and Trouble That Befell After Her Coming to the Country of the King's Son]

[*Chapter 8: The Lady Maketh an End of Her Tale]

[*Chapter 9: They Go On Their Way Once More]

[*Chapter 10: Of the Desert-House and the Chamber of Love in the Wilderness]

[*Chapter 11: Ralph Cometh Out of the Wilderness]

[*Chapter 12: Ralph Falleth in With Friends and Rideth to Whitwall]

[*Chapter 13: Richard Talketh With Ralph Concerning the Well at the World's End. Concerning Swevenham]

[*Chapter 14: Ralph Falleth in With Another Old Friend]

[*Chapter 15: Ralph Dreams a Dream Or Sees a Vision]

[*Chapter 16: Of the Tales of Swevenham]

[*Chapter 17: Richard Bringeth Tidings of Departing]

[*Chapter 18: Ralph Departeth From Whitwall With the Fellowship of Clement Chapman]

[*Chapter 19: Master Clement Tells Ralph Concerning the Lands Whereunto They Were Riding]

[*Chapter 20: They Come to the Mid-Mountain Guest-House]

[*Chapter 21: A Battle in the Mountains]

[*Chapter 22: Ralph Talks With Bull Shockhead]

[*Chapter 23: Of the Town of Cheaping Knowe]

[*Chapter 24: Ralph Heareth More Tidings of the Damsel]

[*Chapter 25: The Fellowship Comes to Whiteness]

[*Chapter 26: They Ride the Mountains Toward Goldburg]

[*Chapter 27: Clement Tells of Goldburg]

[*Chapter 28: Now They Come to Goldburg]

[*Chapter 29: Of Goldburg and the Queen Thereof]

[*Chapter 30: Ralph Hath Hope of Tidings Concerning the Well at the World's End]

[*Chapter 31: The Beginning of the Road to Utterbol]

[*Chapter 32: Ralph Happens on Evil Days]

[*Chapter 33: Ralph is Brought on the Road Towards Utterbol]

[*Chapter 34: The Lord of Utterbol Will Wot of Ralph's Might and Minstrelsy]

[*Chapter 35: Ralph Cometh To the Vale of the Tower]

[*Chapter 36: The Talk of Two Women Concerning Ralph]

[*Chapter 37: How Ralph Justed With the Aliens]

[*Chapter 38: A Friend Gives Ralph Warning]

[*Chapter 39: The Lord of Utterbol Makes Ralph a Free Man]

[*Chapter 40: They Ride Toward Utterness From Out of Vale Turris]

[*Chapter 41: Redhead Keeps Tryst]

Book Three: The Road To The Well At World's End

[*Chapter 1: An Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountains]

[*Chapter 2: Ralph Rides the Wood Under the Mountains]

[*Chapter 3: Ralph Meeteth With Another Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountain]

[*Chapter 4: They Ride the Wood Under the Mountains]

[*Chapter 5: They Come on the Sage of Swevenham]

[*Chapter 6: Those Two Are Learned Lore by the Sage of Swevenham]

[*Chapter 7: An Adventure by the Way]

[*Chapter 8: They Come to the Sea of Molten Rocks]

[*Chapter 9: They Come Forth From the Rock-Sea]

[*Chapter 10: They Come to the Gate of the Mountains]

[*Chapter 11: They Come to the Vale of Sweet Chestnuts]

[*Chapter 12: Winter Amidst of the Mountains]

[*Chapter 13: Of Ursula and the Bear]

[*Chapter 14: Now Come the Messengers of the Innocent Folk]

[*Chapter 15: They Come to the Land of the Innocent Folk]

[*Chapter 16: They Come to the House of the Sorceress]

[*Chapter 17: They Come Through the Woodland to the Thirsty Desert]

[*Chapter 18: They Come to the Dry Tree]

[*Chapter 19: They Come Out of the Thirsty Desert]

[*Chapter 20: They Come to the Ocean Sea]

[*Chapter 21: Now They Drink of the Well at the World's End]

[*Chapter 22: Now They Have Drunk and Are Glad]

Book Four: The Road Home

[*Chapter 1: Ralph and Ursula Come Back Again Through the Great Mountains]

[*Chapter 2: They Hear New Tidings of Utterbol]

[*Chapter 3: They Winter With the Sage; and Thereafter Come Again to Vale Turris]

[*Chapter 4: A Feast in the Red Pavilion]

[*Chapter 5: Bull Telleth of His Winning of the Lordship of Utterbol]

[*Chapter 6: They Ride From Vale Turris.  Redhead Tells of Agatha]

[*Chapter 7: Of Their Riding the Waste, and of a Battle Thereon]

[*Chapter 8: Of Goldburg Again, and the Queen Thereof]

[*Chapter 9: They Come to Cheaping Knowe Once More.  Of the King Thereof]

[*Chapter 10: An Adventure on the Way to the Mountains]

[*Chapter 11: They Come Through the Mountains Into the Plain]

[*Chapter 12: The Roads Sunder Again]

[*Chapter 13: They Come to Whitwall Again]

[*Chapter 14: They Ride Away From Whitwall]

[*Chapter 15: A Strange Meeting in the Wilderness]

[*Chapter 16: They Come to the Castle of Abundance Once More]

[*Chapter 17: They Fall in With That Hermit]

[*Chapter 18: A Change of Days in the Burg of the Four Friths]

[*Chapter 19: Ralph Sees Hampton and the Scaur]

[*Chapter 20: They Come to the Gate of Higham By the Way]

[*Chapter 21: Talk Between Those Two Brethren]

[*Chapter 22: An Old Acquaintance Comes From the Down Country to See Ralph]

[*Chapter 23: They Ride to Bear Castle]

[*Chapter 24: The Folkmote of the Shepherds]

[*Chapter 25: They Come to Wulstead]

[*Chapter 26: Ralph Sees His Father and Mother Again]

[*Chapter 27: Ralph Holds Converse With Katherine His Gossip]

[*Chapter 28: Dame Katherine Tells of the Pair of Beads, and Whence She Had Them]

[*Chapter 29: They Go Down to Battle in Upmeads]

[*Chapter 30: Ralph Brings His Father and Mother to Upmeads]

[*Chapter 31: Ralph Brings Ursula Home to the High House]

[*Chapter 32: Yet a Few Words Concerning Ralph of Upmeads]

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_01]

BOOK ONE

The Road Unto Love

CHAPTER 1

The Sundering of the Ways

Long ago there was a little land, over which ruled a regulus or kinglet, who was called King Peter, though his kingdom was but little. He had four sons whose names were Blaise, Hugh, Gregory and Ralph: of these Ralph was the youngest, whereas he was but of twenty winters and one; and Blaise was the oldest and had seen thirty winters.

Now it came to this at last, that to these young men the kingdom of their father seemed strait; and they longed to see the ways of other men, and to strive for life. For though they were king's sons, they had but little world's wealth; save and except good meat and drink, and enough or too much thereof; house-room of the best; friends to be merry with, and maidens to kiss, and these also as good as might be; freedom withal to come and go as they would; the heavens above them, the earth to bear them up, and the meadows and acres, the woods and fair streams, and the little hills of Upmeads, for that was the name of their country and the kingdom of King Peter.

So having nought but this little they longed for much; and that the more because, king's sons as they were, they had but scant dominion save over their horses and dogs: for the men of that country were stubborn and sturdy vavassors, and might not away with masterful doings, but were like to pay back a blow with a blow, and a foul word with a buffet. So that, all things considered, it was little wonder if King Peter's sons found themselves straitened in their little land: wherein was no great merchant city; no mighty castle, or noble abbey of monks:  nought but fair little halls of yeomen, with here and there a franklin's court or a shield-knight's manor-house; with many a goodly church, and whiles a house of good canons, who knew not the road to Rome, nor how to find the door of the Chancellor's house.

So these young men wearied their father and mother a long while with telling them of their weariness, and their longing to be gone: till at last on a fair and hot afternoon of June King Peter rose up from the carpet which the Prior of St. John's by the Bridge had given him (for he had been sleeping thereon amidst the grass of his orchard after his dinner) and he went into the hall of his house, which was called the High House of Upmeads, and sent for his four sons to come to him. And they came and stood before his high-seat and he said:

"Sons, ye have long wearied me with words concerning your longing for travel on the roads; now if ye verily wish to be gone, tell me when would ye take your departure if ye had your choice?"

They looked at one another, and the three younger ones nodded at Blaise the eldest:  so he began, and said:  "Saving the love and honour that we have for thee, and also for our mother, we would be gone at once, even with the noon's meat still in our bellies. But thou art the lord in this land, and thou must rule. Have I said well, brethren?"  And they all said "Yea, yea." Then said the king; "Good! now is the sun high and hot; yet if ye ride softly ye may come to some good harbour before nightfall without foundering your horses. So come ye in an hour's space to the Four-want-way, and there and then will I order your departure."

The young men were full of joy when they heard his word; and they departed and went this way and that, gathering such small matters as each deemed that he needed, and which he might lightly carry with him; then they armed themselves, and would bid the squires bring them their horses; but men told them that the said squires had gone their ways already to the Want-way by the king's commandment: so thither they went at once a-foot all four in company, laughing and talking together merrily.

It must be told that this Want-way aforesaid was but four furlongs from the House, which lay in an ingle of the river called Upmeads Water amongst very fair meadows at the end of the upland tillage; and the land sloped gently up toward the hill-country and the unseen mountains on the north; but to the south was a low ridge which ran along the water, as it wound along from west to east.  Beyond the said ridge, at a place whence you could see the higher hills to the south, that stretched mainly east and west also, there was presently an end of the Kingdom of Upmeads, though the neighbours on that side were peaceable and friendly, and were wont to send gifts to King Peter.  But toward the north beyond the Want-way King Peter was lord over a good stretch of land, and that of the best; yet was he never a rich man, for he had no freedom to tax and tail his folk, nor forsooth would he have used it if he had; for he was no ill man, but kindly and of measure.  On these northern marches there was war at whiles, whereas they ended in a great forest well furnished of trees; and this wood was debateable, and King Peter and his sons rode therein at their peril: but great plenty was therein of all wild deer, as hart, and buck, and roe, and swine, and bears and wolves withal. The lord on the other side thereof was a mightier man than King Peter, albeit he was a bishop, and a baron of Holy Church. To say sooth he was a close-fist and a manslayer; though he did his manslaying through his vicars, the knights and men-at-arms who held their manors of him, or whom he waged.

In that forest had King Peter's father died in battle, and his eldest son also; therefore, being a man of peace, he rode therein but seldom, though his sons, the three eldest of them, had both ridden therein and ran therefrom valiantly. As for Ralph the youngest, his father would not have him ride the Wood Debateable as yet.

So came those young men to the Want-ways, and found their father sitting there on a heap of stones, and over against him eight horses, four destriers, and four hackneys, and four squires withal. So they came and stood before their father, waiting for his word, and wondering what it would be.

Now spake King Peter:  "Fair sons, ye would go on all adventure to seek a wider land, and a more stirring life than ye may get of me at home: so be it!  But I have bethought me, that, since I am growing old and past the age of getting children, one of you, my sons, must abide at home to cherish me and your mother, and to lead our carles in war if trouble falleth upon us.  Now I know not how to choose by mine own wit which of you shall ride and which abide.  For so it is that ye are diverse of your conditions; but the evil conditions which one of you lacks the other hath, and the valiancy which one hath, the other lacks. Blaise is wise and prudent, but no great man of his hands. Hugh is a stout rider and lifter, but headstrong and foolhardy, and over bounteous a skinker; and Gregory is courteous and many worded, but sluggish in deed; though I will not call him a dastard.  As for Ralph, he is fair to look on, and peradventure he may be as wise as Blaise, as valiant as Hugh, and as smooth-tongued as Gregory; but of all this we know little or nothing, whereas he is but young and untried. Yet may he do better than you others, and I deem that he will do so. All things considered, then, I say, I know not how to choose between you, my sons; so let luck choose for me, and ye shall draw cuts for your roads; and he that draweth longest shall go north, and the next longest shall go east, and the third straw shall send the drawer west; but as to him who draweth the shortest cut, he shall go no whither but back again to my house, there to abide with me the chances and changes of life; and it is most like that this one shall sit in my chair when I am gone, and be called King of Upmeads.

"Now, my sons, doth this ordinance please you?  For if so be it doth not, then may ye all abide at home, and eat of my meat, and drink of my cup, but little chided either for sloth or misdoing, even as it hath been aforetime."

The young men looked at one another, and Blaise answered and said: "Sir, as for me I say we will do after your commandment, to take what road luck may show us, or to turn back home again." They all yeasaid this one after the other; and then King Peter said: "Now before I draw the cuts, I shall tell you that I have appointed the squires to go with each one of you.  Richard the Red shall go with Blaise; for though he be somewhat stricken in years, and wise, yet is he a fierce carle and a doughty, and knoweth well all feats of arms.

"Lancelot Longtongue shall be squire to Hugh; for he is good of seeming and can compass all courtesy, and knoweth logic (though it be of the law and not of the schools), yet is he a proper man of his hands; as needs must he be who followeth Hugh; for where is Hugh, there is trouble and debate.

"Clement the Black shall serve Gregory:  for he is a careful carle, and speaketh one word to every ten deeds that he doeth; whether they be done with point and edge, or with the hammer in the smithy.

"Lastly, I have none left to follow thee, Ralph, save Nicholas Longshanks; but though he hath more words than I have, yet hath he more wisdom, and is a man lettered and far-travelled, and loveth our house right well.

"How say ye, sons, is this to your liking?"

They all said "yea."  Then quoth the king; "Nicholas, bring hither the straws ready dight, and I will give them my sons to draw."

So each young man came up in turn and drew; and King Peter laid the straws together and looked at them, and said:

"Thus it is, Hugh goeth north with Lancelot, Gregory westward with Clement." He stayed a moment and then said:  "Blaise fareth eastward and Richard with him.  As for thee, Ralph my dear son, thou shalt back with me and abide in my house and I shall see thee day by day; and thou shalt help me to live my last years happily in all honour; and thy love shall be my hope, and thy valiancy my stay."

Therewith he arose and threw his arm about the young man's neck; but he shrank away a little from his father, and his face grew troubled; and King Peter noted that, and his countenance fell, and he said:

"Nay nay, my son; grudge not thy brethren the chances of the road, and the ill-hap of the battle.  Here at least for thee is the bounteous board and the full cup, and the love of kindred and well-willers, and the fellowship of the folk. O well is thee, my son, and happy shalt thou be!"

But the young man knit his brows and said no word in answer.

Then came forward those three brethren who were to fare at all adventure, and they stood before the old man saying nought.  Then he laughed and said: "O ho, my sons!  Here in Upmeads have ye all ye need without money, but when ye fare in the outlands ye need money; is it not a lack of yours that your pouches be bare?  Abide, for I have seen to it."

Therewith he drew out of his pouch three little bags, and said; "Take ye each one of these; for therein is all that my treasury may shed as now. In each of these is there coined money, both white and red, and some deal of gold uncoined, and of rings and brooches a few, and by estimation there is in each bag the same value reckoned in lawful silver of Upmeads and the Wolds and the Overhill-Countries. Take up each what there is, and do the best ye may therewith."

Then each took his bag, and kissed and embraced his father; and they kissed Ralph and each other, and so got to horse and departed with their squires, going softly because of the hot sun. But Nicholas slowly mounted his hackney and led Ralph's war-horse with him home again to King Peter's House.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_02]

CHAPTER 2

Ralph Goeth Back Home to the High House

Ralph and King Peter walked slowly home together, and as they went King Peter fell to telling of how in his young days he rode in the Wood Debateable, and was belated there all alone, and happed upon men who were outlaws and wolfheads, and feared for his life; but they treated him kindly, and honoured him, and saw him safe on his way in the morning.  So that never thereafter would he be art and part with those who hunted outlaws to slay them. "For," said he, "it is with these men as with others, that they make prey of folk; yet these for the more part prey on the rich, and the lawful prey on the poor.  Otherwise it is with these wolfheads as with lords and knights and franklins, that as there be bad amongst them, so also there be good; and the good ones I happed on, and so may another man."

Hereto paid Ralph little heed at that time, since he had heard the tale and its morality before, and that more than once; and moreover his mind was set upon his own matters and these was he pondering.  Albeit perchance the words abode with him. So came they to the House, and Ralph's mother, who was a noble dame, and well-liking as for her years, which were but little over fifty, stood in the hall-door to see which of her sons should come back to her, and when she saw them coming together, she went up to them, and cast her arms about Ralph and kissed him and caressed him-- being exceeding glad that it was he and not one of the others who had returned to dwell with them; for he was her best-beloved, as was little marvel, seeing that he was by far the fairest and the most loving.  But Ralph's face grew troubled again in his mother's arms, for he loved her exceeding well; and forsooth he loved the whole house and all that dwelt there, down to the turnspit dogs in the chimney ingle, and the swallows that nested in the earthen bottles, which when he was little he had seen his mother put up in the eaves of the out-bowers: but now, love or no love, the spur was in his side, and he must needs hasten as fate would have him.  However, when he had disentangled himself from his mother's caresses, he enforced himself to keep a cheerful countenance, and upheld it the whole evening through, and was by seeming merry at supper, and went to bed singing.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_03]

CHAPTER 3

Ralph Cometh to the Cheaping-Town

He slept in an upper chamber in a turret of the House, which chamber was his own, and none might meddle with it. There the next day he awoke in the dawning, and arose and clad himself, and took his wargear and his sword and spear, and bore all away without doors to the side of the Ford in that ingle of the river, and laid it for a while in a little willow copse, so that no chance-comer might see it; then he went back to the stable of the House and took his destrier from the stall (it was a dapple-grey horse called Falcon, and was right good,) and brought him down to the said willow copse, and tied him to a tree till he had armed himself amongst the willows, whence he came forth presently as brisk-looking and likely a man-at-arms as you might see on a summer day.  Then he clomb up into the saddle, and went his ways splashing across the ford, before the sun had arisen, while the throstle-cocks were yet amidst their first song.

Then he rode on a little trot south away; and by then the sun was up he was without the bounds of Upmeads; albeit in the land thereabout dwelt none who were not friends to King Peter and his sons: and that was well, for now were folk stirring and were abroad in the fields; as a band of carles going with their scythes to the hay-field; or a maiden with her milking-pails going to her kine, barefoot through the seeding grass; or a company of noisy little lads on their way to the nearest pool of the stream that they might bathe in the warm morning after the warm night. All these and more knew him and his armour and Falcon his horse, and gave him the sele of the day, and he was nowise troubled at meeting them; for besides that they thought it no wonder to meet one of the lords of Upmeads going armed about his errands, their own errands were close at home, and it was little likely that they should go that day so far as to Upmeads Water, seeing that it ran through the meadows a half-score miles to the north-ward.

So Ralph rode on, and came into the high road, that led one way back again into Upmeads, and crossed the Water by a fair bridge late builded between King Peter and a house of Canons on the north side, and the other way into a good cheaping-town hight Wulstead, beyond which Ralph knew little of the world which lay to the south, and seemed to him a wondrous place, full of fair things and marvellous adventures.

So he rode till he came into the town when the fair morning was still young, the first mass over, and maids gathered about the fountain amidst the market-place, and two or three dames sitting under the buttercross. Ralph rode straight up to the house of a man whom he knew, and had often given him guesting there, and he himself was not seldom seen in the High House of Upmeads.  This man was a merchant, who went and came betwixt men's houses, and bought and sold many things needful and pleasant to folk, and King Peter dealt with him much and often. Now he stood in the door of his house, which was new and goodly, sniffing the sweet scents which the morning wind bore into the town; he was clad in a goodly long gown of grey welted with silver, of thin cloth meet for the summer-tide: for little he wrought with his hands, but much with his tongue; he was a man of forty summers, ruddy-faced and black-bearded, and he was called Clement Chapman.

When he saw Ralph he smiled kindly on him, and came and held his stirrup as he lighted down, and said:  "Welcome, lord! Art thou come to give me a message, and eat and drink in a poor huckster's house, and thou armed so gallantly?"

Ralph laughed merrily, for he was hungry, and he said: "Yea, I will eat and drink with thee and kiss my gossip, and go my ways."

Therewith the carle led him into the house; and if it were goodly without, within it was better.  For there was a fair chamber panelled with wainscot well carven, and a cupboard of no sorry vessels of silver and latten: the chairs and stools as fair as might be; no king's might be better: the windows were glazed, and there were flowers and knots and posies in them; and the bed was hung with goodly web from over sea such as the soldan useth. Also, whereas the chapman's ware-bowers were hard by the chamber, there was a pleasant mingled smell therefrom floating about.  The table was set with meat and drink and vessel of pewter and earth, all fair and good; and thereby stood the chapman's wife, a very goodly woman of two-score years, who had held Ralph at the font when she was a slim damsel new wedded; for she was come of no mean kindred of the Kingdom of Upmeads: her name was Dame Katherine.

Now she kissed Ralph's cheek friendly, and said: "Welcome, gossip! thou art here in good time to break thy fast; and we will give thee a trim dinner thereafter, when thou hast been here and there in the town and done thine errand; and then shalt thou drink a cup and sing me a song, and so home again in the cool of the evening."

Ralph seemed a little troubled at her word, and he said: "Nay, gossip, though I thank thee for all these good things as though I had them, yet must I ride away south straightway after I have breakfasted, and said one word to the goodman. Goodman, how call ye the next town southward, and how far is it thither?"

Quoth Clement:  "My son, what hast thou to do with riding south? As thou wottest, going hence south ye must presently ride the hill-country; and that is no safe journey for a lonely man, even if he be a doughty knight like to thee, lord."

Said Ralph, reddening withal:  "I have an errand that way."

"An errand of King Peter's or thine own?" said Clement.

"Of King Peter's, if ye must wot," said Ralph.

Clement were no chapman had he not seen that the lad was lying; so he said:

"Fair lord, saving your worship, how would it be as to the speeding of King Peter's errand, if I brought thee before our mayor, and swore the peace against thee; so that I might keep thee in courteous prison till I had sent to thy father of thy whereabouts?"

The young man turned red with anger; but ere he could speak Dame Katherine said sharply:  "Hold thy peace, Clement! What hast thou to meddle or make in the matter?  If our young lord hath will to ride out and see the world, why should we let him? Yea, why should his father let him, if it come to that? Take my word for it that my gossip shall go through the world and come back to those that love him, as goodly as he went forth. And hold! here is for a token thereof."

Therewith she went to an ark that stood in the corner, and groped in the till thereof and brought out a little necklace of blue and green stones with gold knobs betwixt, like a pair of beads; albeit neither pope nor priest had blessed them; and tied to the necklace was a little box of gold with something hidden therein.  This gaud she gave to Ralph, and said to him: "Gossip, wear this about thy neck, and let no man take it from thee, and I think it will be salvation to thee in peril, and good luck to thee in the time of questing; so that it shall be to thee as if thou hadst drunk of the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

"What is that water?" said Ralph, "and how may I find it?"

"I know not rightly," she said, "but if a body might come by it, I hear say it saveth from weariness and wounding and sickness; and it winneth love from all, and maybe life everlasting. Hast thou not heard tell of it, my husband?"

"Yea," said the chapman, "many times; and how that whoso hath drunk thereof hath the tongue that none may withstand, whether in buying or selling, or prevailing over the hearts of men in any wise. But as for its wherabouts, ye shall not find it in these parts. Men say that it is beyond the Dry Tree; and that is afar, God wot! But now, lord Ralph, I rede thee go back again this evening with Andrew, my nephew, for company:  forsooth, he will do little less gainful than riding with thee to Upmeads than if he abide in Wulstead; for he is idle.  But, my lord, take it not amiss that I spake about the mayor and the tipstaves; for it was but a jest, as thou mayest well wot."

Ralph's face cleared at that word, and he stood smiling, weighing the chaplet in his hand; but Dame Katherine said:

"Dear gossip, do it on speedily; for it is a gift from me unto thee: and from a gossip even king's sons may take a gift."

Quoth Ralph:  "But is it lawful to wear it? is there no wizardry within it?"

"Hearken to him!" she said, "and how like unto a man he speaketh; if there were a brawl in the street, he would strike in and ask no word thereof, not even which were the better side: whereas here is my falcon-chick frighted at a little gold box and a pair of Saracen beads."

"Well," quoth Ralph, "the first holy man I meet shall bless them for me."

"That shall he not," said the dame, "that shall he not. Who wotteth what shall betide to thee or me if he do so? Come, do them on, and then to table!  For seest thou not that the goodman is wearying for meat? and even thine eyes will shine the brighter for a mouthful, king's son and gossip."

She took him by the hand and did the beads on his neck and kissed and fondled him before he sat down, while the goodman looked on, grinning rather sheepishly, but said nought to them; and only called on his boy to lead the destrier to stable. So when they were set down, the chapman took up the word where it had been dropped, and said:  "So, Lord Ralph, thou must needs take to adventures, being, as thou deemest, full grown.  That is all one as the duck taketh to water despite of the hen that hath hatched her.  Well, it was not to be thought that Upmeads would hold you lords much longer. Or what is gone with my lords your brethren?"

Said Ralph:  "They have departed at all adventure, north, east, and west, each bearing our father's blessing and a bag of pennies. And to speak the truth, goodman, for I perceive I am no doctor at lying, my father and mother would have me stay at home when my brethren were gone, and that liketh me not; therefore am I come out to seek my luck in the world: for Upmeads is good for a star-gazer, maybe, or a simpler, or a priest, or a worthy good carle of the fields, but not for a king's son with the blood running hot in his veins. Or what sayest thou, gossip?"

Quoth the dame:  "I could weep for thy mother; but for thee nought at all. It is good that thou shouldest do thy will in the season of youth and the days of thy pleasure.  Yea, and I deem that thou shalt come back again great and worshipful; and I am called somewhat foreseeing. Only look to it that thou keep the pretty thing that I have just given thee."

"Well," said the chapman, "this is fine talk about pleasure and the doing of one's will; nevertheless a whole skin is good wares, though it be not to be cheapened in any market of the world. Now, lord, go thou where thou wilt, whether I say go or abide; and forsooth I am no man of King Peter's, that I should stay thee. As for the name of the next town, it is called Higham-on-the-Way, and is a big town plenteous of victuals, with strong walls and a castle, and a very rich abbey of monks:  and there is peace within its walls, because the father abbot wages a many men to guard him and his, and to uphold his rights against all comers; wherein he doth wisely, and also well.  For much folk flocketh to his town and live well therein; and there is great recourse of chapmen thither.  No better market is there betwixt this and Babylon.  Well, Sir Ralph, I rede thee if thou comest unhurt to Higham-on-the-Way, go no further for this time, but take service with the lord abbot, and be one of his men of war; thou may'st then become his captain if thou shouldest live; which would be no bad adventure for one who cometh from Upmeads."

Ralph looked no brighter for this word, and he answered nought to it: but said presently:

"And what is to be looked for beyond Higham if one goeth further? Dost thou know the land any further?"

The carle smiled:  "Yea forsooth, and down to the Wood Perilous, and beyond it, and the lands beyond the Wood; and far away through them. I say not that I have been to the Dry Tree; but I have spoken to one who hath heard of him who hath seen it; though he might not come by a draught of the Well at the World's End."

Ralph's eyes flashed, and his cheeks reddened as he listened hereto; but he spake quietly:

"Master Clement, how far dost thou make it to Higham-on-the-Way?"

"A matter of forty miles," said the Chapman; "because, as thou wottest, if ye ride south from hence, ye shall presently bring your nose up against the big downs, and must needs climb them at once; and when ye are at the top of Bear Hill, and look south away ye shall see nought but downs on downs with never a road to call a road, and never a castle, or church, or homestead:  nought but some shepherd's hut; or at the most the little house of a holy man with a little chapel thereby in some swelly of the chalk, where the water hath trickled into a pool; for otherwise the place is waterless." Therewith he took a long pull at the tankard by his side, and went on:

"Higham is beyond all that, and out into the fertile plain; and a little river hight Coldlake windeth about the meadows there; and it is a fair land; though look you the wool of the downs is good, good, good!  I have foison of this year's fleeces with me. Ye shall raise none such in Upmeads."

Ralph sat silent a little, as if pondering, and then he started up and said: "Good master Clement, we have eaten thy meat and thank thee for that and other matters.  Wilt thou now be kinder, and bid thy boy bring round Falcon our horse; for we have far to go, and must begone straight-away."

"Yea, lord," said Clement, "even so will I do."  And he muttered under his breath; "Thou talkest big, my lad, with thy 'we'; but thou art pressed lest Nicholas be here presently to fetch thee back; and to say sooth I would his hand were on thy shoulder even now."

Then he spake aloud again, and said:

"I must now begone to my lads, and I will send one round with thy war-horse. But take my rede, my lord, and become the man of the Abbot of St. Mary's of Higham, and all will be well."

Therewith he edged himself out of the chamber, and the dame fell to making a mighty clatter with the vessel and trenchers and cups on the board, while Ralph walked up and down the chamber his war-gear jingling upon him. Presently the dame left her table-clatter and came up to Ralph and looked kindly into his face and said:  "Gossip, hast thou perchance any money?"

He flushed up red, and then his face fell; yet he spake gaily: "Yea, gossip, I have both white and red:  there are three golden crowns in my pouch, and a little flock of silver pennies: forsooth I say not as many as would reach from here to Upmeads, if they were laid one after the other."

She smiled and patted his cheek, and said:

"Thou art no very prudent child, king's son.  But it comes into my mind that my master did not mean thee to go away empty-handed; else had he not departed and left us twain together."

Therewith she went to the credence that stood in a corner, and opened a drawer therein and took out a little bag, and gave it into Ralph's hand, and said:  "This is the gift of the gossip; and thou mayst take it without shame; all the more because if thy father had been a worser man, and a harder lord he would have had more to give thee. But now thou hast as much or more as any one of thy brethren."

He took the bag smiling and shame-faced, but she looked on him fondly and said:

"Now I know not whether I shall lay old Nicholas on thine heels when he cometh after thee, as come he will full surely; or whether I shall suffer the old sleuth-hound nose out thy slot of himself, as full surely he will set on to it."

"Thou mightest tell him," said Ralph, "that I am gone to take service with the Abbot of St. Mary's of Higham:  hah?"

She laughed and said:  "Wilt thou do so, lord, and follow the rede of that goodman of mine, who thinketh himself as wise as Solomon?"

Ralph smiled and answered her nothing.

"Well," she said, "I shall say what likes me when the hour is at hand. Lo, here! thine horse.  Abide yet a moment of time, and then go whither thou needs must, like the wind of the summer day."

Therewith she went out of the chamber and came back again with a scrip which she gave to Ralph and said:  "Herein is a flask of drink for the waterless country, and a little meat for the way. Fare thee well, gossip!  Little did I look for it when I rose up this morning and nothing irked me save the dulness of our town, and the littleness of men's doings therein, that I should have to cut off a piece of my life from me this morning, and say, farewell gossip, as now again I do."

Therewith she kissed him on either cheek and embraced him; and it might be said of her and him that she let him go thereafter; for though as aforesaid he loved her, and praised her kindness, he scarce understood the eagerness of her love for him; whereas moreover she saw him not so often betwixt Upmeads and Wulstead:  and belike she herself scarce understood it. Albeit she was a childless woman.

So when he had got to horse, she watched him riding a moment, and saw how he waved his hand to her as he turned the corner of the market-place, and how a knot of lads and lasses stood staring on him after she lost sight of him.  Then she turned her back into the chamber and laid her head on the table and wept. Then came in the goodman quietly and stood by her and she heeded him not.  He stood grinning curiously on her awhile, and then laid his hand on her shoulder, and said as she raised her face to him:

"Sweetheart, it availeth nought; when thou wert young and exceeding fair, he was but a little babe, and thou wert looking in those days to have babes of thine own; and then it was too soon: and now that he is such a beauteous young man, and a king's son withal, and thou art wedded to a careful carle of no weak heart, and thou thyself art more than two-score years old, it is too late.  Yet thou didst well to give our lord the money. Lo! here is wherewithal to fill up the lack in thy chest; and here is a toy for thee in place of the pair of beads thou gavest him; and I bid thee look on it as if I had given him my share of the money and the beads."

She turned to Clement, and took the bag of money, and the chaplet which he held out to her, and she said: "God wot thou art no ill man, my husband, but would God I had a son like to him!"

She still wept somewhat; but the chapman said:  "Let it rest there, sweetheart! let it rest there!  It may be a year or twain before thou seest him again:  and then belike he shall be come back with some woman whom he loves better than any other; and who knows but in a way he may deem himself our son. Meanwhile thou hast done well, sweetheart, so be glad."

Therewith he kissed her and went his ways to his merchandize, and she to the ordering of her house, grieved but not unhappy.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_04]

CHAPTER 4

Ralph Rideth the Downs

As for Ralph, he rode on with a merry heart, and presently came to an end of the plain country, and the great downs rose up before him with a white road winding up to the top of them. Just before the slopes began to rise was a little thorp beside a stream, and thereby a fair church and a little house of Canons: so Ralph rode toward the church to see if therein were an altar of St. Nicholas, who was his good lord and patron, that he might ask of him a blessing on his journey. But as he came up to the churchyard-gate he saw a great black horse tied thereto as if abiding some one; and as he lighted down from his saddle he saw a man coming hastily from out the church-door and striding swiftly toward the said gate. He was a big man, and armed; for he had a bright steel sallet on his head, which covered his face all save the end of his chin; and plates he had on his legs and arms. He wore a green coat over his armour, and thereon was wrought in gold an image of a tree leafless:  he had a little steel axe about his neck, and a great sword hung by his side. Ralph stood looking on him with his hand on the latch of the gate, but when the man came thereto he tore it open roughly and shoved through at once, driving Ralph back, so that he well-nigh overset him, and so sprang to his horse and swung himself into the saddle, just as Ralph steadied himself and ruffled up to him, half drawing his sword from the scabbard the while. But the man-at-arms cried out, "Put it back, put it back! If thou must needs deal with every man that shoveth thee in his haste, thy life is like to be but short."

He was settling himself in his saddle as he spoke, and now he shook his rein, and rode off speedily toward the hill-road. But when he was so far off that Ralph might but see his face but as a piece of reddish colour, he reined up for a moment of time, and turning round in his saddle lifted up his sallet and left his face bare, and cried out as if to Ralph, "The first time!" And then let the head-piece fall again, and set spurs to his horse and gallopped away.

Ralph stood looking at him as he got smaller on the long white road, and wondering what this might mean, and how the unknown man should know him, if he did know him. But presently he let his wonder run off him, and went his ways into the church, wherein he found his good lord and friend St. Nicholas, and so said a paternoster before his altar, and besought his help, and made his offering; and then departed and gat to horse again, and rode softly the way to the downs, for the day was hot.

The way was steep and winding, with a hollow cup of the hills below it, and above it a bent so steep that Ralph could see but a few yards of it on his left hand; but when he came to the hill's brow and could look down on the said bent, he saw strange figures on the face thereof, done by cutting away the turf so that the chalk might show clear.  A tree with leaves was done on that hill-side, and on either hand of it a beast like a bear ramping up against the tree; and these signs were very ancient. This hill-side carving could not be seen from the thorp beneath, which was called Netherton, because the bent looked westward down into the hollow of the hill abovesaid; but from nigher to Wulstead they were clear to see, and Ralph had often beheld them, but never so nigh: and that hill was called after them Bear Hill.  At the top of it was an earth-work of the ancient folk, which also was called Bear Castle. And now Ralph rode over the hill's brow into it; for the walls had been beaten down in places long and long ago.

Now he rode up the wall, and at the topmost of it turned and looked aback on the blue country which he had ridden through stretching many a league below, and tried if he could pick out Upmeads from amongst the diverse wealth of the summer land: but Upmeads Water was hidden, and he could see nothing to be sure of to tell him whereabouts the High House stood; yet he deemed that he could make out the Debateable Wood and the hills behind it well enough.  Then he turned his horse about, and had the down-country before him; long lines of hills to wit, one rising behind the other like the waves of a somewhat quiet sea: no trees thereon, nor houses that he might see thence: nought but a green road that went waving up and down before him greener than the main face of the slopes.

He looked at it all for a minute or two as the south-west wind went past his ears, and played a strange tune on the innumerable stems of the bents and the hard-stalked blossoms, to which the bees sang counterpoint. Then the heart arose within him, and he drew the sword from the scabbard, and waved it about his head, and shook it toward the south, and cried out, "Now, welcome world, and be thou blessed from one end to the other, from the ocean sea to the uttermost mountains!"

A while he held the white steel in his fist, and then sheathed the blade, and rode down soberly over the turf bridge across the ancient fosse, and so came on to the green road made many ages before by an ancient people, and so trotted south along fair and softly.

Little is to be told of his journey through the downs: as he topped a low hill whereon were seven grave-mounds of the ancient folk in a row, he came on a shepherd lying amidst of his sheep: the man sprang to his feet when he heard horse-hoofs anigh him and saw the glint of steel, and he set his hand to a short spear which lay by him; but when he saw nought but Ralph, and heard how he gave him the sele of the day, he nodded his head in a friendly way, though he said nought in salutation; for the loneliness of the downs made the speech slow within him.

Again some two miles further on Ralph met a flock of sheep coming down a bent which the road climbed, and with them were three men, their drovers, and they drew nigh him as he was amidst of the sheep, so that he could scarce see the way.  Each of these three had a weapon; one a pole-axe, another a long spear, and the third a flail jointed and bound with iron, and an anlace hanging at his girdle. So they stood in the way and hailed him when the sheep were gone past; and the man with the spear asked him whither away. "I am turned toward Higham-on-the-Way," quoth he; "and how many miles shall I ride ere I get there?"

Said one of them:  "Little less than twenty, lord."  Now it was past noon two hours, and the day was hot; so whereas the faces of the men looked kind and friendly, albeit somewhat rugged, he lighted down from his horse and sat down by the way-side, and drew his bottle of good wine from out of his wallet, and asked the men if they were in haste.  "Nay, master," said he of the pole-axe, while all eyes turned to the bottle, "HE has gone by too long; and will neither meddle with us, nor may we deal with him."

"Well then," quoth Ralph, "there is time for bever. Have ye ought of a cup, that we may drink to each other?"

"Yea," said the carle with the anlace, "that have I." Therewith he drew from his pouch a ram's horn rimmed with silver, and held it up, and said as if he were speaking to it:  "Now, Thirly, rejoice! for ye shall have lord's wine poured into thy maw."

Therewith he held it out toward Ralph, who laughed and filled it up, and filled for himself a little silver cup which he carried, and said:  "To you, shepherds!  Much wool and little cry!" And he drank withal.

"And I," quoth the man with the horn, "call this health; Much cry and little wool!"

"Well, well, how mean ye by that, Greasy Wat?" said the man with the spear, taking the horn as he spake; "that is but a poor wish for a lord that drinketh out of our cup."

Said Wat:  "Why, neighbour, why! thy wit is none too hasty. The wool that a knight sheareth is war and battle; that is wounding and death; but the cry is the talk and boasting and minstrelsy that goeth before all this. Which is the best wish to wish him? the wounds and the death, or the fore-rumour and stir thereof which hurteth no man?"

Ralph laughed thereat, and was merry and blithe with them; but the spearman, who was an old man, said:

"For all Wat sayeth, lord, and his japes, ye must not misdeem of us that we shepherds of the Downs can do nought but run to ales and feasts, and that we are but pot-valiant: maybe thou thyself mayst live to see things go otherwise:  and in that day may we have such as thee for captain. Now, fair lord, I drink to thy crown of valour, and thy good luck; and we thank thee for the wine and yet more for the blithe fellowship."

So Ralph filled up the ram's horn till Dame Katherine's good island wine was well-nigh spent; and at last he said:

"Now, my masters, I must to horse; but I pray you tell or we depart, what did ye mean when ye said that HE had gone past? Who is HE?"

The merry faces of the men changed at his word, and they looked in each other's faces, till at last the old spearman answered him:

"Fair lord, these things we have little will to talk about: for we be poor men with no master to fleece us, and no lord to help us: also we be folk unlearned and unlettered, and from our way of life, whereas we dwell in the wilderness, we seldom come within the doors of a church.  But whereas we have drunk with thee, who seemest to be a man of lineage, and thou hast been blithe with us, we will tell thee that we have seen one riding south along the Greenway, clad in a coat as green as the way, with the leafless tree done on his breast.  So nigh to him we were that we heard his cry as he sped along, as ye may hear the lapwing whining; for he said: 'POINT AND EDGE, POINT AND EDGE!  THE RED WATER AMIDST OF THE HILLS!' In my lifetime such a man hath, to my knowledge, been seen thrice before; and after each sight of him followed evil days and the death of men. Moreover this is the Eve of St. John, and we deem the token the worse therefor.  Or how deemest thou?"

Ralph stood silent awhile; for he was thinking of the big man whom he had met at the churchyard gate, and all this tale seemed wonderful to him. But at last he said:

"I cannot tell what there is in it; herein am I no help to you. To-day I am but little; though I may one day be great. Yet this may I do for you; tomorrow will I let sing a mass in St. Mary's Church on your behoof.  And hereafter, if I wax as my will is, and I come to be lord in these lands, I will look to it to do what a good lord should do for the shepherds of the Downs, so that they may live well, and die in good hope. So may the Mother of God help me at need!"

Said the old shepherd:  "Thou hast sworn an oath, and it is a good oath, and well sworn.  Now if thou dost as thou swearest, words can but little thanks, yet deeds may.  Wherefore if ever thou comest back hither, and art in such need that a throng of men may help thee therein; then let light a great fire upon each corner of the topmost wall of Bear Castle, and call to mind this watch-word: 'SMITE ASIDE THE AXE, O BEAR-FATHER,' and then shalt thou see what shall betide thee for thy good-hap: farewell now, with the saints to aid!"

Ralph bade them live well and hail, and mounted his horse and rode off down the Greenway, and as he rode the shepherds waved their weapons to him in token of good-will.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_05]

CHAPTER 5

Ralph Cometh to Higham-on-the-Way

Nought more befell Ralph to tell of till he came to the end of the Downs and saw Higham lying below him overlooked by a white castle on a knoll, and with a river lapping it about and winding on through its fair green meadows even as Clement had told. From amidst its houses rose up three towers of churches above their leaden roofs, and high above all, long and great, the Abbey Church; and now was the low sun glittering on its gilded vanes and the wings of the angels high upon the battlements.

So Ralph rode down the slopes and was brisk about it, for it was drawing toward sunset, and he knew not at what hour they shut their gates. The road was steep and winding, and it was the more part of an hour ere he came to the gate, which was open, and like to be yet, for many folk were thronging in, which throng also had hindered him soon after he came into the plain country.  The gate was fair and strong, but Ralph saw no men-at-arms about it that evening.  He rode into the street unquestioned, and therein was the throng great of people clad in fair and gay attire; and presently Ralph called to mind that this was St. John's Eve, so that he knew that there was some feast toward.

At last the throng was so thick that he was stayed by it; and therewithal a religious who was beside him and thrust up against his horse, turned to him and gave him good even, and said:  "By thy weapons and gear thou art a stranger here in our burg, Sir Knight?"

"So it is," said Ralph.

"And whither away?" said the monk; "hast thou some kinsman or friend in the town?"

"Nay," said Ralph, "I seek a good hostelry where I may abide the night for my money."

The monk shook his head and said:  "See ye the folk?  It is holiday time, and midsummer after haysel.  Ye shall scarce get lodging outside our house. But what then?  Come thou thither straightway and have harbour of the best, and see our prior, who loveth young and brisk men-at-arms like to thee. Lo now! the throng openeth a little; I will walk by thy bridle and lead thee the shortest road thither."

Ralph gainsaid him not, and they bored through the throng of the street till they came into the market-square, which was very great and clean, paved with stones all over:  tall and fair houses rose up on three sides of it, and on the fourth was the Great Church which made those houses seem but low: most of it was new-built; for the lord Abbot that then was, though he had not begun it, had taken the work up from his forerunner and had pushed it forward all he might; for he was very rich, and an open-handed man. Like dark gold it showed under the evening sun, and the painted and gilded imagery shone like jewels upon it.

"Yea," said the monk, as he noted Ralph's wonder at this wonder; "a most goodly house it is, and happy shall they be that dwell there."

Therewith he led Ralph on, turning aside through the great square. Ralph saw that there were many folk therein, though it was too big to be thronged thick with them.  Amidst of it was now a great pile of wood hung about with flowers, and hard by it a stage built up with hangings of rich cloth on one side thereof.  He asked the monk what this might mean, and he told him the wood was for the Midsummer bale-fire, and the stage for the show that should come thereafter. So the brother led Ralph down a lane to the south of the great west door, and along the side of the minster and so came to the Abbey gate, and there was Ralph well greeted, and had all things given him which were due to a good knight; and then was he brought into the Guest-hall, a very fair chamber, which was now full of men of all degrees. He was shown to a seat on the dais within two of the subprior's, and beside him sat an honourable lord, a vassal of St. Mary's. So was supper served well and abundantly:  the meat and drink was of the best, and the vessel and all the plenishing was as good as might be; and the walls of that chamber were hung with noble arras-cloth picturing the Pilgrimage of the Soul of Man.

Every man there who spoke with Ralph, and they were many, was exceeding courteous to him; and he heard much talk about him of the wealth of the lands of St. Mary's at Higham, and how it was flourishing; and of the Abbot how mighty he was, so that he might do what he would, and that his will was to help and to give, and be blithe with all men: and folk told of turmoil and war in other lands, and praised the peace of Higham-on-the-Way.

Ralph listened to all this, and smiled, and said to himself that to another man this might well be the end of his journey for that time; but for him all this peace and well-being was not enough; for though it were a richer land than Upmeads, yet to the peace and the quiet he was well used, and he had come forth not for the winning of fatter peace, but to try what new thing his youth and his might and his high hope and his good hap might accomplish.

So when the supper was over, and the wine and spices had been brought, the Guest-hall began to thin somewhat, and the brother who had brought Ralph thither came to him and said:

"Fair lord, it were nowise ill if ye went forth, as others of our guests have done, to see the deeds of Midsummer Eve that shall be done in the great square in honour of Holy John; for our manner therein at Higham has been much thought of. Look my son!"

He pointed to the windows of the hall therewith, and lo! they grew yellow and bright with some fire without, as if a new fiery day had been born out of the dusk of the summer night; for the light that shone through the windows out-did the candle-light in the hall. Ralph started thereat and laid his right hand to the place of his sword, which indeed he had left with the chamberlain; but the monk laughed and said:  "Fear nothing, lord; there is no foeman in Higham: come now, lest thou be belated of the show."

So he led Ralph forth, and into the square, where there was a space appointed for the brethren and their guests to see the plays; and the square was now so full of folk that it seemed like as if that there were no one man in the streets which were erewhile so thronged.

There were rows of men-at-arms in bright armour also to keep the folk in their places, like as hurdles pen the sheep up; howbeit they were nowise rough with folk, but humble and courteous. Many and many were the torches and cressets burning steadily in the calm air, so that, as aforesaid, night was turned into day. But on the scaffold aforesaid were standing bright and gay figures, whose names or what they were Ralph had no time to ask.

Now the bells began to clash from the great tower of the minster, and in a little while they had clashed themselves into order and rang clear and tuneably for a space; and while they were ringing, lo! those gay-clad people departed from the scaffold, and a canvas painted like a mountain-side, rocky and with caves therein, was drawn up at the back of it. Then came thereon one clad like a king holding a fair maiden by the hand, and with him was a dame richly clad and with a crown on her head. So these two kissed the maiden, and lamented over her, and went their ways, and the maiden left alone sat down upon a rock and covered up her face and wept; and while Ralph wondered what this might mean, or what grieved the maiden, there came creeping, as it were from out of a cranny of the rocks, a worm huge-headed and covered over with scales that glittered in the torch-light. Then Ralph sprang up in his place, for he feared for the maiden that the worm would devour her:  but the monk who sat by him pulled him down by the skirt, and laughed and said: "Sit still, lord! for the champion also has been provided."

Then Ralph sat down again somewhat abashed and looked on; yet was his heart in his mouth the while.  And so while the maiden stood as one astonied before the worm, who gaped upon her with wide open mouth, there came forth from a cleft in the rocks a goodly knight who bore silver, a red cross; and he had his sword in his hand, and he fell upon the worm to smite him; and the worm ramped up against him, and there was battle betwixt them, while the maiden knelt anigh with her hands clasped together.

Then Ralph knew that this was a play of the fight of St. George with the worm; so he sat silent till the champion had smitten off the worm's head and had come to the maiden and kissed and embraced her, and shown her the grisly head. Then presently came many folk on to the scaffold, to wit, the king and queen who were the father and mother of the maiden, and a bishop clad in very fair vestments, and knights withal; and they stood about St. George and the maiden, and with them were minstrels who fell to playing upon harps and fiddles; while other some fell to singing a sweet song in honour of St. George, and the maiden delivered.

So when it was all done, the monk said:  "This play is set forth by the men-at-arms of our lord Abbot, who have great devotion toward St. George, and he is their friend and their good lord. But hereafter will be other plays, of wild men and their feasting in the woods in the Golden Age of the world; and that is done by the scribes and the limners.  And after that will be a pageant of St. Agnes ordered by the clothiers and the webbers, which be both many and deft in this good town. Albeit thou art a young man and hast ridden far to-day belike, and mayhappen thou wilt not be able to endure it: so it may be well to bring thee out of this throng straightway. Moreover I have bethought me, that there is much of what is presently to come which we shall see better from the minster roof, or even it may be from the tower:  wilt thou come then?"

Ralph had liefer have sat there and seen all the plays to the end, for they seemed to him exceeding fair, and like to ravish the soul from the body; howbeit, being shamefaced, he knew not how to gainsay the brother, who took him by the hand, and led him through the press to the west front of the minster, where on the north side was a little door in a nook. So they went up a stair therein a good way till they came into a gallery over the western door; and looking forth thence Ralph deemed that he could have seen a long way had daylight been, for it was higher than the tops of the highest houses.

So there they abode a space looking down on the square and its throng, and the bells, which had been ringing when they came up, now ceased a while. But presently there arose great shouts and clamour amongst the folk below, and they could see men with torches drawing near to the pile of wood, and then all of a sudden shot up from it a great spiring flame, and all the people shouted together, while the bells broke out again over their heads.

Then the brother pointed aloof with his finger and said: "Lo you! fair lord, how bale speaks to bale all along the headlands of the down-country, and below there in the thorps by the river!"

Forsooth Ralph saw fire after fire break out to the westward; and the brother said:  "And if we stood over the high altar and looked east, ye would see more of such fires and many more; and all these bales are piled up and lighted by vassals and villeins of my lord Abbot: now to-night they are but mere Midsummer bale-fires; but doubt ye not that if there came war into the land each one of these bales would mean at least a half-score of stout men, archers and men-at-arms, all ready to serve their lord at all adventure.  All this the tyrants round about, that hate holy Church and oppress the poor, know full well; therefore we live in peace in these lands."

Ralph hearkened, but said nought; for amidst all this flashing of fire and flame, and the crying out of folk, and the measured clash of the bells so near him, his thought was confused, and he had no words ready to hand. But the monk turned from the parapet and looked him full in the face and said to him:

"Thou art a fair young man, and strong, and of gentle blood as I deem; and thou seemest to me to have the lucky look in thine eyes: now I tell thee that if thou wert to take service with my lord thou shouldest never rue it.  Yea, why shouldest thou not wax in his service, and become his Captain of Captains, which is an office meet for kings?"

Ralph looked on him, but answered nought, for he could not gather his thoughts for an answer; and the brother said: "Think of it, I bid thee, fair young lord; and be sure that nowhere shalt thou have a better livelihood, not even wert thou a king's son; for the children of my lord Abbot are such that none dareth to do them any displeasure; neither is any overlord as good as is Holy Church."

"Yea," said Ralph, "doubtless thou sayest sooth; yet I wot not that I am come forth to seek a master."

Said the brother:  "Nay, do but see the lord Abbot, as thou mayst do to-morrow, if thou wilt."

"I would have his blessing," said Ralph.

"No less shalt thou have," said the brother; "but look you down yonder; for I can see tokens that my lord is even now coming forth."

Ralph looked down and beheld the folk parting to right and left, and a lane made amidst the throng, guarded by men-at-arms mingled with the cross-bearers and brethren; and the sound of trumpets blared forth over the noises of the throng.

"If the lord Abbot cometh," said Ralph, "I were fain of his blessing to-night before I sleep:  so go we down straightway that I may kneel before him with the rest."

"What!" said the monk, "Wilt thou, my lord, kneel amongst all these burgesses and vavassors when thou mightest see the Abbot in his own chamber face to face alone with him?"

"Father," said Ralph, "I am no great man, and I must needs depart betimes to-morrow; for I perceive that here are things too mighty and over-mastering for such as I be."

"Well," said the monk, "yet mayst thou come back again; so at present I will make no more words about it."

So they went down, and came out amidst the throng, above which the bale still flared high, making the summer night as light as day. The brother made way for Ralph, so that they stood in the front row of folk:  they had not been there one minute ere they heard the sound of the brethren singing, and the Abbot came forth out of the lane that went down to the gate. Then all folk went down upon their knees, and thus abode him. Right so Ralph deemed that he felt some one pull his sleeve, but in such a throng that was nought of a wonder; howbeit, he turned and looked to his left, whence came the tug, and saw kneeling beside him a tall man-at-arms, who bore a sallet on his head in such wise that it covered all his face save the point of his chin. Then Ralph bethought him of the man of the leafless tree, and he looked to see what armoury the man bore on his coat; but he had nothing save a loose frock of white linen over his hauberk.  Nevertheless, he heard a voice in his ear, which said, "The second time!" whereon he deemed that it was verily that same man:  yet had he nought to do to lay hold on him, and he might not speak with him, for even therewith came the Abbot in garments all of gold, going a-foot under a canopy of baudekyn, with the precious mitre on his head, and the crozier borne before him, as if he had been a patriarch: for he was an exceeding mighty lord.

Ralph looked hard on him as he passed by, blessing the folk with upraised hand; and he saw that he was a tall spare man, clean-shaven, and thin-faced; but no old man, belike scarce of fifty winters. Ralph caught his eye, and he smiled on the goodly young man so kindly, that for a moment Ralph deemed that he would dwell in St. Mary's House for a little while; for, thought he, if my father, or Nicholas, hear of me therein, they must even let me alone to abide here.

Therewith the Abbot went forth to his place, and sat him down under a goodly cloth of estate, and folk stood up again; but when Ralph looked for the man in the sallet he could see nought of him.  Now when the Abbot was set down, men made a clear ring round about the bale, and there came into the said ring twelve young men, each clad in nought save a goat-skin, and with garlands of leaves and flowers about their middles: they had with them a wheel done about with straw and hemp payed with pitch and brimstone.  They set fire to the same, and then trundled it blazing round about the bale twelve times. Then came to them twelve damsels clad in such-like guise as the young men:  then both bands, the young men and the maidens, drew near to the bale, which was now burning low, and stood about it, and joined hands, and so danced round it a while, and meantime the fiddles played an uncouth tune merrily: then they sundered, and each couple of men and maids leapt backward and forward over the fire; and when they had all leapt, came forward men with buckets of water which they cast over the dancers till it ran down them in streams. Then was all the throng mingled together, and folk trod the embers of the bale under foot, and scattered them hither and thither all over the square.

All this while men were going about with pitchers of wine and ale, and other good drinks; and every man drank freely what he would, and there was the greatest game and joyance.

But now was Ralph exceeding weary, and he said:  "Father, mightest thou lead me out of this throng, and show me some lair where I may sleep in peace, I would thank thee blithely."

As he spake there sounded a great horn over the square, and the Abbot rose in his place and blessed all the people once more. Then said the monk:

"Come then, fair field-lord, now shalt thou have thy will of bed." And he laughed therewith, and drew Ralph out of the throng and brought him into the Abbey, and into a fair little chamber, on the wall whereof was pictured St. Christopher, and St. Julian the lord and friend of wayfarers. Then he brought Ralph the wine and spices, and gave him good-night, and went his ways.

As Ralph put the raiment from off him he said to himself a long day forsooth, so long that I should have thought no day could have held all that has befallen me.  So many strange things have I seen, that surely my dreams shall be full of them; for even now I seem to see them, though I waken.

So he lay down in his bed and slept, and dreamed that he was fishing with an angle in a deep of Upmeads Water; and he caught many fish; but after a while whatsoever he caught was but of gilded paper stuffed with wool, and at last the water itself was gone, and he was casting his angle on to a dry road.  Therewith he awoke and saw that day was dawning, and heard the minster clock strike three, and heard the thrushes singing their first song in the Prior's garden. Then he turned about and slept, and dreamed no more till he woke up in the bright sunny morning.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_06]

CHAPTER 6

Ralph Goeth His Ways From the Abbey of St. Mary at Higham

It was the monk who had been his guide the day before who had now waked him, and he stood by the bedside holding a great bowl of milk in his hand, and as Ralph sat up, and rubbed his eyes, with all his youthful sloth upon him, the monk laughed and said:

"That is well, lord, that is well!  I love to see a young man so sleepy in the morning; it is a sign of thriving; and I see thou art thriving heartily for the time when thou shalt come back to us to lead my lord's host in battle."

"Where be the bale-fires?" said Ralph, not yet fully awake.

"Where be they!" said the brother, "where be they!  They be sunken to cold coals long ago, like many a man's desires and hopes, who hath not yet laid his head on the bosom of the mother, that is Holy Church.  Come, my lord, arise, and drink the monk's wine of morning, and then if ye must need ride, ride betimes, and ride hard; for the Wood Perilous beginneth presently as ye wend your ways; and it were well for thee to reach the Burg of the Four Friths ere thou be benighted. For, son, there be untoward things in the wood; and though some of them be of those for whom Christ's Cross was shapen, yet have they forgotten hell, and hope not for heaven, and their by-word is, 'Thou shalt lack ere I lack.' Furthermore there are worse wights in the wood than they be-- God save us!--but against them have I a good hauberk, a neck-guard which I will give thee, son, in token that I look to see thee again at the lovely house of Mary our Mother."

Ralph had taken the bowl and was drinking, but he looked over the brim, and saw how the monk drew from his frock a pair of beads, as like to Dame Katherine's gift as one pea to another, save that at the end thereof was a little box shapen crosswise. Ralph emptied the bowl hastily, got out of bed, and sat on the bed naked, save that on his neck was Dame Katherine's gift. He reached out his hand and took the beads from the monk and reddened therewith, as was his wont when he had to begin a contest in words: but he said:

"I thank thee, father; yet God wot if these beads will lie sweetly alongside the collar which I bear on my neck as now, which is the gift of a dear friend."

The monk made up a solemn countenance and said: "Thou sayest sooth, my son; it is most like that my chaplet, which hath been blessed time was by the holy Richard, is no meet fellow for the gift of some light love of thine: or even," quoth he, noting Ralph's flush deepen, and his brow knit, "or even if it were the gift of a well-willer, yet belike it is a worldly gift; therefore, since thy journey is with peril, thou wert best do it off and let me keep it for thee till thou comest again."

Now as he spake he looked anxiously, nay, it may be said greedily, at the young man.  But Ralph said nought; for in his heart he was determined not to chaffer away his gossip's gift for any shaveling's token. Yet he knew not how to set his youthful words against the father's wisdom; so he stood up, and got his shirt into his hand, and as he did it over his head he fell to singing to himself a song of eventide of the High House of Upmeads, the words whereof were somewhat like to these:

   Art thou man, art thou maid, through the long grass a-going?
     For short shirt thou bearest, and no beard I see,
   And the last wind ere moonrise about thee is blowing.
     Would'st thou meet with thy maiden or look'st thou for me?

  Bright shineth the moon now, I see thy gown longer;
     And down by the hazels Joan meeteth her lad:
   But hard is thy palm, lass, and scarcely were stronger
     Wat's grip than thine hand-kiss that maketh me glad.

  And now as the candles shine on us and over,
     Full shapely thy feet are, but brown on the floor,
   As the bare-footed mowers amidst of the clover
     When the gowk's note is broken and mid-June is o'er.

  O hard are mine hand-palms because on the ridges
     I carried the reap-hook and smote for thy sake;
   And in the hot noon-tide I beat off the midges
     As thou slep'st 'neath the linden o'er-loathe to awake.

  And brown are my feet now because the sun burneth
     High up on the down-side amidst of the sheep,
   And there in the hollow wherefrom the wind turneth,
     Thou lay'st in my lap while I sung thee to sleep.

  O friend of the earth, O come nigher and nigher,
     Thou art sweet with the sun's kiss as meads of the May,
   O'er the rocks of the waste, o'er the water and fire,
     Will I follow thee, love, till earth waneth away.

The monk hearkened to him with knitted brow, and as one that liketh not the speech of his fellow, though it be not wise to question it: then he went out of the chamber, but left the pair of beads lying in the window.  But Ralph clad himself in haste, and when he was fully clad, went up to the window and took the beads in his hand, and looked into them curiously and turned them over, but left them lying there. Then he went forth also, and came into the forecourt of the house, and found there a squire of the men-at-arms with his weapons and horse, who helped him to do on his war-gear.

So then, just as he was setting his foot in the stirrup, came the Brother again, with his face once more grown smiling and happy; and in his left hand he held the chaplet, but did not offer it to Ralph again, but nodded his head to him kindly, and said: "Now, lord, I can see by thy face that thou art set on beholding the fashion of this world, and most like it will give thee the rue."

Then came a word into Ralph's mouth, and he said: "Wilt thou tell me, father, whose work was the world's fashion?"

The monk reddened, but answered nought, and Ralph spake again:

"Forsooth, did the craftsman of it fumble over his work?"

Then the monk scowled, but presently he enforced himself to speak blithely, and said:  "Such matters are over high for my speech or thine, lord; but I tell thee, who knoweth, that there are men in this House who have tried the world and found it wanting."

Ralph smiled, and said stammering:

"Father, did the world try them, and find them wanting perchance?"

Then he reddened, and said:  "Are ye verily all such as this in this House? Who then is it who hath made so fair a lordship, and so goodly a governance for so many people?  Know ye not at all of the world's ways!"

"Fair sir," said the monk sternly, "they that work for us work for the Lord and all his servants."

"Yea," said Ralph, "so it is; and will the Lord be content with the service of him whom the devil hath cast out because he hath found him a dastard?"

The monk frowned, yet smiled somewhat withal, and said: "Sir, thou art young, but thy wits are over old for me; but there are they in this House who may answer thee featly; men who have read the books of the wise men of the heathen, and the doctors of Holy Church, and are even now making books for the scribes to copy."  Then his voice softened, and he said: "Dear lord, we should be right fain of thee here, but since thou must needs go, go with my blessing, and double blessing shalt thou have when thou comest back to us."  Then Ralph remembered his promise to the shepherds and took a gold crown from his pouch, and said: "Father, I pray thee say a mass for the shepherd downsmen; and this is for the offering."

The monk praised the gift and the bidding, and kissed Ralph, who clomb into his saddle; and the brother hospitalier brought him his wallet with good meat and drink therein for the way. Then Ralph shook his rein, and rode out of the abbey-gate, smiling at the lay-brethren and the men-at-arms who hung about there.

But he sighed for pleasure when he found himself in the street again, and looked on the shops of the chapmen and the booths of the petty craftsmen, as shoe-smiths and glovers, and tinsmiths and coppersmiths, and horners and the like; and the folk that he met as he rode toward the southern gate seemed to him merry and in good case, and goodly to look on. And he thought it pleasant to gaze on the damsels in the street, who were fair and well clad:  and there were a many of them about his way now, especially as he drew nigh the gate before the streets branched off: for folk were coming in from the countryside with victual and other wares for the town and the Abbey; and surely as he looked on some of the maidens he deemed that Hall-song of Upmeads a good one.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_07]

CHAPTER 7

The Maiden of Bourton Abbas

So went he through the gate, and many, both of men and maids gazed at him, for he was fair to look on, but none meddled with him.

There was a goodly fauburg outside the gate, and therein were fair houses, not a few, with gardens and orchards about them; and when these were past he rode through very excellent meadows lying along the water, which he crossed thrice, once by a goodly stone bridge and twice by fords; for the road was straight, and the river wound about much.

After a little while the road led him off the plain meads into a country of little hills and dales, the hill-sides covered with vineyards and orchards, and the dales plenteous of corn-fields; and now amongst these dales Higham was hidden from him.

Through this tillage and vine-land he rode a good while, and thought he had never seen a goodlier land; and as he went he came on husbandmen and women of the country going about their business: yet were they not too busy to gaze on him, and most greeted him; and with some he gave and took a little speech.

These people also he deemed well before the world, for they were well clad and buxom, and made no great haste as they went, but looked about them as though they deemed the world worth looking at, and as if they had no fear either of a blow or a hard word for loitering.

So he rode till it was noon, and he was amidst a little thorp of grey stone houses, trim enough, in a valley wherein there was more of wild-wood trees and less of fruit-bearers than those behind him. In the thorp was a tavern with the sign of the Nicholas, so Ralph deemed it but right to enter a house which was under the guard of his master and friend; therefore he lighted down and went in. Therein he found a lad of fifteen winters, and a maiden spinning, they two alone, who hailed him and asked his pleasure, and he bade them bring him meat and drink, and look to his horse, for that he had a mind to rest a while.  So they brought him bread and flesh, and good wine of the hill-side, in a little hall well arrayed as of its kind; and he sat down and the damsel served him at table, but the lad, who had gone to see to his horse, did not come back.

So when he had eaten and drunk, and the damsel was still there, he looked on her and saw that she was sad and drooping of aspect; and whereas she was a fair maiden, Ralph, now that he was full, fell to pitying her, and asked her what was amiss.  "For," said he, "thou art fair and ailest nought; that is clear to see; neither dwellest thou in penury, but by seeming hast enough and to spare. Or art thou a servant in this house, and hath any one misused thee?"

She wept at his words, for indeed he spoke softly to her; then she said:  "Young lord, thou art kind, and it is thy kindness that draweth the tears from me; else it were not well to weep before a young man:  therefore I pray thee pardon me. As for me, I am no servant, nor has any one misused me: the folk round about are good and neighbourly; and this house and the croft, and a vineyard hard by, all that is mine own and my brother's; that is the lad who hath gone to tend thine horse.  Yea, and we live in peace here for the most part; for this thorp, which is called Bourton Abbas, is a land of the Abbey of Higham; though it be the outermost of its lands and the Abbot is a good lord and a defence against tyrants. All is well with me if one thing were not."

"What is thy need then?" said Ralph, "if perchance I might amend it." And as he looked on her he deemed her yet fairer than he had done at first. But she stayed her weeping and sobbing and said:  "Sir, I fear me that I have lost a dear friend."  "How then," said he, "why fearest thou, and knowest not? doth thy friend lie sick between life and death?" "O Sir," she said, "it is the Wood which is the evil and disease."

"What wood is that?" said he.

She said:  "The Wood Perilous, that lieth betwixt us and the Burg of the Four Friths, and all about the Burg.  And, Sir, if ye be minded to ride to the Burg to-day, do it not, for through the wood must thou wend thereto; and ye are young and lovely. Therefore take my rede, and abide till the Chapmen wend thither from Higham, who ride many in company.  For, look you, fair lord, ye have asked of my grief, and this it is and nought else; that my very earthly love and speech-friend rode five days ago toward the Burg of the Four Friths all alone through the Wood Perilous, and he has not come back, though we looked to see him in three days' wearing:  but his horse has come back, and the reins and the saddle all bloody."

And she fell a-weeping with the telling of the tale.  But Ralph said (for he knew not what to say): "Keep a good heart, maiden; maybe he is safe and sound; oft are young men fond to wander wide, even as I myself."

She looked at him hard and said:  "If thou hast stolen thyself away from them that love thee, thou hast done amiss. Though thou art a lord, and so fair as I see thee, yet will I tell thee so much."

Ralph reddened and answered nought; but deemed the maiden both fair and sweet.  But she said:  "Whether thou hast done well or ill, do no worse; but abide till the Chapmen come from Higham, on their way to the Burg of the Four Friths.  Here mayst thou lodge well and safely if thou wilt. Or if our hall be not dainty enough for thee, then go back to Higham: I warrant me the monks will give thee good guesting as long as thou wilt."

"Thou art kind, maiden," said Ralph, "but why should I tarry for an host? and what should I fear in the Wood, as evil as it may be? One man journeying with little wealth, and unknown, and he no weakling, but bearing good weapons, hath nought to dread of strong-thieves, who ever rob where it is easiest and gainfullest.  And what worse may I meet than strong-thieves?"

"But thou mayest meet worse," she said; and therewith fell a-weeping again, and said amidst her tears:  "O weary on my life!  And why should I heed thee when nought heedeth me, neither the Saints of God's House, nor the Master of it; nor the father and the mother that were once so piteous kind to me? O if I might but drink a draught from the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END!"

He turned about on her hastily at that word; for he had risen to depart; being grieved at her grief and wishful to be away from it, since he might not amend it.  But now he said eagerly:

"Where then is that Well?  Know ye of it in this land?"

"At least I know the hearsay thereof," she said; "but as now thou shalt know no more from me thereof; lest thou wander the wider in seeking it. I would not have thy life spilt."

Ever as he looked on her he thought her still fairer; and now he looked long on her, saying nought, and she on him in likewise, and the blood rose to her cheeks and her brow, but she would not turn her from his gaze.  At last he said: "Well then, I must depart, no more learned than I came: but yet am I less hungry and thirsty than I came; and have thou thanks therefor."

Therewith he took from his pouch a gold piece of Upmeads, which was good, and of the touch of the Easterlings, and held it out to her. And she put out her open hand and he put the money in it; but thought it good to hold her hand a while, and she gainsayed him not.

Then he said:  "Well then, I must needs depart with things left as they are: wilt thou bid thy brother bring hither my horse, for time presses."

"Yea," she said (and her hand was still in his), "Yet do thine utmost, yet shalt thou not get to the Burg before nightfall. O wilt thou not tarry?"

"Nay," he said, "my heart will not suffer it; lest I deem myself a dastard."

Then she reddened again, but as if she were wroth; and she drew her hand away from his and smote her palms together thrice and cried out: "Ho Hugh! bring hither the Knight's horse and be speedy!"

And she went hither and thither about the hall and into the buttery and back, putting away the victual and vessels from the board and making as if she heeded him not:  and Ralph looked on her, and deemed that each way she moved was better than the last, so shapely of fashion she was; and again he bethought him of the Even-song of the High House at Upmeads, and how it befitted her; for she went barefoot after the manner of maidens who work afield, and her feet were tanned with the sun of hay harvest, but as shapely as might be; but she was clad goodly withal, in a green gown wrought with flowers.

So he watched her going to and fro; and at last he said: "Maiden, wilt thou come hither a little, before I depart?"

"Yea," she said; and came and stood before him: and he deemed that she was scarce so sad as she had been; and she stood with her hands joined and her eyes downcast. Then he said:

"Now I depart.  Yet I would say this, that I am sorry of thy sorrow: and now since I shall never see thee more, small would be the harm if I were to kiss thy lips and thy face."

And therewith he took her hands in his and drew her to him, and put his arms about her and kissed her many times, and she nothing lothe by seeming; and he found her as sweet as May blossom.

Thereafter she smiled on him, yet scarce for gladness, and said: "It is not all so sure that I shall not see thee again; yet shall I do to thee as thou hast done to me."

Therewith she took his face between her hands, and kissed him well-favouredly; so that the hour seemed good to him.

Then she took him by the hand and led him out-a-doors to his horse, whereby the lad had been standing a good while; and he when he saw his sister come out with the fair knight he scowled on them, and handled a knife which hung at his girdle; but Ralph heeded him nought. As for the damsel, she put her brother aside, and held the stirrup for Ralph; and when he was in the saddle she said to him:

"All luck go with thee!  Forsooth I deem thee safer in the Wood than my words said.  Verily I deem that if thou wert to meet a company of foemen, thou wouldest compel them to do thy bidding."

"Farewell to thee maiden," said Ralph, "and mayst thou find thy beloved whole and well, and that speedily.  Fare-well!"

She said no more; so he shook his rein and rode his ways; but looked over his shoulder presently and saw her standing yet barefoot on the dusty highway shading her eyes from the afternoon sun and looking after him, and he waved his hand to her and so went his ways between the houses of the Thorp.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_08]

CHAPTER 8

Ralph Cometh to the Wood Perilous. An Adventure Therein

Now when he was clear of the Thorp the road took him out of the dale; and when he was on the hill's brow he saw that the land was of other fashion from that which lay behind him. For the road went straight through a rough waste, no pasture, save for mountain sheep or goats, with a few bushes scattered about it; and beyond this the land rose into a long ridge; and on the ridge was a wood thick with trees, and no break in them. So on he rode, and soon passed that waste, which was dry and parched, and the afternoon sun was hot on it; so he deemed it good to come under the shadow of the thick trees (which at the first were wholly beech trees), for it was now the hottest of the day. There was still a beaten way between the tree-boles, though not overwide, albeit, a highway, since it pierced the wood. So thereby he went at a soft pace for the saving of his horse, and thought but little of all he had been told of the perils of the way, and not a little of the fair maid whom he had left behind at the Thorp.

After a while the thick beech-wood gave out, and he came into a place where great oaks grew, fair and stately, as though some lord's wood-reeve had taken care that they should not grow over close together, and betwixt them the greensward was fine, unbroken, and flowery. Thereby as he rode he beheld deer, both buck and hart and roe, and other wild things, but for a long while no man.

The afternoon wore and still he rode the oak wood, and deemed it a goodly forest for the greatest king on earth. At last he came to where another road crossed the way he followed, and about the crossway was the ground clearer of trees, while beyond it the trees grew thicker, and there was some underwood of holly and thorn as the ground fell off as towards a little dale.

There Ralph drew rein, because he doubted in his mind which was his right road toward the Burg of the Four Friths; so he got off his horse and abode a little, if perchance any might come by; he looked about him, and noted on the road that crossed his, and the sward about it, the sign of many horses having gone by, and deemed that they had passed but a little while. So he lay on the ground to rest him and let his horse stray about and bite the grass; for the beast loved him and would come at his call or his whistle.

Ralph was drowsy when he lay down, and though he said to himself that he would nowise go to sleep, yet as oft happens, he had no defence to make against sleepiness, and presently his hands relaxed, his head fell aside, and he slept quietly. When he woke up in a little space of time, he knew at once that something had awaked him and that he had not had his sleep out; for in his ears was the trampling of horse-hoofs and the clashing of weapons and loud speech of men.  So he leapt up hastily, and while he was yet scarce awake, took to whistling on his horse; but even therewith those men were upon him, and two came up to him and laid hold of him; and when he asked them what they would, they bade him hold his peace.

Now his eyes cleared, and he saw that those men were in goodly war-gear, and bore coats of plate, and cuir-bouilly, or of bright steel; they held long spears and were girt with good swords; there was a pennon with them, green, whereon was done a golden tower, embattled, amidst of four white ways; and the same token bore many of the men on their coats and sleeves. Unto this same pennon he was brought by the two men who had taken him, and under it, on a white horse, sat a Knight bravely armed at all points with the Tower and Four Ways on his green surcoat; and beside him was an ancient man-at-arms, with nought but an oak wreath on his bare head, and his white beard falling low over his coat:  but behind these twain a tall young man, also on a white horse and very gaily clad, upheld the pennon. On one side of these three were five men, unarmed, clad in green coats, with a leafless tree done on them in gold:  they were stout carles, bearded and fierce-faced: their hands were bound behind their backs and their feet tied together under their horses' bellies.  The company of those about the Knight, Ralph deemed, would number ten score men.

So when those twain stayed Ralph before the Knight, he turned to the old man and said:

"It is of no avail asking this lither lad if he be of them or no: for no will be his answer.  But what sayest thou, Oliver?"

The ancient man drew closer to Ralph and looked at him up and down and all about; for those two turned him about as if he had been a joint of flesh on the roasting-jack; and at last he said:

"His beard is sprouting, else might ye have taken him for a maid of theirs, one of those of whom we wot.  But to say sooth I seem to know the fashion of his gear, even as Duke Jacob knew Joseph's tabard. So ask him whence he is, lord, and if he lie, then I bid bind him and lead him away, that we may have a true tale out of him; otherwise let him go and take his chance; for we will not waste the bread of the Good Town on him."

The Knight looked hard on Ralph, and spake to him somewhat courteously:

"Whence art thou, fair Sir, and what is thy name? for we have many foes in the wildwood."

Ralph reddened as he answered:  "I am of Upmeads beyond the down country; and I pray thee let me be gone on mine errands. It is meet that thou deal with thine own robbers and reivers, but not with me."

Then cried out one of the bounden men:  "Thou liest, lad, we be no robbers." But he of the Knight's company who stood by him smote the man on the mouth and said:  "Hold thy peace, runagate!  Thou shalt give tongue to-morrow when the hangman hath thee under his hands."

The Knight took no heed of this; but turned to the ancient warrior and said: "Hath he spoken truth so far?"

"Yea, Sir Aymer," quoth Oliver; "And now meseems I know him better than he knoweth me."

Therewith he turned to Ralph and said:  "How fareth Long Nicholas, my lord?"

Ralph reddened again:  "He is well," said he.

Then said the Knight:  "Is the young man of a worthy house, Oliver?"

But ere the elder could speak, Ralph brake in and said: "Old warrior, I bid thee not to tell out my name, as thou lovest Nicholas."

Old Oliver laughed and said:  "Well, Nicholas and I have been friends in a way, as well as foes; and for the sake of the old days his name shall help thee, young lord." Then he said to his Knight:  "Yea, Sir Aymer, he is of a goodly house and an ancient; but thou hearest how he adjureth me. Ye shall let his name alone."

The Knight looked silently on Ralph for a while; then he said: "Wilt thou wend with us to the Burg of the Four Friths, fair Sir? Wert thou not faring thither?  Or what else dost thou in the Wood Perilous?"

Ralph turned it over in his mind; and though he saw no cause why he should not join himself to their company, yet something in his heart forbade him to rise to the fly too eagerly; so he did but say: "I am seeking adventures, fair lord."

The Knight smiled:  "Then mayst thou fill thy budget with them if thou goest with us," quoth he.  Now Ralph did not know how he might gainsay so many men at arms in the long run, though he were scarce willing to go; so he made no haste to answer; and even therewith came a man running, through the wood up from the dale; a long, lean carle, meet for running, with brogues on his feet, and nought else but a shirt; the company parted before him to right and left to let him come to the Knight, as though he had been looked for; and when he was beside him, the Knight leaned down while the carle spake softly to him and all men drew out of ear-shot. And when the carle had given his message the Knight drew himself straight up in his saddle again and lifted up his hand and cried out:

"Oliver!  Oliver! lead on the way thou wottest!  Spur! spur, all men!"

Therewith he blew one blast from a horn which hung at his saddle-bow; the runner leapt up behind old Oliver, and the whole company went off at a smart trot somewhat south-east, slantwise of the cross-roads, where the wood was nought cumbered with undergrowth; and presently they were all gone to the last horse-tail, and no man took any more note of Ralph.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_09]

CHAPTER 9

Another Adventure in the Wood Perilous

Ralph left alone pondered a little; and thought that he would by no means go hastily to the Burg of the Four Friths. Said he to himself; This want-way is all unlike to the one near our house at home:  for belike adventures shall befall here: I will even abide here for an hour or two; but will have my horse by me and keep awake, lest something hap to me unawares.

Therewith he whistled for Falcon his horse, and the beast came to him, and whinnied for love of him, and Ralph smiled and tied him to a sapling anigh, and himself sat down on the grass, and pondered many things; as to what folk were about at Upmeads, and how his brethren were faring; and it was now about five hours after noon, and the sun's rays fell aslant through the boughs of the noble oaks, and the scent of the grass and bracken trodden by the horse-hoofs of that company went up into the warm summer air. A while he sat musing but awake, though the faint sound of a little stream in the dale below mingled with all the lesser noises of the forest did its best to soothe him to sleep again:  and presently had its way with him; for he leaned his head back on the bracken, and in a minute or two was sleeping once more and dreaming some dream made up of masterless memories of past days.

When he awoke again he lay still a little while, wondering where in the world he was, but as the drowsiness left him, he arose and looked about, and saw that the sun was sinking low and gilding the oakboles red. He stood awhile and watched the gambols of three hares, who had drawn nigh him while he slept, and now noted him not; and a little way he saw through the trees a hart and two hinds going slowly from grass to grass, feeding in the cool eventide; but presently he saw them raise their heads and amble off down the slope of the little dale, and therewith he himself turned his face sharply toward the north-west, for he was fine-eared as well as sharp-eyed, and on a little wind which had just arisen came down to him the sound of horse-hoofs once more.

So he went up to Falcon and loosed him, and stood by him bridle in hand, and looked to it that his sword was handy to him: and he hearkened, and the sound drew nigher and nigher to him. Then lightly he got into the saddle and gathered the reins into his left hand, and sat peering up the trodden wood-glades, lest he should have to ride for his life suddenly.  Therewith he heard voices talking roughly and a man whistling, and athwart the glade of the wood from the northwest, or thereabout, came new folk; and he saw at once that there went two men a-horseback and armed; so he drew his sword and abode them close to the want-ways. Presently they saw the shine of his war-gear, and then they came but a little nigher ere they drew rein, and sat on their horses looking toward him. Then Ralph saw that they were armed and clad as those of the company which had gone before.  One of the armed men rode a horse-length after his fellow, and bore a long spear over his shoulder. But the other who rode first was girt with a sword, and had a little axe hanging about his neck, and with his right hand he seemed to be leading something, Ralph could not see what at first, as his left side was turned toward Ralph and the want-way.

Now, as Ralph looked, he saw that at the spearman's saddle-bow was hung a man's head, red-haired and red-bearded; for this man now drew a little nigher, and cried out to Ralph in a loud and merry voice: "Hail, knight! whither away now, that thou ridest the green-wood sword in hand?"

Ralph was just about to answer somewhat, when the first man moved a little nigher, and as he did so he turned so that Ralph could see what betid on his right hand; and lo! he was leading a woman by a rope tied about her neck (though her hands were loose), as though he were bringing a cow to market. When the man stayed his horse she came forward and stood within the slack of the rope by the horse's head, and Ralph could see her well, that though she was not to say naked, her raiment was but scanty, for she had nought to cover her save one short and strait little coat of linen, and shoes on her feet. Yet Ralph deemed her to be of some degree, whereas he caught the gleam of gold and gems on her hands, and there was a golden chaplet on her head. She stood now by the horse's head with her hands folded, looking on, as if what was tiding and to betide, were but a play done for her pleasure.

So when Ralph looked on her, he was silent a while; and the spearman cried out again:  "Ho, young man, wilt thou speak, or art thou dumb-foundered for fear of us?"

But Ralph knit his brows, and was first red and then pale; for he was both wroth, and doubtful how to go to work; but he said:

"I ride to seek adventures; and here meseemeth is one come to hand. Or what will ye with the woman?"

Said the man who had the woman in tow:  "Trouble not thine head therewith; we lead her to her due doom.  As for thee, be glad that thou art not her fellow; since forsooth thou seemest not to be one of them; so go thy ways in peace."

"No foot further will I go," said Ralph, "till ye loose the woman and let her go; or else tell me what her worst deed is."

The man laughed, and said:  "That were a long tale to tell; and it is little like that thou shalt live to hear the ending thereof."

Therewith he wagged his head at the spearman, who suddenly let his spear fall into the rest, and spurred, and drave on at Ralph all he might. There and then had the tale ended, but Ralph, who was wary, though he were young, and had Falcon well in hand, turned his wrist and made the horse swerve, so that the man-at-arms missed his attaint, but could not draw rein speedily enough to stay his horse; and as he passed by all bowed over his horse's neck, Ralph gat his sword two-handed and rose in his stirrups and smote his mightiest; and the sword caught the foeman on the neck betwixt sallet and jack, and nought held before it, neither leather nor ring-mail, so that the man's head was nigh smitten off, and he fell clattering from his saddle: yet his stirrups held him, so that his horse went dragging him on earth as he gallopped over rough and smooth betwixt the trees of the forest. Then Ralph turned about to deal with his fellow, and even through the wrath and fury of the slaying saw him clear and bright against the trees as he sat handling his axe doubtfully, but the woman was fallen back again somewhat.

But even as Ralph raised his sword and pricked forward, the woman sprang as light as a leopard on to the saddle behind the foeman, and wound her arms about him and dragged him back just as he was raising his axe to smite her, and as Ralph rode forward she cried out to him, "Smite him, smite! O lovely creature of God!"

Therewith was Ralph beside them, and though he were loth to slay a man held in the arms of a woman, yet he feared lest the man should slay her with some knife-stroke unless he made haste; so he thrust his sword through him, and the man died at once, and fell headlong off his horse, dragging down the woman with him.

Then Ralph lighted down from his horse, and the woman rose up to him, her white smock all bloody with the slain man. Nevertheless was she as calm and stately before him, as if she were sitting on the dais of a fair hall; so she said to him:

"Young warrior, thou hast done well and knightly, and I shall look to it that thou have thy reward.  And now I rede thee go not to the Burg of the Four Friths; for this tale of thee shall get about and they shall take thee, if it were out of the very Frith-stool, and there for thee should be the scourge and the gibbet; for they of that Burg be robbers and murderers merciless. Yet well it were that thou ride hence presently; for those be behind my tormentors whom thou hast slain, who will be as an host to thee, and thou mayst not deal with them. If thou follow my rede, thou wilt take the way that goeth hence east away, and then shalt thou come to Hampton under Scaur, where the folk are peaceable and friendly."

He looked at her hard as she spake, and noted that she spake but slowly, and turned red and white and red again as she looked at him. But whatever she did, and in spite of her poor attire, he deemed he had never seen woman so fair.  Her hair was dark red, but her eyes grey, and light at whiles and yet at whiles deep; her lips betwixt thin and full, but yet when she spoke or smiled clad with all enticements; her chin round and so wrought as none was ever better wrought; her body strong and well-knit; tall she was, with fair and large arms, and limbs most goodly of fashion, of which but little was hidden, since her coat was but thin and scanty.  But whatever may be said of her, no man would have deemed her aught save most lovely. Now her face grew calm and stately again as it was at the first, and she laid a hand on Ralph's shoulder, and smiled in his face and said:

"Surely thou art fair, though thy strokes be not light." Then she took his hand and caressed it, and said again: "Dost thou deem that thou hast done great things, fair child?  Maybe.  Yet some will say that thou hast but slain two butchers:  and if thou wilt say that thou hast delivered me; yet it may be that I should have delivered myself ere long. Nevertheless hold up thine heart, for I think that greater things await thee."

Then she turned about, and saw the dead man, how his feet yet hung in the stirrups as his fellow's had done, save that the horse of this one stood nigh still, only reaching his head down to crop a mouthful of grass; so she said: "Take him away, that I may mount on his horse."

So he drew the dead man's feet out of the stirrups, and dragged him away to where the bracken grew deep, and laid him down there, so to say hidden.  Then he turned back to the lady, who was pacing up and down near the horse as the beast fed quietly on the cool grass. When Ralph came back she took the reins in her hand and put one foot in the stirrup as if she would mount at once; but suddenly lighted down again, and turning to Ralph, cast her arms about him, and kissed his face many times, blushing red as a rose meantime. Then lightly she gat her up into the saddle, and bestrode the beast, and smote his flanks with her heels, and went her ways riding speedily toward the south-east, so that she was soon out of sight.

But Ralph stood still looking the way she had gone and wondering at the adventure; and he pondered her words and held debate with himself whether he should take the road she bade him.  And he said within himself: "Hitherto have I been safe and have got no scratch of a weapon upon me, and this is a place by seeming for all adventures; and little way moreover shall I make in the night if I must needs go to Hampton under Scaur, where dwell those peaceable people; and it is now growing dusk already. So I will abide the morning hereby; but I will be wary and let the wood cover me if I may."

Therewith he went and drew the body of the slain man down into a little hollow where the bracken was high and the brambles grew strong, so that it might not be lightly seen.  Then he called to him Falcon, his horse, and looked about for cover anigh the want-way, and found a little thin coppice of hazel and sweet chestnut, just where two great oaks had been felled a half score years ago; and looking through the leaves thence, he could see the four ways clearly enough, though it would not be easy for anyone to see him thence.

Thither he betook him, and he did the rein off Falcon, but tethered him by a halter in the thickest of the copse, and sat down himself nigher to the outside thereof; he did off his helm and drew what meat he had from out his wallet and ate and drank in the beginning of the summer night; and then sat pondering awhile on what had befallen on this second day of his wandering. The moon shone out presently, little clouded, but he saw her not, for though he strove to wake awhile, slumber soon overcame him, and nothing waked him till the night was passing, nor did he see aught of that company of which the lady had spoken, and which in sooth came not.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_10]

CHAPTER 10

A Meeting and a Parting in the Wood Perilous

When the first glimmer of dawn was in the sky he awoke in the fresh morning, and sat up and hearkened, for even as he woke he had heard something, since wariness had made him wakeful. Now he hears the sound of horse-hoofs on the hard road, and riseth to his feet and goeth to the very edge of the copse; looking thence he saw a rider who was just come to the very crossing of the roads.  The new comer was much muffled in a wide cloak, but he seemed to be a man low of stature. He peered all round about him as if to see if the way were clear, and then alighted down from horseback and let the hood fall off his head, and seemed pondering which way were the best to take. By this time it was grown somewhat lighter and Ralph, looking hard, deemed that the rider was a woman; so he stepped forward lightly, and as he came on to the open sward about the way, the new comer saw him and put a foot into the stirrup to mount, but yet looked at him over the shoulder, and then presently left the saddle and came forward a few steps as if to meet Ralph, having cast the cloak to the ground.

Then Ralph saw that it was none other than the damsel of the hostelry of Bourton Abbas, and he came up to her and reached out his hand to her, and she took it in both hers and held it and said, smiling: "It is nought save mountains that shall never meet.  Here have I followed on thy footsteps; yet knew I not where thou wouldst be in the forest. And now I am glad to have fallen in with thee; for I am going a long way."

Ralph looked on her and himseemed some pain or shame touched his heart, and he said:  "I am a knight adventurous; I have nought to do save to seek adventures.  Why should I not go with thee?"

She looked at him earnestly awhile and said:  "Nay, it may not be; thou art a lord's son, and I a yeoman's daughter." She stopped, and he said nothing in answer.

"Furthermore," said she, "it is a long way, and I know not how long." Again he made no answer, and she said:  "I am going to seek the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END, and to find it and live, or to find it not, and die."

He spake after a while:  "Why should I not come with thee?"

It was growing light now, and he could see that she reddened and then turned pale and set her lips close.

Then she said:  "Because thou willest it not:  because thou hadst liefer make that journey with some one else."

He reddened in his turn, and said:  "I know of no one else who shall go with me."

"Well," she said, "it is all one, I will not have thee go with me." "Yea, and why not?" said he.  She said:  "Wilt thou swear to me that nought hath happed to thee to change thee betwixt this and Bourton? If thou wilt, then come with me; if thou wilt not, then refrain thee. And this I say because I see and feel that there is some change in thee since yesterday, so that thou wouldst scarce be dealing truly in being my fellow in this quest:  for they that take it up must be single-hearted, and think of nought save the quest and the fellow that is with them."

She looked on him sadly, and his many thoughts tongue-tied him a while; but at last he said:  "Must thou verily go on this quest?" "Ah," she said, "now since I have seen thee and spoken with thee again, all need there is that I should follow it at once."

Then they both kept silence, and when she spoke again her voice was as if she were gay against her will.  She said: "Here am I come to these want-ways, and there are three roads besides the one I came by, and I wot that this that goeth south will bring me to the Burg of the Four Friths; and so much I know of the folk of the said Burg that they would mock at me if I asked them of the way to the Well at the World's End. And as for the western way I deem that that will lead me back again to the peopled parts whereof I know; therefore I am minded to take the eastern way.  What sayest thou, fair lord?"

Said Ralph:  "I have heard of late that it leadeth presently to Hampton under the Scaur, where dwelleth a people of goodwill."

"Who told thee this tale?" said she.  Ralph answered, reddening again, "I was told by one who seemed to know both of that folk, and of the Burg of the Four Friths, and she said that the folk of Hampton were a good folk, and that they of the Burg were evil."

The damsel smiled sadly when she heard him say 'She,' and when he had done she said:  "And I have heard, and not from yesterday, that at Hampton dwelleth the Fellowship of the Dry Tree, and that those of the fellowship are robbers and reivers. Nevertheless they will perchance be little worse than the others; and the tale tells that the way to the Well at the World's End is by the Dry Tree; so thither will I at all adventure. And now will I say farewell to thee, for it is most like that I shall not see thee again."

"O, maiden!" said Ralph, "why wilt thou not go back to Bourton Abbas? There I might soon meet thee again, and yet, indeed, I also am like to go to Hampton.  Shall I not see thee there?"

She shook her head and said:  "Nay, since I must go so far, I shall not tarry; and, sooth to say, if I saw thee coming in at one gate I should go out by the other, for why should I dally with a grief that may not be amended. For indeed I wot that thou shalt soon forget to wish to see me, either at Bourton Abbas or elsewhere; so I will say no more than once again farewell."

Then she came close to him and put her hands on his shoulders and kissed his mouth; and then she turned away swiftly, caught up her cloak, and gat lightly into the saddle, and so shook her reins and rode away east toward Hampton, and left Ralph standing there downcast and pondering many things. It was still so early in the summer morning, and he knew so little what to do, that presently he turned and walked back to his lair amongst the hazels, and there he lay down, and his thoughts by then were all gone back again to the lovely lady whom he had delivered, and he wondered if he should ever see her again, and, sooth to say, he sorely desired to see her. Amidst such thoughts he fell asleep again, for the night yet owed him something of rest, so young as he was and so hard as he had toiled, both body and mind, during the past day.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_11]

CHAPTER 11

Now Must Ralph Ride For It

When he awoke again the sun was shining through the hazel leaves, though it was yet early; he arose and looked to his horse, and led him out of the hazel copse and stood and looked about him; and lo! a man coming slowly through the wood on Ralph's right hand, and making as it seemed for the want-way; he saw Ralph presently, and stopped, and bent a bow which he held in his hand, and then came towards him warily, with the arrow nocked. But Ralph went to meet him with his sword in his sheath, and leading Falcon by the rein, and the man stopped and took the shaft from the string: he had no armour, but there was a little axe and a wood-knife in his girdle; he was clad in homespun, and looked like a carle of the country-side. Now he greeted Ralph, and Ralph gave him the sele of the day, and saw that the new-comer was both tall and strong, dark of skin and black-haired, but of a cheerful countenance.  He spake frank and free to Ralph, and said: "Whither away, lord, out of the woodland hall, and the dwelling of deer and strong-thieves? I would that the deer would choose them a captain, and gather head and destroy the thieves--and some few others with them."

Said Ralph:  "I may scarce tell thee till I know myself. Awhile ago I was minded for the Burg of the Four Friths; but now I am for Hampton under Scaur."

"Yea?" said the carle, "when the Devil drives, to hell must we."

"What meanest thou, good fellow?" said Ralph, "Is Hampton then so evil an abode?"  And indeed it was in his mind that the adventure of the lady led captive bore some evil with it.

Said the carle:  "If thou wert not a stranger in these parts I need not to answer thy question; but I will answer it presently, yet not till we have eaten, for I hunger, and have in this wallet both bread and cheese, and thou art welcome to a share thereof, if thou hungerest also, as is most like, whereas thou art young and fresh coloured."

"So it is," said Ralph, laughing, "and I also may help to spread this table in the wilderness, since there are yet some crumbs in my wallet. Let us sit down and fall to at once."

"By your leave, Sir Gentleman," said the carle, "we will go a few yards further on, where there is a woodland brook, whereof we may drink when my bottle faileth."

"Nay, I may better that," said Ralph, "for I have wherewithal." "Nevertheless," said the carle, "we will go thither, for here is it too open for so small a company as ours, since this want-way hath an ill name, and I shall lead thee whereas we shall be somewhat out of the way of murder-carles. So come on, if thou trusteth in me."

Ralph yeasaid him, and they went together a furlong from the want-way into a little hollow place wherethrough ran a clear stream betwixt thick-leaved alders.  The carle led Ralph to the very lip of the water so that the bushes covered them; there they sat down and drew what they had from their wallets, and so fell to meat; and amidst of the meat the carle said:

"Fair Knight, as I suppose thou art one, I will ask thee if any need draweth thee to Hampton?"

Said Ralph:  "The need of giving the go-by to the Burg of the Four Friths, since I hear tell that the folk thereof be robbers and murderers."

"Thou shalt find that out better, lord, by going thither; but I shall tell thee, that though men may slay and steal there time and time about, yet in regard to Hampton under Scaur, it is Heaven, wherein men sin not. And I am one who should know, for I have been long dwelling in Hell, that is Hampton; and now am I escaped thence, and am minded for the Burg, if perchance I may be deemed there a man good enough to ride in their host, whereby I might avenge me somewhat on them that have undone me: some of whom meseemeth must have put in thy mouth that word against the Burg. Is it not so?"

"Maybe," said Ralph, "for thou seemest to be a true man." No more he spake though he had half a mind to tell the carle all the tale of that adventure; but something held him back when he thought of that lady and her fairness.  Yet again his heart misgave him of what might betide that other maiden at Hampton, and he was unquiet, deeming that he must needs follow her thither. The carle looked on him curiously and somewhat anxiously, but Ralph's eyes were set on something that was not there; or else maybe had he looked closely on the carle he might have deemed that longing to avenge him whereof he spoke did not change his face much; for in truth there was little wrath in it.

Now the carle said:  "Thou hast a tale which thou deemest unmeet for my ears, as it well may be.  Well, thou must speak, or refrain from speaking, what thou wilt; but thou art so fair a young knight, and so blithe with a poor man, and withal I deem that thou mayest help me to some gain and good, that I will tell thee a true tale: and first that the Burg is a good town under a good lord, who is no tyrant nor oppressor of peaceful men; and that thou mayest dwell there in peace as to the folk thereof, who be good folk, albeit they be no dastards to let themselves be cowed by murder-carles. And next I will tell thee that the folk of the town of Hampton be verily as harmless and innocent as sheep; but that they be under evil lords who are not their true lords, who lay heavy burdens on them and torment them even to the destroying of their lives: and lastly I will tell thee that I was one of those poor people, though not so much a sheep as the more part of them, therefore have these tyrants robbed me of my croft, and set another man in my house; and me they would have slain had I not fled to the wood that it might cover me.  And happy it was for me that I had neither wife, nor chick, nor child, else had they done as they did with my brother, whose wife was too fair for him, since he dwelt at Hampton; so that they took her away from him to make sport for them of the Dry Tree, who dwell in the Castle of the Scaur, who shall be thy masters if thou goest thither.

"This is my tale, and thine, I say, I ask not; but I deem that thou shalt do ill if thou go not to the Burg either with me or by thyself alone; either as a guest, or as a good knight to take service in their host."

Now so it was that Ralph was wary; and this time he looked closely at the carle, and found that he spake coldly for a man with so much wrath in his heart; therefore he was in doubt about the thing; moreover he called to mind the words of the lady whom he had delivered, and her loveliness, and the kisses she had given him, and he was loth to find her a liar; and he was loth also to think that the maiden of Bourton had betaken her to so evil a dwelling. So he said:

"Friend, I know not that I must needs be a partaker in the strife betwixt Hampton and the Burg, or go either to one or the other of these strongholds. Is there no other way out of this wood save by Hampton or the Burg? or no other place anigh, where I may rest in peace awhile, and then go on mine own errands?"

Said the Carle:  "There is a thorp that lieth somewhat west of the Burg, which is called Apthorp; but it is an open place, not fenced, and is debateable ground, whiles held by them of the Burg, whiles by the Dry Tree; and if thou tarry there, and they of the Dry Tree take thee, soon is thine errand sped; and if they of the Burg take thee, then shalt thou be led into the Burg in worse case than thou wouldest be if thou go thereto uncompelled. What sayest thou, therefore?  Who shall hurt thee in the Burg, a town which is under good and strong law, if thou be a true man, as thou seemest to be?  And if thou art seeking adventures, as may well be, thou shalt soon find them there ready to hand. I rede thee come with me to the Burg; for, to say sooth, I shall find it somewhat easier to enter therein if I be in the company of thee, a knight and a lord."

So Ralph considered and thought that there lay indeed but little peril to him in the Burg, whereas both those men with whom he had striven were hushed for ever, and there was none else to tell the tale of the battle, save the lady, whose peril from them of the Burg was much greater than his; and also he thought that if anything untoward befel, he had some one to fall back on in old Oliver:  yet on the other hand he had a hankering after Hampton under Scaur, where, to say sooth, he doubted not to see the lady again.

So betwixt one thing and the other, speech hung on his lips awhile, when suddenly the carle said:  "Hist! thou hast left thy horse without the bushes, and he is whinnying" (which indeed he was), "there is now no time to lose. To horse straightway, for certainly there are folk at hand, and they may be foemen, and are most like to be."

Therewith they both arose and hastened to where Falcon stood just outside the alder bushes, and Ralph leapt a-horseback without more ado, and the carle waited no bidding to leap up behind him, and pointing to a glade of the wood which led toward the highway, cried out, "Spur that way, thither! they of the Dry Tree are abroad this morning. Spur! 'tis for life or death!"

Ralph shook the rein and Falcon leapt away without waiting for the spur, while the carle looked over his shoulder and said, "Yonder they come! they are three; and ever they ride well horsed.  Nay, nay!  They are four," quoth he, as a shout sounded behind them.  "Spur, young lord! spur! And thine horse is a mettlesome beast.  Yea, it will do, it will do."

Therewith came to Ralph's ears the sound of their horse-hoofs beating the turf, and he spurred indeed, and Falcon flew forth.

"Ah," cried the carle! "but take heed, for they see that thy horse is good, and one of them, the last, hath a bent Turk bow in his hand, and is laying an arrow on it; as ever their wont is to shoot a-horseback: a turn of thy rein, as if thine horse were shying at a weasel on the road!"

Ralph stooped his head and made Falcon swerve, and heard therewith the twang of the bowstring and straightway the shaft flew past his ears.  Falcon galloped on, and the carle cried out: "There is the highway toward the Burg!  Do thy best, do thy best! Lo you again!"

For the second shaft flew from the Turkish bow, and the noise of the chase was loud behind them.  Once again twanged the bow-string, but this time the arrow fell short, and the woodland man, turning himself about as well as he might, shook his clenched fist at the chase, crying out in a voice broken by the gallop: "Ha, thieves!  I am Roger of the Rope-walk, I go to twist a rope for the necks of you!"

Then he spake to Ralph:  "They are turning back:  they are beaten, and withal they love not the open road:  yet slacken not yet, young knight, unless thou lovest thine horse more than thy life; for they will follow on through the thicket on the way-side to see whether thou wert born a fool and hast learned nothing later."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and now I deem thou wilt tell me that to the Burg I needs must."

"Yea, forsooth," said the carle, "nor shall we be long, riding thus, ere we come to the Burg Gate."

"Yea, or even slower," said Ralph, drawing rein somewhat, "for now I deem the chase done:  and after all is said, I have no will to slay Falcon, who is one of my friends, as thou perchance mayest come to be another."

Thereafter he went a hand-gallop till the wood began to thin, and there were fields of tillage about the highway; and presently Roger said: "Thou mayst breathe thy nag now, and ride single, for we are amidst friends; not even a score of the Dry Tree dare ride so nigh the Burg save by night and cloud."

So Ralph stayed his horse, and he and Roger lighted down, and Ralph looked about him and saw a stone tower builded on a little knoll amidst a wheatfield, and below it some simple houses thatched with straw; there were folk moreover working, or coming and going about the fields, who took little heed of the two when they saw them standing quiet by the horse's head; but each and all of these folk, so far as could be seen, had some weapon.

Then said Ralph:  "Good fellow, is this the Burg of the Four Friths?" The carle laughed, and said:  "Simple is the question, Sir Knight: yonder is a watch-tower of the Burg, whereunder husbandmen can live, because there be men-at-arms therein.  And all round the outskirts of the Frank of the Burg are there such-like towers to the number of twenty-seven. For that, say folk, was the tale of the winters of the Fair Lady who erewhile began the building of the Burg, when she was first wedded to the Forest Lord, who before that building had dwelt, he and his fathers, in thatched halls of timber here and there about the clearings of the wild-wood. But now, knight, if thou wilt, thou mayest go on softly toward the Gate of the Burg, and if thou wilt I will walk beside thy rein, which fellowship, as aforesaid, shall be a gain to me."

Said Ralph:  "I pray thee come with me, good fellow, and show me how easiest to enter this stronghold."  So, when Falcon was well breathed, they went on, passing through goodly acres and wide meadows, with here and there a homestead on them, and here and there a carle's cot. Then came they to a thorp of the smallest on a rising ground, from the further end of which they could see the walls and towers of the Burg. Thereafter right up to the walls were no more houses or cornfields, nought but reaches of green meadows plenteously stored with sheep and kine, and with a little stream winding about them.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_12]

CHAPTER 12

Ralph Entereth Into the Burg of the Four Friths

When they came up to the wall they saw that it was well builded of good ashlar, and so high that they might not see the roofs of the town because of it; but there were tall towers on it, a many of them, strong and white.  The road led up straight to the master-gate of the Burg, and there was a bailey before it strongly walled, and manned with weaponed men, and a captain going about amongst them. But they entered it along with men bringing wares into the town, and none heeded them much, till they came to the very gate, on the further side of a moat that was both deep and clean; but as now the bridge was down and the portcullis up, so that the market-people might pass in easily, for it was yet early in the day. But before the door on either side stood men-at-arms well weaponed, and on the right side was their captain, a tall man with bare grizzled head, but otherwise all-armed, who stopped every one whom he knew not, and asked their business.

As Ralph came riding up with Roger beside him, one of the guard laid his spear across and bade them stand, and the captain spake in a dry cold voice: "Whence comest thou, man-at-arms?" "From the Abbey of St. Mary at Higham," said Ralph.  "Yea," said the captain, smiling grimly, "even so I might have deemed:  thou wilt be one of the Lord Abbot's lily lads." "No I am not," quoth Ralph angrily.  "Well, well," said the captain, "what is thy name?"

"Ralph Motherson," quoth Ralph, knitting his brow.  Said the captain "And whither wilt thou?"  Said Ralph, "On mine own errands." "Thou answerest not over freely," quoth the captain. Said Ralph, "Then is it even; for thou askest freely enough." "Well, well," said the captain, grinning in no unfriendly wise, "thou seemest a stout lad enough; and as to my asking, it is my craft as captain of the North Gate:  but now tell me friendly, goest thou to any kinsman or friend in the Burg?"

Then Ralph's brow cleared and he said, "Nay, fair sir." "Well then," said the captain, "art thou but riding straight through to another gate, and so away again?"  "Nay," said Ralph, "if I may, I would abide here the night over, or may-happen longer." "Therein thou shalt do well, young man," said the captain; "then I suppose thou wilt to some hostelry? tell me which one."

Said Ralph, "Nay, I wot not to which one, knowing not the town." But Roger close by him spake and said:  "My lord shall go to the Flower de Luce, which is in the big square."

"Truly," said the captain, "he goes to a good harbour; and moreover, fair sir, to-morrow thou shalt see a goodly sight from thine inn; thou mayst do no better, lord.  But thou, carle, who art thou, who knowest the inside of our Burg so well, though I know thee not, for as well as I know our craftsmen and vavassors?"

Then Roger's words hung on his lips awhile, and the knight bent his brow on him, till at last he said, "Sir Captain, I was minded to lie, and say that I am this young knight's serving-man." The captain broke in on him grimly, "Thou wert best not lie."

"Yea, sir," quoth Roger, "I deemed, as it was on my tongue's end, that thou wouldst find me out, so I have nought to do but tell thee the very sooth: this it is:  I am a man made masterless by the thieves of the Dry Tree. From my land at Hampton under Scaur have I been driven, my chattels have been lifted, and my friends slain; and therefore by your leave would I ride in the host of the Burg, that I may pay back the harm which I had, according to the saw, 'better bale by breeding bale.'  So, lord, I ask thee wilt thou lend me the sword and give me the loaf, that I may help both thee, and the Burg, and me?"

The captain looked at him closely and sharply, while the carle faced him with open simple eyes, and at last he said: "Well, carle, thou wert about to name thyself this young knight's serving-man; be thou even so whiles he abideth in the Burg; and when he leaveth the Burg then come back to me here any day before noon, and may be I shall then put a sword in thy fist and horse between thy thighs.  But," (and he wagged his head threateningly at Roger) "see that thou art at the Flower de Luce when thou art called for."

Roger held his peace and seemed somewhat abashed at this word, and the captain turned to Ralph and said courteously:  "Young knight, if thou art seeking adventures, thou shalt find them in our host; and if thou be but half as wise as thou seemest bold, thou wilt not fail to gain honour and wealth both, in the service of the Burg; for we be overmuch beset with foemen that we should not welcome any wight and wary warrior, though he be an alien of blood and land. If thou thinkest well of this, then send me thy man here and give me word of thy mind, and I shall lead thee to the chiefs of the Port, and make the way easy for thee."

Ralph thanked him and rode through the gate into the street, and Roger still went beside his stirrup.

Presently Ralph turned to Roger and spake to him somewhat sourly, and said:  "Thou hadst one lie in thy mouth and didst swallow it; but how shall I know that another did not come out thence? Withal thou must needs be my fellow here, will I, nill I; for thou it was that didst put that word into the captain's mouth that thou shouldst serve me while I abide in the Burg. So I will say here and now, that my mind misgives me concerning thee, whether thou be not of those very thieves and tyrants whom thou didst mis-say but a little while ago."

"Yea," said Roger, "thou art wise indeed to set me down as one of the Dry Tree; doubtless that is why I delivered thee from their ambush even now. And as for my service, thou mayst need it; for indeed I deem thee not so safe as thou deemest thyself in this Burg."

"What!" said Ralph, "Dost thou blow hot and cold? why even now, when we were in the wood, thou wert telling me that I had nought at all to fear in the Burg of the Four Friths, and that all was done there by reason and with justice. What is this new thing then which thou hast found out, or what is that I have to fear?"

Roger changed countenance thereat and seemed somewhat confused, as one who has been caught unawares; but he gat his own face presently, and said:  "Nay, Sir Knight, I will tell thee the truth right out. In the wood yonder thy danger was great that thou mightest run into the hands of them of the Dry Tree; therefore true it is that I spake somewhat beyond my warrant concerning the life of the folk of the Burg, as how could I help it?  But surely whatever thy peril may be here, it is nought to that which awaited thee at Hampton."

"Nay, but what is the peril?" said Ralph.  Quoth Roger, "If thou wilt become their man and enter into their host, there is none; for they will ask few questions of so good a man-at-arms, when they know that thou art theirs; but if thou naysay that, it may well be that they will be for turning the key on thee till thou tellest them what and whence thou art." Ralph answered nought, thinking in his mind that this was like enough; so he rode on soberly, till Roger said:

"Anyhow, thou mayst turn the cold shoulder on me if thou wilt. Yet were I thee, I would not, for so it is, both that I can help thee, as I deem, in time to come, and that I have helped thee somewhat in time past."

Now Ralph was young and could not abide the blame of thanklessness; so he said, "Nay, nay, fellow, go we on together to the Flower de Luce."

Roger nodded his head and grumbled somewhat, and they made no stay except that now and again Ralph drew rein to look at goodly things in the street, for there were many open booths therein, so that the whole street looked like a market. The houses were goodly of building, but not very tall, the ways wide and well-paved. Many folk were in the street, going up and down on their errands, and both men and women of them seemed to Ralph stout and strong, but not very fair of favour. Withal they seemed intent on their business, and payed little heed to Ralph and his fellow, though he was by his attire plainly a stranger.

Now Ralph sees a house more gaily adorned than most, and a sign hung out from it whereon was done an image of St. Loy, and underneath the same a booth on which was set out weapons and war-gear exceeding goodly; and two knaves of the armourer were standing by to serve folk, and crying their wares with "what d'ye lack?" from time to time. So he stayed and fell to looking wistfully at the gleam and glitter of those fair things, till one of the aforesaid knaves came to his side and said:

"Fair Sir, surely thou lackest somewhat; what have we here for thy needs?"  So Ralph thought and called to mind that strong little steel axe of the man whom he had slain yesterday, and asked for the sight of such a weapon, if he might perchance cheapen it.  And the lad brought a very goodly steel axe, gold-inlaid about the shaft, and gave him the price thereof, which Ralph deemed he might compass; so he brought round his scrip to his hand, that he might take out the money. But while his hand was yet in the bag, out comes the master-armourer, a tall and very stark carle, and said in courteous wise: "Sir Knight, thou art a stranger to me and I know thee not; so I must needs ask for a sight of thy license to buy weapons, under the seal of the Burg."

"Hear a wonder," said Ralph, "that a free man for his money shall not buy wares set out to be bought, unless he have the Burg-Reeve's hand and seal for it!  Nay, take thy florins, master, and give me the axe and let the jest end there." "I jest not, young rider," quoth the armourer.  "When we know thee for a liegeman of the Burg, thou shalt buy what thou wilt without question; but otherwise I have told thee the law, and how may I, the master of the craft, break the law? Be not wrath, fair sir, I will set aside thine axe for thee, till thou bring me the license, or bid me come see it, and thou shalt get the said license at the Town Hall straight-way, when they may certify thee no foeman of the Burg."

Ralph saw that it availed nothing to bicker with the smith, and so went his way somewhat crestfallen, and that the more as he saw Roger grinning a little.

Now they come into the market-place, on one side whereof was the master church of the town, which was strongly built and with a tall tower to it, but was not very big, and but little adorned.  Over against it they saw the sign of the Flower de Luce, a goodly house and great. Thitherward they turned; but in the face of the hostelry amidmost the place was a thing which Roger pointed at with a grin that spoke as well as words; and this was a high gallows-tree furnished with four forks or arms, each carved and wrought in the fashion of the very bough of a tree, from which dangled four nooses, and above them all was a board whereon was written in big letters THE DRY TREE.  And at the foot of this gallows were divers folk laughing and talking.

So Ralph understood at once that those four men whom he had seen led away bound yesterday should be hanged thereon; so he stayed a franklin who was passing by, and said to him, "Sir, I am a stranger in the town, and I would know if justice shall be done on the four woodmen to-day." "Nay," said the man, "but to-morrow; they are even now before the judges."

Then said Roger in a surly voice, "Why art thou not there to look on?" "Because," quoth the man, "there is little to see there, and not much more to hearken.  The thieves shall be speedily judged, and not questioned with torments, so that they may be the lustier to feel what the hangman shall work on them to-morrow; then forsooth the show shall be goodly. But far better had it been if we had had in our hands the great witch of these dastards, as we looked to have her; but now folk say that she has not been brought within gates, and it is to be feared that she hath slipped through our fingers once more."

Roger laughed, and said:  "Simple are ye folk of the Burg and know nought of her shifts.  I tell thee it is not unlike that she is in the Burg even now, and hath in hand to take out of your prison the four whom ye have caught."

The franklin laughed scornfully in his turn and said: "If we be simple, thou art a fool merely:  are we not stronger and more than the Dry Tree?  How should she not be taken? How should she not be known if she were walking about these streets? Have we no eyes, fool-carle?" And he laughed again, for he was wroth.

Ralph hearkened, and a kind of fear seemed griping his heart, so he asked the franklin:  "Tell me, sir, are ye two speaking of a woman who is Queen of these strong-thieves?" "Yea," said he, "or it might better be said that she is their goddess, their mawmet, their devil, the very heart and soul of their wickedness. But one day shall we have her body and soul, and then shall her body have but an evil day of it till she dieth in this world."

"Yea, forsooth, if she can die at all," quoth Roger.

The franklin looked sourly on him and said:  "Good man, thou knowest much of her, meseemeth--Whence art thou?" Said Roger speedily:  "From Hampton under Scaur; and her rebel I am, and her dastard, and her runaway. Therefore I know her forsooth."

"Well," the Franklin said, "thou seemest a true man, and yet I would counsel thee to put a rein on thy tongue when thou art minded to talk of the Devil of the Dry Tree, or thou mayst come to harm in the Burg."

He walked away towards the gallows therewith; and Roger said, almost as if he were talking to himself; "A heavy-footed fool goeth yonder; but after this talk we were better hidden by the walls of the Flower-de-Luce." So therewith they went on toward the hostel.

But the market place was wide, and they were yet some minutes getting to the door, and ere they came there Ralph said, knitting his brows anxiously: "Is this woman fair or foul to look on?"  "That is nought so easy to tell of," said Roger, "whiles she is foul, whiles very fair, whiles young and whiles old; whiles cruel and whiles kind. But note this, when she is the kindest then are her carles the cruellest; and she is the kinder to them because they are cruel."

Ralph pondered what he said, and wondered if this were verily the woman whom he had delivered, or some other. As if answering to his unspoken thought, Roger went on: "They speak but of one woman amongst them of the Dry Tree, but in sooth they have many others who are like unto her in one way or other; and this again is a reason why they may not lay hands on the very Queen of them all."

Therewithal they came unto the hostel, and found it fair enough within, the hall great and goodly for such a house, and with but three chapmen-carles therein.  Straightway they called for meat, for it was now past noon, and the folk of the house served them when the grooms had taken charge of Falcon. And Roger served Ralph as if he were verily his man. Then Ralph went to his chamber aloft and rested a while, but came down into the hall a little before nones, and found Roger there walking up and down the hall floor, and no man else, so he said to him:  "Though thou art not of the Burg, thou knowest it; wilt thou not come abroad then, and show it me? for I have a mind to learn the ways of the folk here."

Said Roger, and smiled a little:  "If thou commandest me as my lord, I will come; yet I were better pleased to abide behind; for I am weary with night-waking and sorrow; and have a burden of thought, one which I must bear to the end of the road; and if I put it down I shall have to go back and take it up again."

Ralph thought that he excused himself with more words than were needed; but he took little heed of it, but nodded to him friendly, and went out of the house afoot, but left his weapons and armour behind him by the rede of Roger.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_13]

CHAPTER 13

The Streets of the Burg of the Four Friths

He went about the streets and found them all much like to the one which they had entered by the north gate; he saw no poor or wretched houses, and none very big as of great lords; they were well and stoutly builded, but as aforesaid not much adorned either with carven work or painting: there were folk enough in the streets, and now Ralph, as was like to be, looked specially at the women, and thought many of them little better-favoured than the men, being both dark and low; neither were they gaily clad, though their raiment, like the houses, was stout and well wrought.  But here and there he came on a woman taller and whiter than the others, as though she were of another blood; all such of these as he saw were clad otherwise than the darker women: their heads uncoifed, uncovered save for some garland or silken band: their gowns yellow like wheat-straw, but gaily embroidered; sleeveless withal and short, scarce reaching to the ancles, and whiles so thin that they were rather clad with the embroidery than the cloth; shoes they had not, but sandals bound on their naked feet with white thongs, and each bore an iron ring about her right arm.

The more part of the men wore weapons at their sides and had staves in hand, and were clad in short jerkins brown or blue of colour, and looked ready for battle if any moment should call them thereto; but among them were men of different favour and stature from these, taller for the most part, unarmed, and clad in long gowns of fair colours with cloths of thin and gay-coloured web twisted about their heads. These he took for merchants, as they were oftenest standing in and about the booths and shops, whereof there were some in all the streets, though the market for victuals and such like he found over for that day, and but scantily peopled.

Out of one of these markets, which was the fish and fowl market, he came into a long street that led him down to a gate right over against that whereby he had entered the Burg; and as he came thereto he saw that there was a wide way clear of all houses inside of the wall, so that men-at-arms might go freely from one part to the other; and he had also noted that a wide way led from each port out of the great place, and each ended not but in a gate. But as to any castle in the town, he saw none; and when he asked a burgher thereof, the carle laughed in his face, and said to him that the whole Burg, houses and all, was a castle, and that it would turn out to be none of the easiest to win. And forsooth Ralph himself was much of that mind.

Now he was just within the south gate when he held this talk, and there were many folk thereby already, and more flocking thereto; so he stood there to see what should betide; and anon he heard great blowing of horns and trumpets all along the wall, and, as he deemed, other horns answered from without; and so it was; for soon the withoutward horns grew louder, and the folk fell back on either side of the way, and next the gates were thrown wide open (which before had been shut save for a wicket) and thereafter came the first of a company of men-at-arms, foot-men, with bills some, and some with bows, and all-armed knights and sergeants a-horseback.

So streamed in these weaponed men till Ralph saw that it was a great host that was entering the Burg; and his heart rose within him, so warrior-like they were of men and array, though no big men of their bodies; and many of them bore signs of battle about them, both in the battering of their armour and the rending of their raiment, and the clouts tied about the wounds on their bodies.

After a while among the warriors came herds of neat and flocks of sheep and strings of horses, of the spoil which the host had lifted; and then wains filled, some with weapons and war gear, and some with bales of goods and household stuff.  Last came captives, some going afoot and some for weariness borne in wains; for all these war-taken thralls were women and women-children; of males there was not so much as a little lad.  Of the women many seemed fair to Ralph despite their grief and travel; and as he looked on them he deemed that they must be of the kindred and nation of the fair white women he had seen in the streets; though they were not clad like those, but diversely.

So Ralph gazed on this pageant till all had passed, and he was weary with the heat and the dust and the confused clamour of shouting and laughter and talking; and whereas most of the folk followed after the host and their spoil, the streets of the town there about were soon left empty and peaceful. So he turned into a street narrower than most, that went east from the South Gate and was much shaded from the afternoon sun, and went slowly down it, meaning to come about the inside of the wall till he should hit the East Gate, and so into the Great Place when the folk should have gone their ways home.

He saw no folk in the street save here and there an old woman sitting at the door of her house, and maybe a young child with her. As he came to where the street turned somewhat, even such a carline was sitting on a clean white door-step on the sunny side, somewhat shaded by a tall rose-laurel tree in a great tub, and she sang as she sat spinning, and Ralph stayed to listen in his idle mood, and he heard how she sang in a dry, harsh voice:

    Clashed sword on shield In the harvest field;
     And no man blames The red red flames,
     War's candle-wick On roof and rick.
     Now dead lies the yeoman unwept and unknown
     On the field he hath furrowed, the ridge he hath sown:
     And all in the middle of wethers and neat
     The maidens are driven with blood on their feet;
     For yet 'twixt the Burg-gate and battle half-won
     The dust-driven highway creeps uphill and on,
     And the smoke of the beacons goes coiling aloft,
     While the gathering horn bloweth loud, louder and oft.

    Throw wide the gates
     For nought night waits;
     Though the chase is dead
     The moon's o'erhead
     And we need the clear
     Our spoil to share.
     Shake the lots in the helm then for brethren are we,
     And the goods of my missing are gainful to thee.
     Lo! thine are the wethers, and his are the kine;
     And the colts of the marshland unbroken are thine,
     With the dapple-grey stallion that trampled his groom;
     And Giles hath the gold-blossomed rose of the loom.
     Lo! leaps out the last lot and nought have I won,
     But the maiden unmerry, by battle undone.

Even as her song ended came one of those fair yellow-gowned damsels round the corner of the street, bearing in her hand a light basket full of flowers: and she lifted up her head and beheld Ralph there; then she went slowly and dropped her eyelids, and it was pleasant to Ralph to behold her; for she was as fair as need be.  Her corn-coloured gown was dainty and thin, and but for its silver embroidery had hidden her limbs but little; the rosiness of her ancles showed amidst her white sandal-thongs, and there were silver rings and gold on her arms along with the iron ring.

Now she lifted up her eyes and looked shyly at Ralph, and he smiled at her well-pleased, and deemed it would be good to hear her voice; so he went up to her and greeted her, and she seemed to take his greeting well, though she glanced swiftly at the carline in the doorway.

Said Ralph:  "Fair maiden, I am a stranger in this town, and have seen things I do not wholly understand; now wilt thou tell me before l ask the next question, who will be those war-taken thralls whom even now I saw brought into the Burg by the host? of what nation be they, and of what kindred?"

Straightway was the damsel all changed; she left her dainty tricks, and drew herself up straight and stiff.  She looked at him in the eyes, flushing red, and with knit brows, a moment, and then passed by him with swift and firm feet as one both angry and ashamed.

But the carline who had beheld the two with a grin on her wrinkled face changed aspect also, and cried out fiercely after the damsel, and said: "What! dost thou flee from the fair young man, and he so kind and soft with thee, thou jade?  Yea, I suppose thou dost fetch and carry for some mistress who is young and a fool, and who has not yet learned how to deal with the daughters of thine accursed folk. Ah! if I had but money to buy some one of you, and a good one, she should do something else for me than showing her fairness to young men; and I would pay her for her long legs and her white skin, till she should curse her fate that she had not been born little and dark-skinned and free, and with heels un-bloodied with the blood of her back."

Thus she went on, though the damsel was long out of ear-shot of her curses; and Ralph tarried not to get away from her spiteful babble, which he now partly understood; and that all those yellow-clad damsels were thralls to the folk of the Burg; and belike were of the kindred of those captives late-taken whom he had seen amidst the host at its entering into the Burg.

So he wandered away thence thinking on what he should do till the sun was set, and he had come into the open space underneath the walls, and had gone along it till he came to the East Gate: there he looked around him a little and found people flowing back from the Great Place, whereto they had gathered to see the host mustered and the spoil blessed; then he went on still under the wall, and noted not that here and there a man turned about to look upon him curiously, for he was deep in thought, concerning the things which he had seen and heard of, and pondered much what might have befallen his brethren since they sundered at the Want-way nigh to the High House of Upmeads. Withal the chief thing that he desired was to get him away from the Burg, for he felt himself unfree therein; and he said to himself that if he were forced to dwell among this folk, that he had better never have stolen himself away from his father and mother; and whiles even he thought that he would do his best on the morrow to get him back home to Upmeads again. But then when he thought of how his life would go in his old home, there seemed to him a lack, and when he questioned himself as to what that lack was, straightway he seemed to see that Lady of the Wildwood standing before the men-at-arms in her scanty raiment the minute before his life was at adventure because of them. And in sooth he smiled to himself then with a beating heart, as he told himself that above all things he desired to see that Lady, whatever she might be, and that he would follow his adventure to the end until he met her.

Amidst these thoughts he came unto the North Gate, whereby he had first entered the Burg, and by then it was as dark as the summer night would be; so he woke up from his dream, as it were, and took his way briskly back to the Flower de Luce.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_14]

CHAPTER 14

What Ralph Heard of the Matters of the Burg of the Four Friths

There was no candle in the hall when he entered, but it was not so dark therein but he might see Roger sitting on a stool near the chimney, and opposite to him on the settle sat two men; one very tall and big, the other small; Roger was looking away from these, and whistling; and it came into Ralph's mind that he would have him think that he had nought to do with them, whether that were so or not. But he turned round as Ralph came up the hall and rose and came up to him, and fell to talking with him and asking him how he liked the Burg; and ever he spake fast and loud, so that again it came on Ralph that he was playing a part.

Ralph heeded him little, but ever looked through the hall-dusk on those twain, who presently arose and went toward the hall door, but when they were but half-way across the floor a chamberlain came in suddenly, bearing candles in his hands, and the light fell on those guests and flashed back from a salade on the head of the big man, and Ralph saw that he was clad in a long white gaberdine, and he deemed that he was the very man whom he had seen last in the Great Place at Higham, nigh the church, and before that upon the road. As for the smaller man Ralph had no knowledge of him, for he could see but little of his face, whereas he was wrapped up in a cloak, for as warm as the evening was, and wore a slouch hat withal; but his eyes seemed great and wondrous bright.

But when they were gone Ralph asked Roger if he knew aught of them, or if they had told him aught.  "Nay," said Roger, "they came in here as I sat alone, and had their meat, and spake nought to me, and little to each other. I deem them not to be of the Burg.  Nay, sooth to say, I doubt if they be true men."

As he spake came in a sort of the townsmen somewhat merry and noisy, and called for meat and drink and more lights; so that the board was brought and the hall was speedily astir. These men, while supper was being dight, fell to talking to Ralph and Roger, and asking them questions of whence and whither, but nowise uncourteously:  to whom Roger answered with the tale which he had told Ralph, and Ralph told what he would, and that was but little.

But when the board was dight they bade them sit down with them and eat. Ralph sat down at once, and Roger would have served him, but Ralph bade him do it not, and constrained him to sit by his side, and they two sat a little apart from the townsmen.

So when they had eaten their fill, and wine was brought, and men were drinking kindly, Ralph began to ask Roger concerning those women whom he had seen in the street, and the captives whom he had seen brought in by the host, and if they were of one kindred, and generally how it was with them:  and he spake somewhat softly as if he would not break into the talk of the townsmen: but Roger answered him in a loud voice so that all could hear:

"Yea, lord, I will tell thee the tale of them, which setteth forth well both the wise policy and the great mercy of the folk of the Burg and their rulers."

Said Ralph:  "Are these women also of the Dry Tree? For I perceive them to be born of the foes of the Burg."

Now the townsmen had let their talk drop a while to listen to the talk of the aliens; and Roger answered still in a loud voice: "Nay, nay, it is not so.  These queens are indeed war-taken thralls, but not from them of the Dry Tree, or they would have been slain at once, like as the carles of those accursed ones. But these are of the folk of the Wheat-wearers, even as those whom thou sawest brought to-day amidst the other spoil. And to this folk the Burg showeth mercy, and whenso the host goeth against them and over-cometh (and that is well-nigh whenever they meet) these worthy lords slay no woman of them, but the men only, whether they be old or young or youngest.  As for their women they are brought hither and sold at the market-cross to the highest bidder. And this honour they have, that such of them as be fair, and that is the more part of the younger ones, fetch no ill penny. Yet for my part I were loth to cheapen such wares:  for they make but evil servants, being proud, and not abiding stripes lightly, or toiling the harder for them; and they be somewhat too handy with the knife if they deem themselves put upon.  Speak I sooth, my masters?" quoth he, turning toward them of the town.

Said a burgher somewhat stricken in years, "Nought but sooth; peaceable men like to me eschew such servants; all the more because of this, that if one of these queens misbehave with the knife, or strayeth from her master's bed, the laws of the Burg meddle not therein. For the wise men say that such folk are no more within the law than kine be, and may not for their deeds be brought before leet or assize any more than kine.  So that if the master punish her not for her misdoings, unpunished she needs must go; yea even if her deed be mere murder."

"That is sooth," said a somewhat younger man; "yet whiles it fareth ill with them at the hands of our women.  To wit, my father's brother has even now come from the war to find his thrall all spoilt by his wife: and what remedy may he have against his wife? his money is gone, even as if she had houghed his horse or his best cow."

"Yea," said a third, "we were better without such cattle. A thrust with a sword and all the tale told, were the better way of dealing with them."

Said another; "Yet are the queens good websters, and, lacking them, figured cloth of silk would be far-fetched and dear-bought here."

A young man gaily clad, who had been eyeing the speakers disdainfully, spake next and said:  "Fair sirs, ye are speaking like hypocrites, and as if your lawful wives were here to hearken to you; whereas ye know well how goodly these thralls be, and that many of them can be kind enough withal; and ye would think yourselves but ill bestead if ye might not cheapen such jewels for your money. Which of you will go to the Cross next Saturday and there buy him a fairer wife than he can wed out of our lineages? and a wife withal of whose humours he need take no more account of than the dullness of his hound or the skittish temper of his mare, so long as the thong smarts, and the twigs sting."

One or two grinned as he spake, but some bent their brows at him, yet scarce in earnest, and the talk thereover dropped, nor did Ralph ask any more questions; for he was somewhat down-hearted, calling to mind the frank and free maidens of Upmead, and their friendly words and hearty kisses. And him seemed the world was worse than he had looked to find it.

Howsoever, the oldest and soberest of the guests, seeing that he was a stranger and of noble aspect, came unto him and sat by him, and fell to telling him tales of the wars of the men of the Burg with the Wheat-wearers; and how in time past, when the town was but little fenced, the Wheat-wearers had stormed their gates and taken the city, and had made a great slaughter; but yet had spared many of the fighting-men, although they had abided there as the masters of them, and held them enthralled for three generations of men: after which time the sons' sons of the old Burg-dwellers having grown very many again, and divers of them being trusted in sundry matters by the conquerors, who oppressed them but little, rose up against them as occasion served, in the winter season and the Yule feast, and slew their masters, save for a few who were hidden away.

"And thereafter," quoth he, "did we make the Burg strong and hard to win, as ye see it to-day; and we took for our captain the Forest Lord, who ere-while had dwelt in the clearings of the wildwood, and he wedded the Fair Lady who was the son's daughter of him who had been our lord ere the Wheat-wearers overcame us; and we grew safe and free and mighty again. And the son of the Forest Lord, he whom we call the War-smith, he it was who beheld the Burg too much given to pleasure, and delighting in the softness of life; and he took order to harden our hearts, and to cause all freemen to learn the craft of war and battle, and let the women and thralls and aliens see to other craftsmanship and to chaffer; and even so is it done as he would; and ye shall find us hardy of heart enough, though belike not so joyous as might be. Yet at least we shall not be easy to overcome."

"So indeed it seemeth," said Ralph.  "Yet will I ask of you first one question, and then another."

"Ask on," said the burgher.

Said Ralph:  "How is it that ye, being so strong, should still suffer them of the Dry Tree, taking a man here and a man there, when ye might destroy them utterly?"

The Burgher reddened and cleared his throat and said: "Sir, it must be made clear to you that these evil beasts are no peril to the Burg of the Four Friths; all the harm they may do us, is as when a cur dog biteth a man in the calf of the leg; whereby the man shall be grieved indeed, but the dog slain. Such grief as that they have done us at whiles:  but the grief is paid for thus, that the hunting and slaying of them keeps our men in good trim, and pleasures them; shortly to say it, they are the chief deer wherewith our wood is stocked."

He stopped awhile and then went on again and said:  "To say sooth they be not very handy for crushing as a man crushes a wasp, because sorcery goes with them, and the wiles of one who is their Queen, the evilest woman who ever spat upon the blessed Host of the Altar: yet is she strong, a devouring sea of souls, God help us!" And he blessed himself therewith.

Said Ralph:  "Yet a word on these Wheat-wearers; it seemeth that ye never fail to overcome them in battle?"

"But seldom at least," quoth the Burgher.

Said Ralph:  "Then it were no great matter for you to gather a host overwhelming, and to take their towns and castles, and forbid them weapons, and make them your thralls to till the land for you which now they call theirs; so that ye might have of their gettings all save what were needful for them to live as thralls."

"I deem it were an easy thing," said the burgher.

Quoth Ralph:  "Then why do ye not so?"

"It were but a poor game to play," said the burgher. "Such of their wealth as we have a mind to, we can have now at the cost of a battle or two, begun one hour and ended the next: were we their masters sitting down amidst of their hatred, and amidst of their plotting, yea, and in the very place where that were the hottest and thickest, the battle would be to begin at every sun's uprising, nor would it be ended at any sunset. Hah! what sayest thou?"

Said Ralph:  "This seemeth to me but the bare truth; yet it is little after the manner of such masterful men as ye be. But why then do ye slay all their carles that are taken; whereas ye bear away the women and make thralls of them at home, that is to say, foes in every house?"

"It may be," said the Burgher, "that this is not amongst the wisest of our dealings.  Yet may we do no otherwise; for thus we swore to do by all the greatest oaths that we might swear, in the days when we first cast off their yoke, and yet were not over strong at the first; and now it hath so grown into a part of our manners, yea, and of our very hearts and minds, that the slaying of a Wheat-wearer is to us a lighter matter than the smiting of a rabbit or a fowmart.  But now, look you, fair sir, my company ariseth from table; so I bid thee a good night. And I give thee a good rede along with the good wish, to wit, that thou ask not too many questions in this city concerning its foemen: for here is the stranger looked upon with doubt, if he neither will take the wages of the Burg for battle, nor hath aught to sell."

Ralph reddened at his word, and the other looked at him steadily as he spoke, so that Ralph deemed that he mistrusted him: he deemed moreover that three or four of the others looked hard at him as they went towards the door, while Roger stood somewhat smiling, and humming a snatch of an old song.

But when the other guests had left the hostelry, Roger left his singing, and turned to Ralph and said:  "Master, meseems that they mistrust us, and now maybe is that peril that I spake of nigher than I deemed when we came into the Burg this morning. And now I would that we were well out of the Burg and in the merry greenwood again, and it repents me that I brought thee hither."

"Nay, good fellow," quoth Ralph, "heed it not:  besides, it was me, not thee, that they seemed to doubt of.  I will depart hence to-morrow morning no worser than I came, and leave thee to seek thy fortune here; and good luck go with thee."

Roger looked hard at him and said:  "Not so, young lord; if thou goest I will go with thee, for thou hast won my heart, I know not how: and I would verily be thy servant, to follow thee whithersoever thou goest; for I think that great deeds will come of thee."

This word pleased Ralph, for he was young and lightly put faith in men's words, and loved to be well thought of, and was fain of good fellowship withal.  So he said: "This is a good word of thine, and I thank thee for it; and look to it that in my adventures, and the reward of them thou shalt have thy due share.  Lo here my hand on it!"

Roger took his hand, yet therewith his face seemed a little troubled, but he said nought.  Then spoke Ralph: "True it is that I am not fain to take the wages of the Burg; for it seems to me that they be hard men, and cruel and joyless, and that their service shall be rather churlish than knightly. Howbeit, let night bring counsel, and we will see to this to-morrow; for now I am both sleepy and weary."  Therewith he called the chamberlain, who bore a wax light before him to his chamber, and he did off his raiment and cast himself on his bed, and fell asleep straightway, before he knew where Roger was sleeping, whether it were in the hall or some place else.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_15]

CHAPTER 15

How Ralph Departed From the Burg of the Four Friths

Himseemed he had scarce been asleep a minute ere awoke with a sound of someone saying softly, "Master, master, awake!"  So he sat up and answered softly in his turn:  "Who is it? what is amiss, since the night is yet young?"

"I am thy fellow-farer, Roger," said the speaker, "and this thou hast to do, get on thy raiment speedily, and take thy weapons without noise, if thou wouldst not be in the prison of the Burg before sunrise."

Ralph did as he was bidden without more words; for already when he lay down his heart misgave him that he was in no safe place; he looked to his weapons and armour that they should not clash, and down they came into the hall and found the door on the latch; so out they went and Ralph saw that it was somewhat cloudy; the moon was set and it was dark, but Ralph knew by the scent that came in on the light wind, and a little stir of blended sounds, that it was hard on dawning; and even therewith he heard the challenge of the warders on the walls and their crying of the hour; and the chimes of the belfry rang clear and loud, and seeming close above him, two hours and a half after midnight. Roger spake not, and Ralph was man-at-arms enough to know that he must hold his peace; and though he longed sore to have his horse Falcon with him, yet he wotted that it availed not to ask of his horse, since he durst not ask of his life.

So they went on silently till they were out of the Great Place and came into a narrow street, and so into another which led them straight into the houseless space under the wall. Roger led right on as if he knew the way well, and in a twinkling were they come to a postern in the wall betwixt the East Gate and the South.  By the said postern Ralph saw certain men standing; and on the earth near by, whereas he was keen-eyed, he saw more than one man lying moveless.

Spake Roger softly to the men who stood on their feet: "Is the rope twined?"  "Nay, rope-twiner," said one of them. Then Roger turned and whispered to Ralph:  "Friends.  Get out thy sword!" Wherewithal the gate was opened, and they all passed out through the wall, and stood above the ditch in the angle-nook of a square tower. Then Ralph saw some of the men stoop and shoot out a broad plank over the ditch, which was deep but not wide thereabout, and straightway he followed the others over it, going last save Roger. By then they were on the other side he saw a glimmer of the dawn in the eastern heaven, but it was still more than dusk, and no man spoke again. They went on softly across the plain fields outside the wall, creeping from bush to bush, and from tree to tree, for here, if nowhere about the circuit of the Burg, were a few trees growing. Thus they came into a little wood and passed through it, and then Ralph could see that the men were six besides Roger; by the glimmer of the growing dawn he saw before them a space of meadows with high hedges about them, and a dim line that he took for the roof of a barn or grange, and beyond that a dark mass of trees.

Still they pressed on without speaking; a dog barked not far off and the cocks were crowing, and close by them in the meadow a cow lowed and went hustling over the bents and the long, unbitten buttercups. Day grew apace, and by then they were under the barn-gable which he had seen aloof he saw the other roofs of the grange and heard the bleating of sheep. And now he saw those six men clearly, and noted that one of them was very big and tall, and one small and slender, and it came into his mind that these two were none other than the twain whom he had come upon the last night sitting in the hall of the Flower de Luce.

Even therewith came a man to the gate of the sheep-cote by the grange, and caught sight of them, and had the wits to run back at once shouting out: "Hugh, Wat, Richard, and all ye, out with you, out a doors!  Here be men! Ware the Dry Tree!  Bows and bills!  Bows and bills!"

With that those fellows of Ralph made no more ado, but set off running at their best toward the wood aforesaid, which crowned the slope leading up from the grange, and now took no care to go softly, nor heeded the clashing of their armour.  Ralph ran with the best and entered the wood alongside the slim youth aforesaid, who stayed not at the wood's edge but went on running still: but Ralph stayed and turned to see what was toward, and beheld how that tall man was the last of their company, and ere he entered the wood turned about with a bent bow in his hand, and even as he nocked the shaft, the men from the Grange, who were seven in all, came running out from behind the barn-gable, crying out: "Ho thieves! ho ye of the Dry Tree, abide till we come! flee not from handy strokes."  The tall man had the shaft to his ear in a twinkling, and loosed straightway, and nocked and loosed another shaft without staying to note how the first had sped. But Ralph saw that a man was before each of the shafts, and had fallen to earth, though he had no time to see aught else, for even therewith the tall man caught him by the hand, and crying out, "The third time!" ran on with him after the rest of their company; and whereas he was long-legged and Ralph lightfooted, they speedily came up with them, who were running still, but laughing as they ran, and jeering at the men of the Burg; and the tall man shouted out to them:  "Yea, lads, the counterfeit Dry Tree that they have raised in the Burg shall be dry enough this time." "Truly," said another, "till we come to water it with the blood of these wretches."

"Well, well, get on," said a third, "waste not your wind in talk; those carles will make but a short run of it to the walls long as it was for us, creeping and creeping as we behoved to."

The long man laughed; "Thou sayest sooth," said he, "but thou art the longest winded of all in talking: get on, lads."

They laughed again at his word and sped on with less noise; while Ralph thought within himself that he was come into strange company, for now he knew well that the big man was even he whom he had first met at the churchyard gate of the thorp under Bear Hill. Yet he deemed that there was nought for it now but to go on.

Within a while they all slacked somewhat, and presently did but walk, though swiftly, through the paths of the thicket, which Ralph deemed full surely was part of that side of the Wood Perilous that lay south of the Burg of the Four Friths. And now Roger joined himself to him, and spake to him aloud and said: "So, fair master, thou art out of the peril of death for this bout."

"Art thou all so sure of that?" quoth Ralph, "or who are these that be with us? meseems they smell of the Dry Tree."

"Yea, or rebels and runaways therefrom," said Roger, with a dry grin. "But whosoever they may be, thou shalt see that they will suffer us to depart whither we will, if we like not their company. I will be thy warrant thereof."

"Moreover," said Ralph, "I have lost Falcon my horse; it is a sore miss of him."

"Maybe," quoth Roger, "but at least thou hast saved thy skin; and whereas there are many horses on the earth, there is but one skin of thine: be content; if thou wilt, thou shall win somewhat in exchange for thine horse."

Ralph smiled, but somewhat sourly, and even therewith he heard a shrill whistle a little aloof, and the men stayed and held their peace, for they were talking together freely again now. Then the big man put his fingers to his mouth and whistled again in answer, a third whistle answered him; and lo, presently, as their company hastened on, the voices of men, and anon they came into a little wood-lawn wherein standing about or lying on the grass beside their horses were more than a score of men well armed, but without any banner or token, and all in white armour with white Gaberdines thereover; and they had with them, as Ralph judged, some dozen of horses more than they needed for their own riding.

Great was the joy at this meeting, and there was embracing and kissing of friends:  but Ralph noted that no man embraced that slender youth, and that he held him somewhat aloof from the others, and all seemed to do him reverence.

Now spake one of the runaways:  "Well, lads, here be all we four well met again along with those twain who came to help us at our pinch, as their wont is, and Roger withal, good at need again, and a friend of his, as it seemeth, and whom we know not. See ye to that."

Then stood forth the big man and said:  "He is a fair young knight, as ye may see; and he rideth seeking adventures, and Roger did us to wit that he was abiding in the Burg at his peril, and would have him away, even if it were somewhat against his will:  and we were willing that it should be so, all the more as I have a guess concerning what he is; and a foreseeing man might think that luck should go with him." Therewith he turned to Ralph and said:  "How say ye, fair sir, will ye take guesting with us a while and learn our ways?"

Said Ralph:  "Certain I am that whither ye will have me go, thither must I; yet I deem that I have an errand that lies not your way. Therefore if I go with you, ye must so look upon it that I am in your fellowship as one compelled.  To be short with you, I crave leave to depart and go mine own road."

As he spoke he saw the youth walking up and down in short turns; but his face he could scarce see at all, what for his slouched hat, what for his cloak; and at last he saw him go up to the tall man and speak softly to him awhile. The tall man nodded his head, and as the youth drew right back nigh to the thicket, spake to Ralph again.

"Fair sir, we grant thine asking; and add this thereto that we give thee the man who has joined himself to thee, Roger of the Rope-walk to wit, to help thee on the road, so that thou mayst not turn thy face back to the Burg of the Four Friths, where thine errand, and thy life withal, were soon sped now, or run into any other trap which the Wood Perilous may have for thee. And yet if thou think better of it, thou mayst come with us straightway; for we have nought to do to tarry here any longer.  And in any case, here is a good horse that we will give thee, since thou hast lost thy steed; and Roger who rideth with thee, he also is well horsed."

Ralph looked hard at the big man, who now had his salade thrown back from his face, to see if he gave any token of jeering or malice, but could see nought such:  nay, his face was grave and serious, not ill-fashioned, though it were both long and broad like his body: his cheek-bones somewhat high, his eyes grey and middling great, and looking, as it were, far away.

Now deems Ralph that as for a trap of the Wood Perilous, he had already fallen into the trap; for he scarce needed to be told that these were men of the Dry Tree.  He knew also that it was Roger who had led him into this trap, although he deemed it done with no malice against him.  So he said to himself that if he went with Roger he but went a roundabout road to the Dry Tree; so that he was well nigh choosing to go on with their company. Yet again he thought that something might well befall which would free him from that fellowship if he went with Roger alone; whereas if he went with the others it was not that he might be, but that he was already of the fellowship of the Dry Tree, and most like would go straight thence to their stronghold. So he spake as soberly as the tall man had done.

"Since ye give me the choice, fair sir, I will depart hence with Roger alone, whom ye call my man, though to me he seemeth to be yours.  Howbeit, he has led me to you once, and belike will do so once more."

"Yea," quoth the big man smiling no whit more than erst, "and that will make the fourth time.  Depart then, fair sir, and take this word with thee that I wish thee good and not evil."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_16]

CHAPTER 16

Ralph Rideth the Wood Perilous Again

Now Roger led up to Ralph a strong horse, red roan of hue, duly harnessed for war, and he himself had a good grey horse, and they mounted at once, and Ralph rode slowly away through the wood at his horse's will, for he was pondering all that had befallen him, and wondering what next should hap. Meanwhile those others had not loitered, but were a-horseback at once, and went their ways from Ralph through the wildwood.

Nought spake Ralph for a while till Roger came close up to him and said: "Whither shall we betake us, fair lord? hast thou an inkling of the road whereon lies thine errand?"

Now to Ralph this seemed but mockery, and he answered sharply: "I wot not, thou wilt lead whither thou wilt, even as thou hast trained me hitherward with lies and a forged tale.  I suppose thou wilt lead me now by some roundabout road to the stronghold of the Dry Tree. It matters little, since thou durst not lead me back into the Burg. Yet now I come to think of it, it is evil to be alone with a found out traitor and liar; and I had belike have done better to go with their company."

"Nay nay," quoth Roger, "thou art angry, and I marvel not thereat; but let thy wrath run off thee if thou mayest; for indeed what I have told thee of myself and my griefs is not all mere lying. Neither was it any lie that thou wert in peril of thy life amongst those tyrants of the Burg; thou with thy manly bearing, and free tongue, and bred, as I judge, to hate cruel deeds and injustice. Such freedom they cannot away with in that fellowship of hard men-at-arms; and soon hadst thou come to harm amongst them. And further, let alone that it is not ill to be sundered from yonder company, who mayhap will have rough work to do or ever they win home, I have nought to do to bring thee to Hampton under Scaur if thou hast no will to go thither: though certes I would lead thee some whither, whereof thou shalt ask me nought as now; yet will I say thereof this much, that there thou shalt be both safe and well at ease. Now lastly know this, that whatever I have done, I have done it to do thee good and not ill; and there is also another one, whom I will not name to thee, who wisheth thee better yet, by the token of those two strokes stricken by thee in the Wood Perilous before yesterday was a day."

Now when Ralph heard those last words, such strong and sweet hope and desire stirred in him to see that woman of the Want-ways of the Wood Perilous that he forgat all else, except that he must nowise fall to strife with Roger, lest they should sunder, and he should lose the help of him, which he now deemed would bring him to sight of her whom he had unwittingly come to long for more than aught else; so he spake to Roger quietly and humbly: "Well, faring-fellow, thou seest how I am little more than a lad, and have fallen into matters mighty and perilous, which I may not deal with of my own strength, at least until I get nigher to them so that I may look them in the eyes, and strike a stroke or two on them if they be at enmity with me. So I bid thee lead me whither thou wilt, and if thou be a traitor to me, on thine own head be it; in good sooth, since I know nought of this wood and since I might go astray and so come back to the Burg where be those whom thou hast now made my foemen, I am content to take thee on thy word, and to hope the best of thee, and ask no question of thee, save whitherward."

"Fair sir," said Roger, "away from this place at least; for we are as yet over nigh to the Burg to be safe: but as to elsewhither we may wend, thereof we may speak on the road as we have leisure."

Therewith he smote his horse with his heel and they went forward at a smart trot, for the horses were unwearied, and the wood thereabouts of beech and clear of underwood; and Roger seemed to know his way well, and made no fumbling over it.

Four hours or more gone, the wood thinned and the beeches failed, and they came to a country, still waste, of little low hills, stony for the more part, beset with scraggy thorn-bushes, and here and there some other berry-tree sown by the birds.  Then said Roger: "Now I deem us well out of the peril of them of the Burg, who if they follow the chase as far as the sundering of us and the others, will heed our slot nothing, but will follow on that of the company: so we may breathe our horses a little, though their bait will be but small in this rough waste:  therein we are better off than they, for lo you, saddle bags on my nag and meat and drink therein."

So they lighted down and let their horses graze what they could, while they ate and drank; amidst which Ralph again asked Roger of whither they were going.  Said Roger:  "I shall lead thee to a good harbour, and a noble house of a master of mine, wherein thou mayst dwell certain days, if thou hast a mind thereto, not without solace maybe."

"And this master," said Ralph, "is he of the Dry Tree?" Said Roger:  "I scarce know how to answer thee without lying: but this I say, that whether he be or not, this is true; amongst those men I have friends and amongst them foes; but fate bindeth me to them for a while."  Said Ralph reddening: "Be there any women amongst them?"  "Yea, yea," quoth Roger, smiling a little, "doubt not thereof."

"And that Lady of the Dry Tree," quoth Ralph, reddening yet more, but holding up his head, "that woman whereof the Burgher spoke so bitterly, threatening her with torments and death if they might but lay hold of her; what wilt thou tell me concerning her?" "But little," said Roger, "save this, that thou desirest to see her, and that thou mayest have thy will thereon if thou wilt be guided by me."

Ralph hearkened as if he heeded little what Roger said; but presently he rose up and walked to and fro in short turns with knit brows as one pondering a hard matter. He spake nought, and Roger seemed to heed him nothing, though in sooth he looked at him askance from time to time, till at last he came and lay down again by Roger, and in a while he spake: "I wot not why ye of the Dry Tree want me, or what ye will do with me; and but for one thing I would even now ride away from thee at all adventure."

Roger said:  "All this ye shall learn later on, and shalt find it but a simple matter; and meanwhile I tell thee again that all is for thy gain and thy pleasure.  So now ride away if thou wilt; who hindereth thee? certes not I."

"Nay," said Ralph, "I will ride with thee first to that fair house; and afterwards we shall see what is to hap."  "Yea," quoth Roger, "then let us to horse straightway, so that we may be there if not before dark night yet at least before bright morn; for it is yet far away."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_17]

CHAPTER 17

Ralph Cometh to the House of Abundance

Therewithal they gat to horse and rode away through that stony land, wherein was no river, but for water many pools in the bottoms, with little brooks running from them. But after a while they came upon a ridge somewhat high, on the further side whereof was a wide valley well-grassed and with few trees, and no habitation of man that they might see. But a wide river ran down the midst of it; and it was now four hours after noon.  Quoth Roger:  "The day wears and we shall by no means reach harbour before dark night, even if we do our best: art thou well used to the water, lord?"  "Much as a mallard is," said Ralph.  Said Roger:  "That is well, for though there is a ford some mile and a half down stream, for that same reason it is the way whereby men mostly cross the water into the wildwood; and here again we are more like to meet foes than well-wishers; or at the least there will be question of who we are, and whence and whither; and we may stumble in our answers."  Said Ralph: "There is no need to tarry, ride we down to the water."

So did they, and took the water, which was deep, but not swift. On the further side they clomb up a hill somewhat steep; at the crown they drew rein to give their horses breath, and Ralph turned in his saddle and looked down on to the valley, and as aforesaid he was clear-sighted and far-sighted; now he said: "Fellow-farer, I see the riding of folk down below there, and meseems they be spurring toward the water; and they have weapons: there! dost thou not see the gleam?"

"I will take thy word for it, fair sir," said Roger, "and will even spur, since they be the first men whom we have seen since we left the thickets." And therewith he went off at a hand gallop, and Ralph followed him without more ado.

They rode up hill and down dale of a grassy downland, till at last they saw a wood before them again, and soon drew rein under the boughs; for now were their horses somewhat wearied. Then said Ralph:  "Here have we ridden a fair land, and seen neither house nor herd, neither sheep-cote nor shepherd. I wonder thereat."

Said Roger:  "Thou wouldst wonder the less didst thou know the story of it." "What story?" said Ralph.  Quoth Roger:  "A story of war and wasting." "Yea?" said Ralph, "yet surely some bold knight or baron hath rights in the land, and might be free to build him a strong house and gather men to him to guard the shepherds and husbandmen from burners and lifters." "Sooth is that," said Roger; "but there are other things in the tale." "What things?" said Ralph.  Quoth Roger:  "Ill hap and sorrow and the Hand of Fate and great Sorcery."  "And dastards withal?" said Ralph.  "Even so," said Roger, "yet mingled with valiant men. Over long is the tale to tell as now, so low as the sun is; so now ride we on with little fear of foemen.  For look you, this wood, like the thickets about the Burg of the Four Friths, hath an evil name, and few folk ride it uncompelled; therefore it is the safer for us. And yet I will say this to thee, that whereas awhile agone thou mightest have departed from me with little peril of aught save the stumbling on some of the riders of the Burg of the Four Friths, departing from me now will be a hard matter to thee; for the saints in Heaven only know whitherward thou shouldest come, if thou wert to guide thyself now. This a rough word, but a true one, so help me God and Saint Michael! What sayest thou; art thou content, or wilt thou cast hard words at me again?"

So it was that for all that had come and gone Ralph was light-hearted and happy; so he laughed and said: "Content were I, even if I were not compelled thereto. For my heart tells me of new things, and marvellous and joyous that I shall see ere long."

"And thine heart lieth not," said Roger, "for amidst of this wood is the house where we shall have guesting to-night, which will be to thee, belike, the door of life and many marvels. For thence have folk sought ere now to the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

Ralph turned to him sharply and said:  "Many times in these few days have I heard that word.  Dost thou know the meaning thereof?  For as to me I know it not."  Said Roger:  "Thou mayest well be as wise as I am thereon: belike men seek to it for their much thriving, and oftenest find it not. Yet have I heard that they be the likeliest with whom all women are in love."

Ralph held his peace, but Roger noted that he reddened at the word.

Now they got on horseback again, for they had lighted down to breathe their beasts, and they rode on and on, and never was Roger at fault: long was the way and perforce they rested at whiles, so that night fell upon them in the wood, but the moon rose withal.  So night being fairly come, they rested a good while, as it would be dawn before moonset. Then they rode on again, till now the summer night grew old and waned, but the wood hid the beginnings of dawn.

At last they came out of the close wood suddenly into an open plain, and now, as the twilight of the dawn was passing into early day, they saw that wide grassy meadows and tilled fields lay before them, with a little river running through the plain; and amidst the meadows, on a green mound, was a white castle, strong, and well built, though not of the biggest.

Roger pointed to it, and said, "Now we are come home," and cried on his wearied beast, who for his part seemed to see the end of his journey. They splashed through a ford of the river and came to the gate of the castle as day drew on apace; Roger blew a blast on a great horn that hung on the gate, and Ralph looking round deemed he had never seen fairer building than in the castle, what he could see of it, and yet it was built from of old.  They waited no long while before they were answered; but whereas Ralph looked to see armed gatewards peer from the battlements or the shot window, and a porter espying them through a lattice, it happened in no such way, but without more ado the wicket was opened to them by a tall old woman, gaunt and grey, who greeted them courteously: Roger lighted down and Ralph did in likewise, and they led their horses through the gate into the court of the castle; the old woman going before them till they came to the hall door, which she opened to them, and taking the reins of their horses led them away to the stable, while those twain entered the hall, which was as goodly as might be. Roger led Ralph up to a board on the dais, whereon there was meat and drink enow, and Ralph made his way-leader sit down by him, and they fell to. There was no serving-man to wait on them nor a carle of any kind did they see; the old woman only, coming back from the horses, served them at table. Ever as she went about she looked long on Ralph, and seemed as if she would have spoken to him, but as often, she glanced at Roger and forbore.

So when they were well nigh done with their meat Ralph spake to the carline and said:  "Belike the lord or the lady of this house are abed and we shall not see them till the morrow?"

Ere the carline could speak Roger broke in and said: "There is neither lord nor lady in the castle as now, nor belike will there be to-morrow morning, or rather, before noon on this day; so now ye were better to let this dame lead thee to bed, and let the next hours take care of themselves."

"So be it," said Ralph, who was by this time heartily wearied, "shall we two lie in the same chamber?"

"Nay," said the carline shortly, "lodging for the master and lodging for the man are two different things."

Roger laughed and said nought, and Ralph gave him good night, and followed the carline nothing loth, who led him to a fair chamber over the solar, as if he had been the very master of the castle, and he lay down in a very goodly bed, nor troubled himself as to where Roger lay, nor indeed of aught else, nor did he dream of Burg, or wood, or castle, or man, or woman; but lay still like the image of his father's father on the painted tomb in the choir of St. Laurence of Upmeads.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_18]

CHAPTER 18

Of Ralph in the Castle of Abundance

Broad lay the sun upon the plain amidst the wildwood when he awoke and sprang out of bed and looked out of the window (for the chamber was in the gable of the hall and there was nought of the castle beyond it). It was but little after noon of a fair June day, for Ralph had slumbered as it behoved a young man. The light wind bore into the chamber the sweet scents of the early summer, the chief of all of them being the savour of the new-cut grass, for about the wide meadows the carles and queens were awork at the beginning of hay harvest; and late as it was in the day, more than one blackbird was singing from the bushes of the castle pleasance. Ralph sighed for very pleasure of life before he had yet well remembered where he was or what had befallen of late; but as he stood at the window and gazed over the meadows, and the memory of all came back to him, he sighed once more for a lack of somewhat that came into his heart, and he smiled shamefacedly, though there was no one near, as his thought bade him wonder if amongst the haymaking women yonder there were any as fair as those yellow-clad thrall-women of the Burg; and as he turned from the window a new hope made his heart beat, for he deemed that he had been brought to that house that he might meet some one who should change his life and make him a new man.

So he did on his raiment and went his ways down to the hall, and looked about for Roger, but found him not, nor any one else save the carline, who presently came in from the buttery, and of whom he asked, where was Roger.  Quoth she:  "He has been gone these six hours, but hath left a word for thee, lord, to wit, that he beseeches thee to abide him here for two days at the least, and thereafter thou art free to go if thou wilt.  But as for me" (and therewith she smiled on him as sweetly as her wrinkled old face might compass) "I say to thee, abide beyond those two days if Roger cometh not, and as long as thou art here I will make thee all the cheer I may. And who knoweth but thou mayest meet worthy adventures here. Such have ere now befallen good knights in this house or anigh it."

"I thank thee, mother," quoth Ralph, "and it is like that I may abide here beyond the two days if the adventure befall me not ere then. But at least I will bide the eating of my dinner here to-day."

"Well is thee, fair lord," said the carline.  "If thou wilt but walk in the meadow but a little half hour all shall be ready for thee. Forsooth it had been dight before now, but that I waited thy coming forth from thy chamber, for I would not wake thee.  And the saints be praised for the long sweet sleep that hath painted thy goodly cheeks." So saying she hurried off to the buttery, leaving Ralph laughing at her outspoken flattering words.

Then he got him out of the hall and the castle, for no door was shut, and there was no man to be seen within or about the house. So he walked to and fro the meadow and saw the neat-herds in the pasture, and the hay-making folk beyond them, and the sound of their voices came to him on the little airs that were breathing. He thought he would talk to some of these folk ere the world was much older, and also he noted between the river and the wood many cots of the husbandmen trimly builded and thatched, and amidst them a little church, white and delicate of fashion; but as now his face was set toward the river because of the hot day. He came to a pool a little below where a wooden foot-bridge crossed the water, and about the pool were willows growing, which had not been shrouded these eight years, and the water was clear as glass with a bottom of fine sand.  There then he bathed him, and as he sported in the water he bethought him of the long smooth reaches of Upmeads Water, and the swimming low down amidst the long swinging weeds between the chuckle of the reed sparrows, when the sun was new risen in the July morning. When he stood on the grass again, what with the bright weather and fair little land, what with the freshness of the water, and his good rest, and the hope of adventure to come, he felt as if he had never been merrier in his life-days. Withal it was a weight off his heart that he had escaped from the turmoil of the wars of the Burg of the Four Friths, and the men of the Dry Tree, and the Wheat-wearers, with the thralldom and stripes and fire-raising, and the hard life of strife and gain of the walled town and strong place.

When he came back to the castle gate there was the carline in the wicket peering out to right and left, seeking him to bring him in to dinner. And when she saw him so joyous, with his lips smiling and his eyes dancing for mirth, she also became joyous, and said:  "Verily, it is a pity of thee that there is never a fair damsel or so to look on thee and love thee here to-day. Far would many a maiden run to kiss thy mouth, fair lad. But now come to thy meat, that thou mayest grow the fairer and last the longer."

He laughed gaily and went into the hall with her, and now was it well dight with bankers and dorsars of goodly figured cloth, and on the walls a goodly halling of arras of the Story of Alexander. So he sat to table, and the meat and drink was of the best, and the carline served him, praising him ever with fulsome words as he ate, till he wished her away.

After dinner he rested awhile, and called to the carline and bade her bring him his sword and his basnet.  "Wherefore?" said she. "Whither wilt thou?"

Said he, "I would walk abroad to drink the air."

"Wilt thou into the wildwood?" said she.

"Nay, mother," he said, "I will but walk about the meadow and look on the hay-making folk."

"For that," said the carline, "thou needest neither sword nor helm. I was afeard that thou wert about departing, and thy departure would be a grief to my heart:  in the deep wood thou mightest be so bestead as to need a sword in thy fist; but what shouldst thou do with it in this Plain of Abundance, where are nought but peaceful husbandmen and frank and kind maidens? and all these are as if they had drunk a draught of the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

Ralph started as she said the word, but held his peace awhile. Then he said:  "And who is lord of this fair land?" "There is no lord, but a lady," said the carline. "How hight she?" said Ralph.  "We call her the Lady of Abundance," said the old woman.  Said Ralph:  "Is she a good lady?" "She is my lady," said the carline, "and doeth good to me, and there is not a carle in the land but speaketh well of her-- it may be over well."  "Is she fair to look on?" said Ralph. "Of women-folk there is none fairer," said the carline; "as to men, that is another thing."

Ralph was silent awhile, then he said:  "What is the Well at the World's End?"

"They talk of it here," said she, "many things too long to tell of now:  but there is a book in this house that telleth of it; I know it well by the look of it though I may not read in it. I will seek it for thee to-morrow if thou wilt."

"Have thou thanks, dame," said he; "and I pray thee forget it not; but now I will go forth."

"Yea," said the carline, "but abide a little."

Therewith she went into the buttery, and came back bearing with her a garland of roses of the garden, intermingled with green leaves, and she said:  "The sun is yet hot and over hot, do this on thine head to shade thee from the burning. I knew that thou wouldst go abroad to-day, so I made this for thee in the morning; and when I was young I was called the garland-maker. It is better summer wear than thy basnet."

He thanked her and did it on smiling, but somewhat ruefully; for he said to himself:  "This is over old a dame that I should wear a love-token from her."  But when it was on his head, the old dame clapped her hands and cried:  "O there, there!  Now art thou like the image of St. Michael in the Choir of Our Lady of the Thorn: there is none so lovely as thou.  I would my Lady could see thee thus; surely the sight of thee should gladden her heart. And withal thou art not ill clad otherwise."

Indeed his raiment was goodly, for his surcoat was new, and it was of fine green cloth, and the coat-armour of Upmead was beaten on it, to wit, on a gold ground an apple-tree fruited, standing by a river-side.

Now he laughed somewhat uneasily at her words, and so went forth from the castle again, and made straight for the hay-making folk on the other side of the water; for all this side was being fed by beasts and sheep; but at the point where he crossed, the winding of the stream brought it near to the castle gate. So he came up with the country folk and greeted them, and they did as much by him in courteous words: they were goodly and well-shapen, both men and women, gay and joyous of demeanour and well clad as for folk who work afield. So Ralph went from one to another and gave them a word or two, and was well pleased to watch them at their work awhile; but yet he would fain speak somewhat more with one or other of them. At last under the shade of a tall elm-tree he saw an old man sitting heeding the outer raiment of the haymakers and their victual and bottles of drink; and he came up to him and gave him the sele of the day; and the old man blessed him and said: "Art thou dwelling in my lady's castle, fair lord?" "A while at least," said Ralph.  Said the old man: "We thank thee for coming to see us; and meseemeth from the look of thee thou art worthy to dwell in my Lady's House."

"What sayest thou?" said Ralph.  "Is she a good lady and a gracious?" "O yea, yea," said the carle.  Said Ralph:  "Thou meanest, I suppose, that she is fair to look on, and soft-spoken when she is pleased?"

"I mean far more than that," said the carle; "surely is she most heavenly fair, and her voice is like the music of heaven: but withal her deeds, and the kindness of her to us poor men and husbandmen, are no worse than should flow forth from that loveliness."

"Will you be her servants?" said Ralph, "or what are ye?"  Said the carle: "We be yeomen and her vavassors; there is no thralldom in our land." "Do ye live in good peace for the more part?" said Ralph. Said the carle:  "Time has been when cruel battles were fought in these wood-lawns, and many poor people were destroyed therein: but that was before the coming of the Lady of Abundance."

"And when was that?" said Ralph.  "I wot not," said the old carle; "I was born in peace and suckled in peace; and in peace I fell to the loving of maidens, and I wedded in peace, and begat children in peace, and in peace they dwell about me, and in peace shall I depart."

"What then," said Ralph (and a grievous fear was born in his heart), "is not the Lady of Abundance young?"  Said the carle: "I have seen her when I was young and also since I have been old, and ever was she fair and lovely, and slender handed, as straight as a spear, and as sweet as white clover, and gentle-voiced and kind, and dear to our souls."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and she doth not dwell in this castle always; where else then doth she dwell?"  "I wot not," said the carle, "but it should be in heaven:  for when she cometh to us all our joys increase in us by the half."

"Look you, father," said Ralph, "May it not have been more than one Lady of Abundance that thou hast seen in thy life-days; and that this one that now is, is the daughter's daughter of the one whom thou first sawest-- how sayest thou?"  The carle laughed:  "Nay, nay," said he, "It is not so: never has there been another like to her in all ways, in body and voice, and heart and soul.  It is as I say, she is the same as she was always." "And when," said Ralph, with a beating heart, "does she come hither? Is it at some set season?"  "Nay, from time to time, at all seasons," said the carle; "and as fair she is when she goeth over the snow, as when her feet are set amidst the June daisies."

Now was Ralph so full of wonder that he scarce knew what to say; but he bethought him of that fair waste on the other side of the forest, the country through which that wide river flowed, so he said: "And that land north-away beyond the wildwood, canst thou tell me the tale of its wars, and if it were wasted in the same wars that tormented this land?"  The carle shook his head: "As to the land beyond this wood," quoth he, "I know nought of it, for beyond the wood go we never:  nay, most often we go but a little way into it, no further than we can see the glimmer of the open daylight through its trees,--the daylight of the land of Abundance-- that is enough for us."

"Well," said Ralph, "I thank thee for the tale thou hast told me, and wish thee more years of peace."

"And to thee, young man," said the carle, "I wish a good wish indeed, to wit that thou mayest see the Lady of Abundance here before thou departest."

His words once more made Ralph's heart beat and his cheek flush, and he went back to the castle somewhat speedily; for he said to himself, after the folly of lovers, "Maybe she will be come even now, and I not there to meet her."  Yet when he came to the castle-gate his heart misgave him, and he would not enter at once, but turned about to go round the wall by the north and west. In the castle he saw no soul save the old dame looking out of the window and nodding to him, but in the pasture all about were neatherds and shepherds, both men and women; and at the north-west corner, whereas the river drew quite close to the wall, he came upon two damsels of the field-folk fishing with an angle in a quiet pool of the stream.  He greeted them, and they, who were young and goodly, returned his greeting, but were shamefaced at his gallant presence, as indeed was he at the thoughts of his heart mingled with the sight of their fairness. So he passed on at first without more words than his greeting. Yet presently he turned back again, for he longed to hear some word more concerning the Lady whose coming he abode. They stood smiling and blushing as he came up to them again, and heeded their angles little.

Said Ralph:  "Fair maidens, do ye know at all when the Lady of the castle may be looked for?"  They were slow to answer, but at last one said: "No, fair sir, such as we know nothing of the comings and goings of great folk."

Said Ralph, smiling on her for kindness, and pleasure of her fairness: "Is it not so that ye will be glad of her coming?"

But she answered never a word, only looked at him steadily, with her great grey eyes fixed in wonderment, while the other one looked down as if intent on her angling tools.

Ralph knew not how to ask another question, so he turned about with a greeting word again, and this time went on steadily round about the wall.

And now in his heart waxed the desire of that Lady, once seen, as he deemed, in such strange wise; but he wondered within himself if the devil had not sown that longing within him: whereas it might be that this woman on whom he had set his heart was herself no real woman but a devil, and one of the goddesses of the ancient world, and his heart was sore and troubled by many doubts and hopes and fears; but he said to himself that when he saw her then could he judge between the good and the evil, and could do or forbear, and that the sight of her would cure all.

Thus thinking he walked swiftly, and was soon round at the castle gate again, and entered, and went into the hall, where was the old dame, busied about some household matter. Ralph nodded to her and hastened away, lest she should fall to talk with him; and he set himself now to go from chamber to chamber, that he might learn the castle, what it was. He came into the guard-chamber and found the walls thereof all hung with armour and weapons, clean and in good order, though there was never a man-at-arms there, nor any soul except the old woman. He went up a stair therefrom on to the battlements, and went into the towers of the wall, and found weapons both for hand, and for cast and shot in each one of them, and all ready as if for present battle; then he came down into the court again and went into a very goodly ambulatory over against the hall, and he entered a door therefrom, which was but on the latch, and went up a little stair into a chamber, which was the goodliest and the richest of all. Its roof was all done with gold and blue from over sea, and its pavement wrought delicately in Alexandrine work. On the dais was a throne of carven ivory, and above it a canopy of baudekin of the goodliest fashion, and there was a foot-carpet before it, wrought with beasts and the hunting of the deer. As for the walls of that chamber, they were hung with a marvellous halling of arras, wherein was wrought the greenwood, and there amidst in one place a pot-herb garden, and a green garth with goats therein, and in that garth a little thatched house. And amidst all this greenery were figured over and over again two women, whereof one old and the other young; and the old one was clad in grand attire, with gold chains and brooches and rings, and sat with her hands before her by the house door, or stood looking on as the young one worked, spinning or digging in the garth, or milking the goats outside of it, or what not; and this one was clad in sorry and scanty raiment.

What all this might mean Ralph knew not; but when he had looked long at the greenery and its images, he said to himself that if he who wrought that cloth had not done the young woman after the likeness of the Lady whom he had helped in the wildwood, then it must have been done from her twin sister.

Long he abode in that chamber looking at the arras, and wondering whether the sitter in the ivory throne would be any other than the thrall in the greenwood cot. He abode there so long that the dusk began to gather in the house, and he could see the images no more; for he was filled with the sweetness of desire when he looked on them.

Then he went back slowly to the hall, and found the carline, who had lighted the waxlights and made meat ready for him; and when she saw him she cried out joyously:  "Ah, I knew that thou wouldst come back. Art thou well content with our little land?"

"I like it well, dame," said he; "but tell me, if thou canst, what is the meaning of the halling in the chamber with the ivory throne?"

Said the carline:  "Thereof shall another tell thee, who can tell of it better than I; but it is nought to hide that yonder chamber is the chamber of estate of our Lady, and she sitteth there to hear the cases of folk and to give dooms."

The old woman crossed herself as she spoke, and Ralph wondered thereat, but asked no more questions, for he was scarce sorry that the carline would not tell him thereof, lest she should spoil the tale.

So passed the evening, and he went to bed and slept as a young man should, and the next day he was up betimes and went abroad and mingled with the carles and queens afield; but this time he spake not of the Lady, and heard nought to heed from any of that folk. So he went back to the castle and gat him a bow and arrows, and entered the thicket of the wood nigh where he and Roger first came out of it. He had prayed a young man of the folk to go with him, but he was not over willing to go, though he would not say wherefore.  So Ralph went himself by himself and wandered some way into the wood, and saw nought worse than himself.  As he came back, making a circuit toward the open meadows, he happened on a herd of deer in a lonely place, half wood half meadow, and there he slew a hart with one shaft, for he was a deft bowman. Then he went and fetched a leash of carles, who went with him somewhat less than half willingly, and between them they broke up the hart and carried him home to the castle, where the carline met them. She smiled on Ralph and praised the venison, and said withal that the hunting was well done; "For, as fond and as fair as thou mayst be, it is not good that young men should have their minds set on one thing only." Therewith she led him in to his meat, and set him down and served him; and all the while of his dinner he was longing to ask her if she deemed that the Lady would come that day, since it was the last day of those which Roger had bidden him wait; but the words would not out of his mouth.

She looked at him and smiled, as though she had a guess of his thought, and at last she said to him:  "Thy tongue is tied to-day. Hast thou, after all, seen something strange in the wood?"  He shook his head for naysay. Said she:  "Why, then, dost thou not ask more concerning the Well at the World's End?"

He laughed, and said:  "Maybe because I think that thou canst not tell me thereof."  "Well," she said, "if I cannot, yet the book may, and this evening, when the sun is down, thou shalt have it."

"I thank thee, mother," said he; "but this is now the last day that Roger bade me wait.  Dost thou think that he will come back to-night?" and he reddened therewith.  "Nay," she said, "I know not, and thou carest not whether he will come or not. Yet I know that thou wilt abide here till some one else come, whether that be early or late."  Again he reddened, and said, in a coaxing way:  "And wilt thou give me guesting, mother, for a few more summer days?"

"Yea," she said, "and till summer is over, if need be, and the corn is cut and carried, and till the winter is come and the latter end of winter is gone."  He smiled faintly, though his heart fell, and he said: "Nay, mother, and can it by any chance be so long a-coming?"

"O, fair boy," she said, "thou wilt make it long, howsoever short it be.  And now I will give thee a rede, lest thou vex thyself sick and fret thy very heart. To-morrow go see if thou canst meet thy fate instead of abiding it. Do on thy war-gear and take thy sword and try the adventure of the wildwood; but go not over deep into it."  Said he: "But how if the Lady come while I am away from this house?"

"Sooth to say," said the carline, "I deem not that she will, for the way is long betwixt us and her."

"Dost thou mean," said Ralph, standing up from the board, "that she will not come ever?  I adjure thee not to beguile me with soft words, but tell me the very sooth." "There, there!" said she, "sit down, king's son; eat thy meat and drink thy wine; for to-morrow is a new day. She will come soon or late, if she be yet in the world. And now I will say no more to thee concerning this matter."

Therewith she went her ways from the hall, and when she came back with hand-basin and towel, she said no word to him, but only smiled kindly. He went out presently into the meadow (for it was yet but early afternoon) and came among the haymaking folk and spake with them, hoping that perchance some of them might speak again of the Lady of Abundance; but none of them did so, though the old carle he had spoken with was there, and there also were the two maidens whom he had seen fishing; and as for him, he was over faint-hearted to ask them any more questions concerning her.

Yet he abode with them long, and ate and drank amidst the hay with them till the moon shone brightly.  Then he went back to the castle and found the carline in the hall, and she had the book with her and gave it to him, and he sat down in the shot-window under the waxlights and fell to reading of it.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_19]

CHAPTER 19

Ralph Readeth in a Book Concerning the Well at the World's End

Fairly written was that book, with many pictures therein, the meaning of which Ralph knew not; but amongst them was the image of the fair woman whom he had holpen at the want-ways of the wood, and but four days ago was that, yet it seemed long and long to him. The book told not much about the Well at the World's End, but much it told of a certain woman whom no man that saw her could forbear to love:  of her it told that erewhile she dwelt lonely in the wildwood (though how she came there was not said) and how a king's son found her there and brought her to his father's kingdom and wedded her, whether others were lief or loth: and in a little while, when the fame of her had spread, he was put out of his kingdom and his father's house for the love of her, because other kings and lords hankered after her; whereof befel long and grievous war which she abode not to the end, but sought to her old place in the wildwood; and how she found there another woman a sorceress, who made her her thrall; and tormented her grievously with toil and stripes. And how again there came a knight to that place who was seeking the Well at the World's End, and bore her away with him; and how the said knight was slain on the way, and she was taken by tyrants and robbers of the folk: but these being entangled in her love fought amongst themselves and she escaped, and went seeking that Well, and found it at the long last, and drank thereof, and throve ever after: and how she liveth yet, and is become the servant of the Well to entangle the seekers in her love and keep them from drinking thereof; because there was no man that beheld her, but anon he was the thrall of her love, and might not pluck his heart away from her to do any of the deeds whereby men thrive and win the praise of the people.

Ralph read on and on till the short night waned, and the wax-lights failed one after the other, and the windows of the hall grew grey and daylight came, and the throstles burst out a-singing at once in the castle pleasaunce, and the sun came up over the wood, and the sound of men-folk bestirring themselves a-field came to his ears through the open windows; and at last he was done with the tale, and the carline came not near him though the sun had clomb high up the heavens. As for Ralph, what he had read was sweet poison to him; for if before he was somewhat tormented by love, now was his heart sick and sore with it. Though he knew not for certain whether this tale had to do with the Lady of the Forest, and though he knew not if the Lady who should come to the castle were even she, yet he needs must deem that so it was, and his heart was weary with love, and his manhood seemed changed.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_20]

CHAPTER 20

Ralph Meeteth a Man in the Wood

But the morning began to wear as he sat deep in these thoughts and still the Carline came not to him; and he thought: "She leaveth me alone that I may do her bidding: so will I without tarrying."  And he arose and did on his hauberk and basnet, and girt his sword to his side, and went forth, a-foot as before.  He crossed the river by a wide ford and stepping stones somewhat below the pool wherein he had bathed on that first day; and already by then he had got so far, what with the fresh air of the beauteous morning, what with the cheerful tinkling of his sword and hauberk, he was somewhat amended of his trouble and heaviness of spirit. A little way across the river, but nigher to the wood, was a house or cot of that country-folk, and an old woman sat spinning in the door.  So Ralph went up thither, and greeted her, and craved of her a draught of milk; so the goody turned about and cried out to one within, and there came forth one of the maidens whom Ralph had met fishing that other day, and the old woman bade her bring forth milk and bread. Then the carline looked hard at Ralph, and said:  "Ah!  I have heard tell of thee:  thou art abiding the turn of the days up at the castle yonder, as others have done before thee. Well, well, belike thou shalt have thy wish, though whether it shall be to thy profit, who shall say?"

Thereat Ralph's heart fell again, and he said:  "Sayest thou, mother, that there have been others abiding like me in the tower? I know not what thy words mean."

The carline laughed.  "Well," said she, "here comes thy morning's bait borne by shapely hands enough; eat and drink first; and then will I tell thee my meaning."

Therewith came the maiden forth with the bowl and the loaf; and indeed she was fair enough, and shy and kind; but Ralph heeded her little, nor was his heart moved by her at all. She set a stool for him beside the door and he sat down and ate and drank, though his heart was troubled; and the maiden hung about, and seemed to find it no easy matter to keep her eyes off him.

Presently the carline, who had been watching the two, said: "Thou askest of the meaning of my words; well, deemest thou that I have had more men than one to love me?"  "I know not, mother," said Ralph, who could scarce hold himself patient.  "There now!" quoth the carline, "look at my damsel! (she is not my daughter, but my brother's,) there is a man, and a brisk lad too, whom she calleth her batchelor, and is as I verily deem well-pleased with him: yet lo you how she eyeth thee, thou fair man, and doth so with her raiment that thou mayst best see how shapely she is of limb and foot, and toyeth her right hand with her left wrist, and the like.--Well, as for me, I have had more lovers than one or two.  And why have I had just so many and no more? Nay, thou needest not make any long answer to me. I am old now, and even before I was old I was not young: I am now foul of favour, and even before I became foul, I was not so fair--well then?"

"Yea, what then?" said Ralph.  "This then, fair young fool," said she: "the one whom thou lovest, long hath she lived, but she is not old to look on, nor foul; but fair--O how fair!"

Then Ralph forgot his fear, and his heart grew greedy and his eyes glistened, and he said, yet he spoke faintly: "Yea, is she fair?"  "What! hast thou not seen her?" said the carline. Ralph called to mind the guise in which he had seen her and flushed bright red, as he answered:  "Yea, I deem that I have: surely it was she."  The carline laughed:  "Well," said she; "however thou hast seen her, thou hast scarce seen her as I have." Said Ralph, "How was that?"  Said she:  "It is her way here in the summer-tide to bathe her in yonder pool up the water:" (and it was the same pool wherein Ralph had bathed) "And she hath me and my niece and two other women to hold up the silken cloth betwixt her body and the world; so that I have seen her as God made her; and I shall tell thee that when he was about that work he was minded to be a craftsmaster; for there is no blemish about her that she should hide her at all or anywhere. Her sides are sleek, and her thighs no rougher than her face, and her feet as dainty as her hands:  yea, she is a pearl all over, withal she is as strong as a knight, and I warrant her hardier of heart than most knights.  A happy man shalt thou be; for surely I deem thou hast not come hither to abide her without some token or warrant of her."

Ralph held down his head, and he could not meet the old woman's eyes as she spake thus; and the maiden took herself out of earshot at the first words of the carline hereof, and was halfway down to the river by now.

Ralph spake after a while and said:  "Tell me, is she good, and a good woman?"  The dame laughed scornfully and said: "Surely, surely; she is the saint of the Forest Land, and the guardian of all poor folk.  Ask the carles else!"

Ralph held his peace, and rose to be gone and turning saw the damsel wading the shallow ford, and looking over her shoulder at him. He gave the dame good day, and departed light-foot but heavy hearted. Yet as he went, he kept saying to himself:  "Did she not send that Roger to turn my ways hither? yet she cometh not.  Surely she hath changed in these last days, or it may be in these last hours: yea, or this very hour."

Amidst such thoughts he came into the wood, and made his way by the paths and open places, going south and east of the House: whereas the last day he had gone west and north.  He went a soft pace, but wandered on without any stay till it was noon, and he had seen nought but the wild things of the wood, nor many of them. But at last he heard the tinkle of a little bell coming towards him: so he stood still and got the hilt of his sword ready to his hand; and the tinkle drew nearer, and he heard withal the trample of some riding-beast; so he went toward the sound, and presently in a clearer place of the wood came upon a man of religion, a clerk, riding on a hackney, to whose neck hung a horse-bell: the priest had saddle bags beside him and carried in his right hand a book in a bag.  When he met Ralph he blessed him, and Ralph gave him the sele of the day, and asked him whither he would. Said the Priest:  "I am for the Little Plain and the Land of Abundance; whence art thou, my son, and whither wilt thou?" "From that very land I come," said Ralph, "and as to whither, I seek adventures; but unless I see more than I have this forenoon, or thou canst tell me of them, back will I whence I came: yet to say sooth, I shall not be sorry for a fellow to help me back, for these woodland ways are some-what blind."

Said the Priest:  "I will bear thee company with a good will; and I know the road right well; for I am the Vicar appointed by the fathers of the Thorn to serve the church of the Little Plain, and the chapel of St. Anthony yonder in the wood, and to-day I go to the church of the good folk there."

So Ralph turned, and went along with him, walking by his bridle-rein. And as they went the priest said to him:  "Art thou one of my lady's lords?" Ralph reddened as he sighed, and said:  "I am no captain of hers." Then smiled the priest and said:  "Then will I not ask thee of thine errand; for belike thou wouldest not tell me thereof."

Ralph said nought, but waxed shamefaced as he deemed that the priest eyed him curiously.  At last he said:  "I will ask thee a question in turn, father."  "Yea," said the priest. Said Ralph:  "This lady of the land, the Lady of Abundance, is she a very woman?"  "Holy Saints!" quoth the priest, blessing himself, "what meanest thou?"  Said Ralph: "I mean, is she of those who outwardly have a woman's semblance, but within are of the race of the ancient devils, the gods of the Gentiles?"

Then the priest crossed himself again, and spake as solemnly as a judge on the bench:  "Son, I pray that if thou art not in thy right mind, thou will come thereinto anon.  Know this, that whatever else she may be, she is a right holy woman. Or hast thou perchance heard any evil tales concerning her?"

Now Ralph was confused at his word, and knew not what to say; for though in his mind he had been piecing together all that he had heard of the lady both for good and for evil, he had no clear tale to tell even to himself: so he answered nothing.

But the priest went on:  "Son, I shall tell thee that such tales I have heard, but from whose mouth forsooth?  I will tell thee; from a sort of idle jades, young women who would be thought fairer than they be, who are afraid of everything save a naked man, and who can lie easier than they can say their paternoster: from such as these come the stories; or from old crones who live in sour anger with themselves and all else, because they have lived no goodly life in their youth, and have not learned the loveliness of holy church.  Now, son, shall the tales of such women, old and young, weigh in thy mind beside the word I tell thee of what I have seen and know concerning this most excellent of ladies? I trow not.  And for my part I tell thee, that though she is verily as fair as Venus (God save us) yet is she as chaste as Agnes, as wise as Katherine, and as humble and meek as Dorothy. She bestoweth her goods plentifully to the church, and is merciful to poor men therewith; and so far as occasion may serve her she is constant at the Holy Office; neither doth she spare to confess her sins, and to do all penance which is bidden her, yea and more. For though I cannot say to my knowledge that she weareth a hair; yet once and again have I seen her wending this woodland toward the chapel of her friend St. Anthony by night and cloud, so that few might see her, obedient to the Scripture which sayeth, 'Let not thy right hand know what thy left hand doeth,' and she barefoot in her smock amidst the rugged wood, and so arrayed fairer than any queen in a golden gown.  Yea, as fair as the woodwives of the ancient heathen."

 Therewith the priest stayed his words, and seemed as if he were fallen into a dream; and he sighed heavily. But Ralph walked on by his bridle-rein dreamy no less; for the words that he had heard he heeded not, save as they made pictures for him of the ways of that woman of the forest.

So they went on soberly till the priest lifted up his head and looked about like one come out of slumber, and said in a firm voice: "I tell thee, my son, that thou mayest set thy love upon her without sin."  And therewith suddenly he fell a-weeping; and Ralph was ill at ease of his weeping, and went along by him saying nought; till the priest plucked up heart again, and said, turning to Ralph, but not meeting his eye: "My son, I weep because men and women are so evil, and mis-say each other so sorely, even as they do by this holy woman." As he spake his tears brake out again, and Ralph strode on fast, so as to outgo him, thinking it unmannerly to seem as if he noted not his sorrow; yet withal unable to say aught to him thereof. Moreover it irked him to hear a grown man weeping for grief, even though it were but a priest.

Within a while the priest caught up with him, his tears all staunched, and fell to talk with him cheerfully concerning the wood, and the Little Land and the dwellers therein and the conditions of them, and he praised them much, save the women. Ralph answered him with good cheer in likewise; and thus they came to the cot of the old woman, and both she and the maiden were without the house, the old carline hithering and thithering on some errand, the maiden leaning against a tree as if pondering some matter. As they passed by, the priest blessed them in words, but his eyes scowled on them, whereat the carline grinned, but the damsel heeded him not, but looked wistfully on Ralph. The priest muttered somewhat as he passed, which Ralph caught not the meaning of, and fell moody again; and when he was a little past the ford he drew rein and said: "Now, son, I must to my cell hard by the church yonder: but yet I will say one word to thee ere we sunder; to wit, that to my mind the Holy Lady will love no one but the saints of heaven, save it be some man with whom all women are in love."  Therewith he turned away suddenly, and rode smartly towards his church; and Ralph deemed that he was weeping once more. As for Ralph, he went quietly home toward the castle, for the sun was setting now, and as he went he pondered all these things in his heart.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_21]

CHAPTER 21

Ralph Weareth Away Three Days Uneasily

He read again in the book that night, till he had gotten the whole tale into his head, and he specially noted this of it, that it told not whence that Lady came, nor what she was, nor aught else save that there she was in the wood by herself, and was found therein by the king's son: neither told the tale in what year of the world she was found there, though it told concerning all the war and miseries which she had bred, and which long endured.  Again, he could not gather from that book why she had gone back to the lone place in the woods, whereas she might have wedded one of those warring barons who sorely desired her: nor why she had yielded herself to the witch of that place and endured with patience her thralldom, with stripes and torments of her body, like the worst of the thralls of the ancient heathen men. Lastly, he might not learn from the book where in the world was that lone place, or aught of the road to the Well at the World's End. But amidst all his thinking his heart came back to this: "When I meet her, she will tell me of it all; I need be no wiser than to learn how to meet her and to make her love me; then shall she show me the way to the Well at the World's End, and I shall drink thereof and never grow old, even as she endureth in youth, and she shall love me for ever, and I her for ever."

So he thought; but yet amidst these happy thoughts came in this evil one, that whereas all the men-folk spoke well of her and worshipped her, the women-folk feared her or hated her; even to the lecherous old woman who had praised the beauty of her body for his torment. So he thought till his head grew heavy, and he went and lay down in his bed and slept, and dreamed of the days of Upmead; and things forgotten in his waking time came between him and any memories of his present longing and the days thereof.

He awoke and arose betimes in the morning, and when he had breakfasted he bade the carline bring him his weapons.  "Wilt thou again to the wood?" said she. "Didst thou not bid me fare thither yesterday?" said he.  "Yea," she said; "but to-day I fear lest thou depart and come not back."  He laughed and said: "Seest thou not, mother, that I go afoot, and I in hauberk and helm? I cannot run far or fast from thee.  Also" (and here he broke off his speech a little) "where should I be but here?"

"Ah," she said, "but who knows what may happen?"  Nevertheless she went and fetched his war-gear and looked at him fondly as he did it on, and went his ways from the hall.

Now he entered the wood more to the south than he had done yesterday, and went softly as before, and still was he turning over in his mind the thoughts of last night, and ever they came back.  "Might I but see her! Would she but love me!  O for a draught of the Well at the World's End, that the love might last long and long!"

So he went on a while betwixt the trees and the thickets, till it was a little past noon.  But all on a sudden a panic fear took him, lest she should indeed come to the castle while he was away, and not finding him, depart again, who knows whither; and when this thought came upon him, he cried aloud, and hastened at his swiftest back again to the castle, and came there breathless and wearied, and ran to the old woman, and cried out to her; "Is she come? is she come?"

The carline laughed and said, "Nay, she is not, but thou art come: praise be to the saints!  But what aileth thee?  Nay, fear not, she shall come at last."

Then grew Ralph shamefaced and turned away from her, and miscalled himself for a fool and a dastard that could not abide the pleasure of his lady at the very place whereto she had let lead him. So he wore through the remnant of the day howso he might, without going out-adoors again; and the carline came and spake with him; but whatever he asked her about the lady, she would not tell aught of any import, so he refrained him from that talk, and made a show of hearkening when she spake of other matters; as tales concerning the folk of the land, and the Fathers of the Thorn, and so forth.

On the next morning he arose and said to himself, that whatever betid, he would bide in the castle and the Plain of Abundance till the lady came; and he went amongst the haymaking folk in the morning and ate his dinner with them, and strove to be of good cheer, and belike the carles and queens thought him merry company; but he was now wearying his heart with longing, and might not abide any great while in one place; so when, dinner over, they turned to their work again, he went back to the Castle, and read in that book, and looked at the pictures thereof, and kept turning his wonder and hope and fear over and over again in his mind, and making to himself stories of how he should meet the Lady and what she would say to him, and how he should answer her, till at last the night came, and he went to his bed, and slept for the very weariness of his longing.

When the new day came he arose and went into the hall, and found the carline there, who said to him, "Fair sir, will thou to the wood again to-day?" "Nay," said Ralph, "I must not, I dare not." "Well," she said, "thou mayest if thou wilt; why shouldst thou not go?" Said Ralph, reddening and stammering:  "Because I fear to; thrice have I been away long from the castle and all has gone well; but the fourth time she will come and find me gone."

The carline laughed:  "Well," she said, "I shall be here if thou goest; for I promise thee not to stir out of the house whiles thou art away." Said Ralph:  "Nay, I will abide here."  "Yea," she said, "I see: thou trustest me not.  Well, no matter; and to-day it will be handy if thou abidest.  For I have an errand to my brother in the flesh, who is one of the brethren of the Thorn over yonder.  If thou wilt give me leave, it will be to my pleasure and gain."

Ralph was glad when he heard this, deeming that if she left him alone there, he would be the less tempted to stray into the wood again. Besides, he deemed that the Lady might come that day when he was alone in the Castle, and that himseemed would make the meeting sweeter yet. So he yea-said the carline's asking joyously, and in an hour's time she went her ways and left him alone there.

Ralph said to himself, when he saw her depart, that he would have the more joy in the castle of his Lady if he were alone, and would wear away the day in better patience therefor. But in sooth the hours of that day were worse to wear than any day there had yet been.  He went not without the house at all that day, for he deemed that the folk abroad would note of him that he was so changed and restless.

Whiles he read in that book, or turned the leaves over, not reading it; whiles he went into the Chamber of Estate, and pored over the woven pictures there wherein the Lady was figured. Whiles he wandered from chamber to chamber, not knowing what to do.

At last, a little after dark, back comes the carline again, and he met her at the door of the hall, for he was weary of his own company, and the ceaseless turning over and over of the same thoughts.

As for her, she was so joyous of him that she fairly threw her arms about him and kissed and clipped him, as though she had been his very mother. Whereof he had some shame, but not much, for he deemed that her goodwill to him was abundant, which indeed it was.

Now she looks on him and says:  "Truly it does my heart good to see thee: but thou poor boy, thou art wearing thyself with thy longing, and thy doubting, and if thou wilt do after my rede, thou wilt certainly go into the wood to-morrow and see what may befall; and indeed and in sooth thou wilt leave behind thee a trusty friend."

He looked on her kindly, and smiled, and said, "In sooth, mother, I deem thou art but right; though it be hard for me to leave this house, to which in a way my Lady hath bidden me. Yet I will do thy bidding herein."  She thanked him, and he went to his bed and slept; for now that he had made up his mind to go, he was somewhat more at rest.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_22]

CHAPTER 22

An Adventure in the Wood

Ralph arrayed himself for departure next morning without more words; and when he was ready the carline said to him:  "When thou wentest forth before, I was troubled at thy going and feared for thy returning: but now I fear not; for I know that thou wilt return; though it may be leading a fair woman by the hand.  So go, and all luck go with thee." Ralph smiled at her words and went his ways, and came into the wood that lay due south from the Castle, and he went on and on and had no thought of turning back.  He rested twice and still went on, till the fashion of the thickets and the woods changed about him; and at last when the sun was getting low, he saw light gleaming through a great wood of pines, which had long been dark before him against the tall boles, and soon he came to the very edge of the wood, and going heedfully, saw between the great stems of the outermost trees, a green strand, and beyond it a long smooth water, a little lake between green banks on either side.  He came out of the pinewood on to the grass; but there were thornbushes a few about, so that moving warily from one to the other, he might perchance see without being seen. Warily he went forsooth, going along the green strand to the east and the head of that water, and saw how the bank sloped up gently from its ending toward the pine-wood, in front of whose close-set trees stood three great-boled tall oak-trees on a smooth piece of green sward. And now he saw that there were folk come before him on this green place, and keen-sighted as he was, could make out that three men were on the hither side of the oak-trees, and on the further side of them was a white horse.  Thitherward then he made, stealing from bush to bush, since he deemed that he needed not be seen of men who might be foes, for at the first sight he had noted the gleam of weapons there. And now he had gone no long way before he saw the westering sun shine brightly from a naked sword, and then another sprang up to meet it, and he heard faintly the clash of steel, and saw withal that the third of the folk had long and light raiment and was a woman belike. Then he bettered his pace, and in a minute or two came so near that he could see the men clearly, that they were clad in knightly war-gear, and were laying on great strokes so that the still place rang with the clatter. As for the woman, he could see but little of her, because of the fighting men before her; and the shadow of the oak boughs fell on her withal.

Now as he went, hidden by the bushes, they hid the men also from him, and when he was come to the last bush, some fifty paces from them, and peered out from it, in that very nick of time the two knights were breathing them somewhat, and Ralph saw that one of them, the furthest from him, was a very big man with a blue surcoat whereon was beaten a great golden sun, and the other, whose back was towards Ralph, was clad in black over his armour. Even as he looked and doubted whether to show himself or not, he of the sun raised his sword aloft, and giving forth a great roar as of wrath and grief mingled together, rushed on his foe and smote so fiercely that he fell to the earth before him, and the big man fell upon him as he fell, and let knee and sword-pommel and fist follow the stroke, and there they wallowed on the earth together.

Straightway Ralph came forth from the bushes with his drawn sword in his hand, and even therewith what with the two knights being both low upon the earth, what with the woman herself coming from out the shadow of the oak boughs, and turning her toward Ralph, he saw her clearly, and stood staring and amazed--for lo! it was the Lady whom he had delivered at the want-ways. His heart well nigh stood still with joy, yet was he shamefaced also: for though now she was no longer clad in that scanty raiment, yet did he seem to see her body through that which covered it. But now her attire was but simple; a green gown, thin and short, and thereover a cote-hardy of black cloth with orphreys of gold and colours:  but on her neck was a collar that seemed to him like to that which Dame Katherine had given him; and the long tresses of her hair, which he had erst seen floating loose about her, were wound as a garland around her head. She looked with a flushed and joyous face on Ralph, and seemed as if she heeded nought the battle of the knights, but saw him only: but he feared her, and his love for her and stood still, and durst not move forward to go to her.

Thus they abode for about the space of one minute:  and meanwhile the big man rose up on one knee and steadied him with his sword for a moment of time, and the blade was bloody from the point half way up to the hilt; but the black knight lay still and made no sign of life. Then the Knight of the Sun rose up slowly and stood on his feet and faced the Lady and seemed not to see Ralph, for his back was towards him. He came slowly toward the Lady, scowling, and his face white as chalk; then he spake to her coldly and sternly, stretching out his bloody sword before her.

"I have done thy bidding, and slain my very earthly friend of friends for thy sake.  Wherewith wilt thou reward me?"

Then once more Ralph heard the voice, which he remembered so sweet amidst peril and battle aforetime, as she said as coldly as the Knight:  "I bade thee not:  thine own heart bade thee to strive with him because thou deemedst that he loved me. Be content! thou hast slain him who stood in thy way, as thou deemedst.  Thinkest thou that I rejoice at his slaying? O no!  I grieve at it, for all that I had such good cause to hate him."

He said:  "My own heart! my own heart!  Half of my heart biddeth me slay thee, who hast made me slay him.  What wilt thou give me?" She knit her brow and spake angrily:  "Leave to depart," she said. Then after a while, and in a kinder voice:  "And thus much of my love, that I pray thee not to sorrow for me, but to have a good heart, and live as a true knight should."  He frowned: "Wilt thou not go with me?" said he.  "Not uncompelled," she said: "if thou biddest me go with threats of hewing and mangling the body which thou sayest thou lovest, needs must I go then. Yet scarce wilt thou do this."

"I have a mind to try it," said he; "If I set thee on thine horse and bound thine hands for thee, and linked thy feet together under the beast's belly; belike thou wouldest come. Shall I have slain my brother-in-arms for nought?"

"Thou hast the mind," said she, "hast thou the might?" "So I deem," said he, smiling grimly.

She looked at him proudly and said:  "Yea, but I misdoubt me thereof." He still had his back to Ralph and was staring at the lady; she turned her head a little and made a sign to Ralph, just as the Knight of the Sun said: "Thou misdoubtest thee?  Who shall help thee in the desert?"

"Look over thy left shoulder," she said.  He turned, and saw Ralph drawing near, sword in hand, smiling, but somewhat pale. He drew aback from the Lady and, spinning round on his heel, faced Ralph, and cried out:  "Hah!  Hast thou raised up a devil against me, thou sorceress, to take from me my grief and my lust, and my life? Fair will the game be to fight with thy devil as I have fought with my friend!  Yet now I know not whether I shall slay him or thee."

She spake not, but stood quietly looking on him, not unkindly, while a wind came up from the water and played with a few light locks of hair that hung down from that ruddy crown, and blew her raiment from her feet and wrapped it close round her limbs; and Ralph beheld her, and close as was the very death to him (for huge and most warrior-like was his foeman) yet longing for her melted the heart within him, and he felt the sweetness of life in his inmost soul as he had never felt it before.

Suddenly the Knight of the Sun turned about to the Lady again, and fell down on his knees before her, and clasped his hands as one praying, and said:  "Now pardon me all my words, I pray thee; and let this young man depart unhurt, whether thou madest him, or hast but led him away from country and friends and all. Then do thou come with me, and make some semblance of loving me, and suffer me to love thee.  And then shall all be well, for in a few days we will go back to thy people, and there will I be their lord or thy servant, or my brother's man, or what thou wilt. O wilt thou not let the summer days be sweet?"

But she spake, holding up her head proudly and speaking in a clear ringing voice:  "I have said it, that uncompelled I will not go with thee at all."  And therewithal she turned her face toward Ralph, as she might do on any chance-met courteous man, and he saw her smiling, but she said nought to him, and gave no token of knowing him.  Then the Knight of the Sun sprang to his feet, and shook his sword above his head and ran furiously on Ralph, who leapt nimbly on one side (else had he been slain at once) and fetched a blow at the Sun-Knight, and smote him, and brake the mails on his left shoulder, so that the blood sprang, and fell on fiercely enough, smiting to right and left as the other gave back at his first onset. But all was for nought, for the Knight of the Sun, after his giving aback under that first stroke drew himself up stark and stiff, and pressing on through all Ralph's strokes, though they rent his mail here and there, ran within his sword, and smote him furiously with the sword-pommel on the side of the head, so that the young man of Upmeads could not stand up under the weight of the blow, but fell to the earth swooning, and the Knight of the Sun knelt on him, and drew out an anlace, short, thick and sharp, and cried out:  "Now, Devil, let see whether thou wilt bleed black." Therewith he raised up his hand:  but the weapon was stayed or ever it fell, for the Lady had glided up to them when she saw that Ralph was overcome, and now she stretched out her arm and caught hold of the Knight's hand and the anlace withal, and he groaned and cried out:  "What now! thou art strong-armed as well as white-armed; (for she had rent the sleeve back from her right arm) and he laughed in the extremity of his wrath. But she was pale and her lips quivered as she said softly and sweetly: "Wilt thou verily slay this young man?"

"And why not?" said he, "since I have just slain the best friend that I ever had, though he was nought willing to fight with me, and only for this, that I saw thee toying with him; though forsooth thou hast said truly that thou hadst more reason to hate him than love him.  Well, since thou wilt not have this youngling slain, I may deem at least that he is no devil of thy making, else wouldst thou be glad of his slaying, so that he might be out of the path of thee; so a man he is, and a well-favoured one, and young; and valiant, as it seemeth: so I suppose that he is thy lover, or will be one day--well then--"

And he lifted his hand again, but again she stayed him, and said: "Look thou, I will buy him of thee:  and, indeed, I owe him a life." "How is that?" said he.  "Why wouldst thou know?" she said; "thou who, if thou hadst me in thine hands again, wouldst keep me away from all men. Yea, I know what thou wouldst say, thou wouldst keep me from sinning again." And she smiled, but bitterly.  "Well, the tale is no long one: "five days ago I was taken by them of the Burg:  and thou wottest what they would do with me; yea, even if they deemed me less than they do deem me: well, as two of their men-at-arms were leading me along by a halter, as a calf is led to the butcher, we fell in with this goodly lad, who slew them both in manly fashion, and I escaped for that time: though, forsooth, I must needs put my neck in the noose again in delivering four of our people, who would else have been tormented to death by the Burgers."

"Well," said the knight, "perchance thou hast more mercy than I looked for of thee; though I misdoubt thee that thou mayst yet pray me or some other to slay him for thee.  Thou art merciful, my Queen, though not to me, and a churl were I if I were less merciful than thou. Therefore will I give his life to him, yet not to thee will I give him if I may help it--Lo you, Sweet! he is just opening his eyes."

Therewith he rose up from Ralph, who raised himself a little, and sat up dazed and feeble.  The Knight of the Sun stood up over him beside the lady with his hands clasped on his sword-hilt, and said to Ralph: "Young man, canst thou hear my words?"  Ralph smiled feebly and nodded a yea-say. "Dost thou love thy life then?" said the Knight. Ralph found speech and said faintly, "Yea."  Said the Knight: "Where dost thou come from, where is thine home?"  Said Ralph, "Upmeads." "Well then," quoth the big knight, "go back to Upmeads, and live." Ralph shook his head and knit his brows and said, "I will not." "Yea," said the Knight, "thou wilt not live?  Then must I shape me to thy humour.  Stand on thy feet and fight it out; for now I am cool I will not slay a swordless man."

Ralph staggered up to his feet, but was so feeble still, that he sank down again, and muttered:  "I may not; I am sick and faint;" and therewith swooned away again.  But the Knight stood a while leaning on his sword, and looking down on him not unkindly. Then he turned about to the Lady, but lo! she had left his side. She had glided away, and got to her horse, which was tethered on the other side of the oak-tree, and had loosed him and mounted him, and so sat in the saddle there, the reins gathered in her hands. She smiled on the knight as he stood astonished, and cried to him; "Now, lord, I warn thee, draw not a single foot nigher to me; for thou seest that I have Silverfax between my knees, and thou knowest how swift he is, and if I see thee move, he shall spring away with me. Thou wottest how well I know all the ways of the woodland, and I tell thee that the ways behind me to the Dry Tree be all safe and open, and that beyond the Gliding River I shall come on Roger of the Ropewalk and his men.  And if thou thinkest to ride after me, and overtake me, cast the thought out of thy mind. For thy horse is strong but heavy, as is meet for so big a knight, and moreover he is many yards away from me and Silverfax: so before thou art in the saddle, where shall I be?  Yea," (for the Knight was handling his anlace) "thou mayst cast it, and peradventure mayst hit Silverfax and not me, and peradventure not; and I deem that it is my body alive that thou wouldest have back with thee. So now, wilt thou hearken?"

"Yea," quoth the knight, though for wrath he could scarce bring the word from his mouth.

"Hearken," she said, "this is the bargain to be struck between us: even now thou wouldst not refrain from slaying this young man, unless perchance he should swear to depart from us; and as for me, I would not go back with thee to Sunhome, where erst thou shamedst me. Now will I buy thy nay-say with mine, and if thou give the youngling his life, and suffer him to come his ways with us, then will I go home with thee and will ride with thee in all the love and duty that I owe thee; or if thou like this fashion of words better, I will give thee my body for his life. But if thou likest not the bargain, there is not another piece of goods for thee in the market, for then I will ride my ways to the Dry Tree, and thou shalt slay the poor youth, or make of him thy sworn friend, like as was Walter--which thou wilt."

So she spake, and Ralph yet lay on the grass and heard nought. But the Knight's face was dark and swollen with anger as he answered: "My sworn friend! yea, I understand thy gibe.  I need not thy words to bring to my mind how I have slain one sworn friend for thy sake."

"Nay," she said, "not for my sake, for thine own folly's sake." He heeded her not, but went on:  "And as for this one, I say again of him, if he be not thy devil, then thou meanest him for thy lover. And now I deem that I will verily slay him, ere he wake again; belike it were his better luck."

She said:  "I wot not why thou hagglest over the price of that thou wouldest have.  If thou have him along with thee, shall he not be in thy power--as I shall be? and thou mayst slay him--or me-- when thou wilt."

"Yea," he said, grimly, "when thou art weary of him. O art thou not shameless amongst women!  Yet must I needs pay thy price, though my honour and the welfare of my life go with it. Yet how if he have no will to fare with us?"  She laughed and said: "Then shalt thou have him with thee as thy captive and thrall. Hast thou not conquered him in battle?"  He stood silent a moment and then he said:  "Thou sayest it; he shall come with me, will he, nill he, unarmed, and as a prisoner, and the spoil of my valiancy." And he laughed, not altogether in bitterness, but as if some joy were rising in his heart.  "Now, my Queen," said he, "the bargain is struck betwixt us, and thou mayest light down off Silverfax; as for me, I will go fetch water from the lake, that we may wake up this valiant and mighty youth, this newfound jewel, and bring him to his wits again."

She answered nought, but rode her horse close to him and lighted down nimbly, while his greedy eyes devoured her beauty. Then he took her hand and drew her to him, and kissed her cheek, and she suffered it, but kissed him not again. Then he took off his helm, and went down to the lake to fetch up water therein.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_23]

CHAPTER 23

The Leechcraft of the Lady

Meanwhile she went to Ralph and stood by him, who now began to stir again; and she knelt down by him and kissed his face gently, and rose up hastily and stood a little aloof again.

Now Ralph sat up and looked about him, and when he saw the Lady he first blushed red, and then turned very pale; for the full life was in him again, and he knew her, and love drew strongly at his heart-strings. But she looked on him kindly and said to him:  "How fares it with thee? I am sorry of thy hurt which thou hast had for me."  He said: "Forsooth, Lady, a chance knock or two is no great matter for a lad of Upmeads.  But oh!  I have seen thee before." "Yea," she said, "twice before, fair knight."  "How is that?" he said; "once I saw thee, the fairest thing in the world, and evil men would have led thee to slaughter; but not twice."

She smiled on him still more kindly, as if he were a dear friend, and said simply:  "I was that lad in the cloak that ye saw in the Flower de Luce; and afterwards when ye, thou and Roger, fled away from the Burg of the Four Friths. I had come into the Burg with my captain of war at the peril of our lives to deliver four faithful friends of mine who were else doomed to an evil death."

He said nought, but gazed at her face, wondering at her valiancy and goodness.  She took him by the hand now, and held it without speaking for a little while, and he sat there still looking up into her face, wondering at her sweetness and his happiness. Then she said, as she drew her hand away and spake in such a voice, and so looking at him, that every word was as a caress to him: "Thy soul is coming back to thee, my friend, and thou art well at ease: is it not so?"

"O yea," he said, "and I woke up happily e'en now; for me-dreamed that my gossip came to me and kissed me kindly; and she is a fair woman, but not a young woman."

As he spoke the knight, who had come nearly noiselessly over the grass, stood by them, holding his helm full of water, and looking grimly upon them; but the Lady looked up at him with wide eyes wonderingly, and Ralph, beholding her, deemed that all he had heard of her goodness was but the very sooth. But the knight spake:  "Young man, thou hast fought with me, thou knowest not wherefore, and grim was my mood when thou madest thine onset, and still is, so that never but once wilt thou be nigher thy death than thou hast been this hour. But now I have given thee life because of the asking of this lady; and therewith I give thee leave to come thy ways with us: nay, rather I command thee to come, for thou art my prisoner, to be kept or ransomed, or set free as I will.  But my will is that thou shalt not have thine armour and weapons; and there is a cause for this, which mayhappen I will tell thee hereafter. But now I bid thee drink of this water, and then do off thine helm and hauberk and give me thy sword and dagger, and go with us peaceably; and be not overmuch ashamed, for I have overcome men who boasted themselves to be great warriors.

So Ralph drank of the water, and did off his helm, and cast water on his face, and arose, and said smiling:  "Nay, my master, I am nought ashamed of my mishaps:  and as to my going with thee and the Lady, thou hast heard me say under thy dagger that I would not forbear to follow her; so I scarce need thy command thereto."  The knight scowled on him and said: "Hold thy peace, fool!  Thou wert best not stir my wrath again." "Nay," said Ralph, "thou hast my sword, and mayst slay me if thou wilt; therefore be not word-valiant with me."

Said the Knight of the Sun:  "Well, well, thou hast the right of it there. Only beware lest thou try me overmuch.  But now must we set forth on our road; and here is work for thee to do:  a hundred yards within the thick wood in a straight line from the oak-tree thou shalt find two horses, mine and the knight's who fell before me; go thou and bring them hither; for I will not leave thee with my lady, lest I have to slay thee in the end, and maybe her also."

Ralph nodded cheerfully, and set off on his task, and was the readier therein because the Lady looked on him kindly and compassionately as he went by her. He found the horses speedily, a black horse that was of the Black Knight, and a bay of the Knight of the Sun, and he came back with them lightly.

But when he came to the oak-tree again, lo, the knight and the Lady both kneeling over the body of the Black Knight, and Ralph saw that the Knight of the Sun was sobbing and weeping sorely, so that he deemed that he was taking leave of his friend that lay dead there:  but when Ralph had tied up those other two steeds by Silverfax and drawn rear to those twain, the Knight of the Sun looked up at him, and spake in a cheerful voice: "Thou seemest to be no ill man, though thou hast come across my lady; so now I bid thee rejoice that there is a good knight more in the world than we deemed e'en now; for this my friend Walter the Black is alive still." "Yea," said the Lady, "and belike he shall live a long while yet."

So Ralph looked, and saw that they had stripped the knight of his hauberk and helm, and bared his body, and that the Lady was dressing a great and sore wound in his side; neither was he come to himself again:  he was a young man, and very goodly to look on, dark haired and straight of feature, fair of face; and Ralph felt a grief at his heart as he beheld the Lady's hands dealing with his bare flesh, though nought the man knew of it belike.

As for the Knight of the Sun, he was no more grim and moody, but smiling and joyous, and he spake and said:  "Young man, this shall stand thee in good stead that I have not slain my friend this bout.  Sooth to say, it might else have gone hard with thee on the way to my house, or still more in my house. But now be of good heart, for unless of thine own folly thou run on the sword's point, thou mayst yet live and do well." Then he turned to the Lady and said:  "Dame, for as good a leech as ye be, ye may not heal this man so that he may sit in his saddle within these ten days; and now what is to do in this matter?"

She looked on him with smiling lips and a strange light in her eyes, and said:  "Yea, forsooth, what wilt thou do? Wilt thou abide here by Walter thyself alone, and let me bring the imp of Upmeads home to our house?  Or wilt thou ride home and send folk with a litter to us?  Or shall this youngling ride at all adventure, and seek to Sunway through the blind woodland? Which shall it be?"

The knight laughed outright, and said:  "Yea, fair one, this is much like to the tale of the carle at the ferry with the fox, and the goat, and the cabbage."

There was scarce a smile on her face as she said gently: "One thing is to be thought of, that Walter's soul is not yet so fast in his body that either thou or some rough-handed leech may be sure of healing him; it must be this hand, and the learning which it hath learned which must deal with him for a while. And she stretched out her arm over the wounded man, with the fingers pointing down the water, and reddened withal, as if she felt the hearts' greediness of the two men who were looking on her beauty.

The big knight sighed, and said:  "Well, unless I am to kill him over again, there is nothing for it but our abiding with him for the next few hours at least.  To-morrow is a new day, and fair is the woodland-hall of summer-tide; neither shall water fail us. But as to victual, I wot not save that we have none."

The Lady laughed, and said to Ralph; "Who knoweth what thou mayst find if thou go to the black horse and look into the saddle-bags which I saw upon him awhile agone?  For indeed we need somewhat, if it were but to keep the life in the body of this wounded man."

Ralph sprang up and turned to the horse, and found the saddle-bags on him, and took from them bread and flesh, and a flask of good wine, and brought them to the Lady, who laughed and said:  "Thou art a good seeker and no ill finder."  Then she gave the wounded man to drink of the wine, so that he stirred somewhat, and the colour came into his face a little. Then she bade gather store of bracken for a bed for the Black Knight, and Ralph bestirred himself therein, but the Knight of the Sun sat looking at the Lady as she busied herself with his friend, and gloom seemed gathering on him again.

But when the bracken was enough, the Lady made a bed deftly and speedily; and between the three they laid the wounded man thereon, who seemed coming to himself somewhat, and spake a few words, but those nothing to the point. Then the Lady took her gay embroidered cloak, which lay at the foot of the oak tree, and cast it over him and, as Ralph deemed, eyed him lovingly, and belike the Knight of the Sun thought in likewise, for he scowled upon her; and for awhile but little was the joyance by the ancient oak, unless it were with the Lady.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_24]

CHAPTER 24

Supper and Slumber in the Woodland Hall

But when all was done to make the wounded knight as easy as might be, the Lady turned to the other twain, and said kindly: "Now, lords, it were good to get to table, since here is wherewithal." And she looked on them both full kindly as she spake the words, but nowise wantonly; even as the lady of a fair house might do by honoured guests.  So the hearts of both were cheered, and nothing loth they sat down by her on the grass and fell to meat. Yet was the Knight of the Sun a little moody for a while, but when he had eaten and drunken somewhat, he said: "It were well if someone might come hereby, some hermit or holy man, to whom we might give the care of Walter: then might we home to Sunway, and send folk with a litter to fetch him home softly when the due time were."

"Yea," said the Lady, "that might happen forsooth, and perchance it will; and if it were before nightfall it were better."

Ralph saw that as she spake she took hold of the two fingers of her left hand with her right forefinger, and let the thumb meet it, so that it made a circle about them, and she spake something therewith in a low voice, but he heeded it little, save as he did all ways that her body moved.  As for the Knight of the Sun, he was looking down on the grass as one pondering matters, and noted this not. But he said presently:  "What hast thou to say of Walter now? Shall he live?"  "Yea," she said, "maybe as long as either of you twain." The knight looked hard at Ralph, but said nothing, and Ralph heeded not his looks, for his eyes were busy devouring the Lady.

So they abode a little, and the more part of what talk there was came from the Lady, and she was chiefly asking Ralph of his home in Upmeads, and his brethren and kindred, and he told her all openly, and hid naught, while her voice ravished his very soul from him, and it seemed strange to him, that such an one should hold him in talk concerning these simple matters and familiar haps, and look on him so kindly and simply. Ever and anon would she go and look to the welfare of the wounded man, and come back from him (for they sat a little way aloof), and tell them how he did.  And still the Knight of the Sun took little heed, and once again gloom settled down on him.

Amidst all this the sun was set, and the long water lay beneath the heavens like a sheet of bright, fair-hued metal, and naught stirred it:  till at last the Lady leaned forward to Ralph, and touched his shoulder (for he was sitting over against her, with his back to the water), and she said: "Sir Knight, Sir Knight, his wish is coming about, I believe verily." He turned his head to look over his shoulder, and, as if by chance-hap, his cheek met the outstretched hand she was pointing with: she drew it not away very speedily, and as sweet to him was the touch of it as if his face had been brushed past by a summer lily.

"Nay, look! something cometh," she cried; and he looked and saw a little boat making down the water toward the end anigh them. Then the Knight of the Sun seemed to awake at her word, and he leapt to his feet, and stood looking at the new comer.

It was but a little while ere the boat touched the shore, and a man stepped out of it on to the grass and made it fast to the bank, and then stood and looked about him as if seeking something; and lo, it was a holy man, a hermit in the habit of the Blackfriars.

Then the Knight of the Sun hastened down to the strand to meet him, and when Ralph was thus left alone with the Lady, though it were but for a little, his heart beat and he longed sore to touch her with his hand, but durst not, and did but hope that her hand would stray his way as it had e'en now. But she arose and stood a little way from him, and spake to him sweetly of the fairness of the evening, and the wounded man, and the good hap of the friar's coming before nightfall; and his heart was wrung sore with the love of her.

So came the knight up from the strand, and the holy man with him, who greeted Ralph and the Lady and blessed them, and said: "Now, daughter, show me thy sick man; for I am somewhat of a leech, and this thy baron would have me heal him, and I have a right good will thereto."

So he went to the Black Knight, and when he had looked to his hurts, he turned to them and said:  "Have ye perchance any meat in the wilderness?" "Yea," quoth the Knight of the Sun; "there is enough for a day or more, and if we must needs abide here longer, I or this young man may well make shift to slay some deer, great or little, for our sustenance and the healing of my friend."

"It is well," said the Friar; "my hermitage is no great way hence, in the thicket at the end of this water.  But now is the fever on this knight, and we may not move him ere morning at soonest; but to-morrow we may make a shift to bear him hence by boat: or, if not, then may I go and fetch from my cell bread and other meat, and milk of my goats; and thus shall we do well till we may bring him to my cell, and then shall ye leave him there; and afterwards I will lead him home to Sunway where thou dwellest, baron, when he is well enough healed; or, if he will not go thither, let him go his ways, and I myself will come to Sunway and let thee wot of his welfare."

The knight yeasaid all this, and thereafter the Friar and the Lady together tended the wounded knight, and gave him water to drink, and wine. And meanwhile Ralph and the Knight of the Sun lay down on the grass and watched the eve darkening, and Ralph marvelled at his happiness, and wondered what the morrow would bring forth.

But amidst his happy thoughts the Knight of the Sun spake to him and said: "Young knight, I have struck a bargain with her that thou shalt follow us home, if thou wilt:  but to say sooth, I think when the bargain was struck I was minded when I had thee at Sunway to cast thee into my prison. But now I will do otherwise, and if thou must needs follow after thine own perdition, as I have, thou shalt do so freely; therefore take again thine armour and weapons, and do what thou wilt with them. But if thou wilt do after my rede, get thee away to-morrow, or better, to-night, and desire our fellowship no more."

Ralph heard him, and the heart within him was divided. It was in his mind to speak debonnairely to the knight; but again he felt as if he hated him, and the blythe words would not come, and he answered doggedly: "I will not leave my Lady since she biddeth me go with her. If thou wilt then, make the most of it that thou art stronger than I, and a warrior more proven; set me before thy sword, and fight with me and slay me."

Then rose the wrath to the knight's lips, and he brake forth:  "Then is there one other thing for thee to do, and that is that thou take thy sword, which I have just given back to thee, and thrust her through therewith. That were better for thee and for me, and for him who lieth yonder."

Therewith he arose and strode up and down in the dusk, and Ralph wondered at him, yet hated him now not so much, since he deemed that the Lady would not love him, and that he was angered thereby. Yet about Ralph's heart there hung a certain fear of what should be.

But presently the knight came and sat down by him again, and again fell to speech with him, and said:  "Thou knowest that I may not slay thee, and yet thou sayest, fight with me; is this well done?" "Is it ill done?" said Ralph, "I wot not why."

The knight was silent awhile, and then he said:  "With what words shall I beseech thee to depart while it is yet time? It may well be that in days to come I shall be good to thee, and help thee."

But Ralph said never a word.  Then said the knight, and sighed withal: "I now see this of thee, that thou mayst not depart; well, so let it be!" and he sighed heavily again.  Then Ralph strove with himself, and said courteously:  "Sir, I am sorry that I am a burden irksome to thee; and that, why I know not, thou mayst not rid thyself of me by the strong hand, and that otherwise thou mayst not be rid of me. What then is this woman to thee, that thou wouldst have me slay her, and yet art so fierce in thy love for her?"  The Knight of the Sun laughed wrathfully thereat, and was on the point of answering him, when up came those two from the wounded man, and the Friar said: "The knight shall do well; but well it is for him that the Lady of Abundance was here for his helping; for from her hands goeth all healing, as it was with the holy men of old time. May the saints keep her from all harm; for meek and holy indeed she is, as oft we have heard it."

The Lady put her hand on his shoulder, as if to bid him silence, and then set herself down on the grass beside the Knight of the Sun, and fell to talking sweetly and blithely to the three men. The Friar answered her with many words, and told her of the deer and fowl of the wood and the water that he was wont to see nigh to his hermitage; for of such things she asked him, and at last he said: "Good sooth, I should be shy to say in all places and before all men of all my dealings with God's creatures which live about me there. Wot ye what?  E'en now I had no thought of coming hitherward; but I was sitting amongst the trees pondering many things, when I began to drowse, and drowsing I heard the thornbushes speaking to me like men, and they bade me take my boat and go up the water to help a man who was in need; and that is how I came hither; benedicite."

So he spake; but the Knight of the Sun did but put in a word here and there, and that most often a sour and snappish word. As for Ralph, he also spake but little, and strayed somewhat in his answers; for he could not but deem that she spake softlier and kinder to him than to the others; and he was dreamy with love and desire, and scarce knew what he was saying.

Thus they wore away some two hours, the Friar or the Lady turning away at whiles to heed the wounded man, who was now talking wildly in his fever.

But at last the night was grown as dark as it would be, since cloud and storm came not, for the moon had sunk down: so the Lady said:  "Now, lords, our candle hath gone out, and I for my part will to bed; so let us each find a meet chamber in the woodland hall; and I will lie near to thee, father, and the wounded friend, lest I be needed to help thee in the night; and thou, Baron of Sunway, lie thou betwixt me and the wood, to ward me from the wild deer and the wood-wights. But thou, Swain of Upmeads, wilt thou deem it hard to lie anear the horses, to watch them if they be scared by aught?"

"Yea," said the Knight of the Sun, "thou art Lady here forsooth; even as men say of thee, that thou swayest man and beast in the wildwood. But this time at least it is not so ill-marshalled of thee: I myself would have shown folk to chamber here in likewise."

Therewith he rose up, and walked to and fro for a little, and then went, and sat down on a root of the oak-tree, clasping his knees with his hands, but lay not down awhile. But the Lady made herself a bed of the bracken which was over from those that Ralph had gathered for the bed of the wounded Knight; and the Friar lay down on the grass nigh to her, and both were presently asleep.

Then Ralph got up quietly; and, shamefacedly for very love, passed close beside the sleeping woman as he went to his place by the horses, taking his weapons and wargear with him: and he said to himself as he laid him down, that it was good for him to be quite alone, that he might lie awake and think at his ease of all the loveliness and kindness of his Lady. Howbeit, he was a young man, and a sturdy, used to lying abroad in the fields or the woods, and it was his custom to sleep at once and sweetly when he lay down after the day's work had wearied him, and even so he did now, and was troubled by no dreams of what was past or to come.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_01]

BOOK TWO

The Road Unto Trouble

CHAPTER 1

Ralph Meets With Love in the Wilderness

He woke up while it was yet night, and knew that he had been awakened by a touch; but, like a good hunter and warrior, he forebore to start up or cry out till sleep had so much run off him that he could tell somewhat of what was toward. So now he saw the Lady bending over him, and she said in a kind and very low voice:  "Rise up, young man, rise up, Ralph, and say no word, but come with me a little way into the wood ere dawn come, for I have a word for thee."

So he stood up and was ready to go with her, his heart beating hard for joy and wonder.  "Nay," she whispered, "take thy sword and war-gear lest ill befall:  do on thine hauberk; I will be thy squire."  And she held his war-coat out for him to do on. "Now," she said, still softly, "hide thy curly hair with the helm, gird thy sword to thee, and come without a word."

Even so he did, and therewithal felt her hand take his (for it was dark as they stepped amidst the trees), and she led him into the Seventh Heaven, for he heard her voice, though it were but a whisper, as it were a caress and a laugh of joy in each word.

She led him along swiftly, fumbling nought with the paths betwixt the pine-tree boles, where it was as dark as dark might be. Every minute he looked to hear her say a word of why she had brought him thither, and that then she would depart from him; so he prayed that the silence and the holding of his hand might last a long while-- for he might think of naught save her--and long it lasted forsooth, and still she spake no word, though whiles a little sweet chuckle, as of the garden warbler at his softest, came from her lips, and the ripple of her raiment as her swift feet drave it, sounded loud to his eager ears in the dark, windless wood.

At last, and it was more than half-an-hour of their walking thus, it grew lighter, and he could see the shape of her alongside of him; and still she held his hand and glided on swifter and swifter, as he thought; and soon he knew that outside the wood dawn was giving place to day, and even there, in the wood, it was scarce darker than twilight.

Yet a little further, and it grew lighter still, and he heard the throstles singing a little way off, and knew that they were on the edge of the pine-wood, and still her swift feet sped on till they came to a little grassy wood-lawn, with nought anear it on the side away from the wood save maples and thorn-bushes: it was broad daylight there, though the sun had not yet arisen.

There she let fall his hand and turned about to him and faced him flushed and eager, with her eyes exceeding bright and her lips half open and quivering.  He stood beholding her, trembling, what for eagerness, what for fear of her words when he had told her of his desire.  For he had now made up his mind to do no less. He put his helm from off his head and laid it down on the grass, and he noted therewith that she had come in her green gown only, and had left mantle and cote hardie behind.

Now he stood up again and was just going to speak, when lo! she put both her palms to her face, and her bosom heaved, and her shoulders were shaken with sobs, and she burst out a weeping, so that the tears ran through her fingers. Then he cast himself on the ground before her, and kissed her feet, and clasped her about the knees, and laid his cheek to her raiment, and fawned upon her, and cried out many an idle word of love, and still she wept a while and spake not. At last she reached her hand down to his face and fondled it, and he let his lips lie on the hand, and she suffered it a while, and then took him by the arm and raised him up and led him on swiftly as before; and he knew not what to do or say, and durst by no means stay her, and could frame no word to ask her wherefore.

So they sped across a waste not much beset with trees, he silent, she never wearying or slacking her pace or faltering as to the way, till they came into the thick wood again, and ever when he would have spoken she hushed him, with "Not yet!  Not yet!" Until at last when the sun had been up for some three hours, she led him through a hazel copse, like a deep hedge, into a cleared grassy place where were great grey stones lying about, as if it had been the broken doom-ring of a forgotten folk. There she threw herself down on the grass and buried her face amidst the flowers, and was weeping and sobbing again and he bending over her, till she turned to him and drew him down to her and put her hands to his face, and laid her cheeks all wet with tears to his, and fell to kissing him long and sweetly, so that in his turn he was like to weep for the very sweetness of love.

Then at last she spake:  "This is the first word, that now I have brought thee away from death; and so sweet it is to me that I can scarce bear it."

"Oh, sweet to me," he said, "for I have waited for thee many days." And he fell to kissing and clipping her, as one who might not be satisfied. At last she drew herself from him a little, and, turning on him a face smiling with love, she said:  "Forbear it a little, till we talk together." "Yea," quoth he, "but may I hold thine hand awhile?"  "No harm in that," she said, laughing, and she gave him her hand and spake:

"I spake it that I have brought thee from death, and thou hast asked me no word concerning what and how." "I will ask it now, then," said he, "since thou wilt have it so." She said:  "Dost thou think that he would have let thee live?"

"Who," said he, "since thou lettest me live?"

"He, thy foeman, the Knight of the Sun," she said. "Why didst thou not flee from him before?  For he did not so much desire to slay thee, but that he would have had thee depart; but if thou wert once at his house, he would thrust a sword through thee, or at the least cast thee into his prison and let thee lie there till thy youth be gone--or so it seemed to me," she said, faltering as she looked on him.

Said Ralph:  "How could I depart when thou wert with him? Didst thou not see me there?  I was deeming that thou wouldst have me abide."

She looked upon him with such tender love that he made as if he would cast himself upon her; but she refrained him, and smiled and said: "Ah, yes, I saw thee, and thought not that thou wouldst sunder thyself from me; therefore had I care of thee."  And she touched his cheek with her other hand; and he sighed and knit his brows somewhat, and said: "But who is this man that he should slay me?  And why is he thy tyrant, that thou must flee from him?"

She laughed and said:  "Fair creature, he is my husband."

Then Ralph flushed red, and his visage clouded, and he opened his mouth to speak; but she stayed him and said: "Yet is he not so much my husband but that or ever we were bedded he must needs curse me and drive me away from his house." And she smiled, but her face reddened so deeply that her grey eyes looked strange and light therein.

But Ralph leapt up, and half drew his sword, and cried out loud: "Would God I had slain him!  Wherefore could I not slay him?" And he strode up and down the sward before her in his wrath. But she leaned forward to him and laughed and said: "Yet, O Champion, we will not go back to him, for he is stronger than thou, and hath vanquished thee. This is a desert place, but thou art loud, and maybe over loud. Come rest by me."

So he came and sat down by her, and took her hand again and kissed the wrist thereof and fondled it and said: "Yea, but he desireth thee sorely; that was easy to see. It was my ill-luck that I slew him not."

She stroked his face again and said:  "Long were the tale if I told thee all.  After he had driven me out, and I had fled from him, he fell in with me again divers times, as was like to be; for his brother is the Captain of the Dry Tree; the tall man whom thou hast seen with me:  and every time this baron hath come on me he has prayed my love, as one who would die despaired if I granted it not, but O my love with the bright sword" (and she kissed his cheek therewith, and fondled his hand with both her hands), "each time I said him nay, I said him nay." And again her face burned with blushes.

"And his brother," said Ralph, "the big captain that I have come across these four times, doth he desire thee also?" She laughed and said:  "But as others have, no more: he will not slay any man for my sake."

Said Ralph:  "Didst thou wot that I was abiding thy coming at the Castle of Abundance?"  "Yea," she said, "have I not told thee that I bade Roger lead thee thither?"  Then she said softly: "That was after that first time we met; after I had ridden away on the horse of that butcher whom thou slayedst."

"But why camest thou so late?" said he; "Wouldst thou have come if I had abided there yet?"  She said:  "What else did I desire but to be with thee?  But I set out alone looking not for any peril, since our riders had gone to the north against them of the Burg: but as I drew near to the Water of the Oak, I fell in with my husband and that other man; and this time all my naysays were of no avail, and whatsoever I might say he constrained me to go with them; but straightway they fell out together, and fought, even as thou sawest." And she looked at him sweetly, and as frankly as if he had been naught but her dearest brother.

But he said:  "It was concerning thee that they fought: hast thou known the Black Knight for long?"

"Yea," she said, "I may not hide that he hath loved me: but he hath also betrayed me.  It was through him that the Knight of the Sun drave me from him.  Hearken, for this concerneth thee: he made a tale of me of true and false mingled, that I was a wise-wife and an enchantress, and my lord trowed in him, so that I was put to shame before all the house, and driven forth wrung with anguish, barefoot and bleeding."

He looked and saw pain and grief in her face, as it had been the shadow of that past time, and the fierceness of love in him so changed his face, that she arose and drew a little way from him, and stood there gazing at him.  But he also rose and knelt before her, and reached up for her hands and took them in his and said: "Tell me truly, and beguile me not; for I am a young man, and without guile, and I love thee, and would have thee for my speech-friend, what woman soever may be in the world. Whatever thou hast been, what art thou now?  Art thou good or evil? Wilt thou bless me or ban me?  For it is the truth that I have heard tales and tales of thee:  many were good, though it maybe strange; but some, they seemed to warn me of evil in thee. O look at me, and see if I love thee or not! and I may not help it. Say once for all, shall that be for my ruin or my bliss? If thou hast been evil, then be good this one time and tell me."

She neither reddened now, nor paled at his words, but her eyes filled with tears, and ran over, and she looked down on him as a woman looks on a man that she loves from the heart's root, and she said:  "O my lord and love, may it be that thou shalt find me no worse to thee than the best of all those tales. Forsooth how shall I tell thee of myself, when, whatever I say, thou shalt believe every word I tell thee?  But O my heart, how shouldest thou, so sweet and fair and good, be taken with the love of an evil thing?  At the least I will say this, that whatsoever I have been, I am good to thee--I am good to thee, and will be true to thee."

He drew her down to him as he knelt there, and took his arms about her, and though she yet shrank from him a little and the eager flame of his love, he might not be gainsayed, and she gave herself to him and let her body glide into his arms, and loved him no less than he loved her. And there between them in the wilderness was all the joy of love that might be.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_02]

CHAPTER 2

They Break Their Fast in the Wildwood

Now when it was hard on noon, and they had lain long in that grassy place, Ralph rose up and stood upon his feet, and made as one listening.  But the Lady looked on him and said: "It is naught save a hart and his hind running in the wood; yet mayhappen we were best on the road, for it is yet long." "Yea," said Ralph, "and it may be that my master will gather folk and pursue us."  "Nay, nay," she said, "that were to wrong him, to deem that he would gather folk to follow one man; if he come, he will be by himself alone. When he found us gone he doubtless cast himself on Silverfax, my horse, in trust of the beast following after my feet."

"Well," said Ralph, "and if he come alone, there is yet a sword betwixt him and thee."

She was standing up by him now with her hand on his shoulder, "Hear now the darling, the champion! how he trusteth well in his heart and his right hand.  But nay, I have cared for thee well. Hearken, if thou wilt not take it amiss that I tell thee all I do, good or evil.  I said a word in the ear of Silverfax or ever I departed, and now the good beast knows my mind, and will lead the fierce lord a little astray, but not too much, lest he follow us with his eager heart and be led by his own keen woodcraft. Indeed, I left the horse behind to that end, else hadst thou ridden the woodland ways with me, instead of my wearying thee by our going afoot; and thou with thy weapons and wargear."

He looked upon her tenderly, and said smiling:  "And thou, my dear, art thou not a little wearied by what should weary a knight and one bred afield?"  "Nay," she said, "seest thou not how I walk lightly clad, whereas I have left behind my mantle and cote-hardie?" Thereat she gathered up her gown into her girdle ready for the way, and smiled as she saw his eyes embrace the loveliness of her feet; and she spake as she moved them daintily on the flowery grass: "Sooth to say, Knight, I am no weakling dame, who cannot move her limbs save in the dance, or to back the white palfrey and ride the meadows, goshawk on wrist; I am both well-knit and light-foot as the Wood-wife and Goddess of yore agone.  Many a toil hath gone to that, whereof I may tell thee presently; but now we were best on our way. Yet before we go, I will at least tell thee this, that in my knowing of these woods, there is no sorcery at all; for in the woods, though not in these woods, was I bred; and here also I am at home, as I may say."

Hand in hand then they went lightly through the hazel copse, and soon was the wood thick about them, but, as before, the Lady led unfalteringly through the thicket paths.  Now Ralph spake and said: "It is good that thou lead me whither thou wilt; but this I may say, that it is clear to me that we are not on the way to the Castle of Abundance." "Even so," said she; "indeed had I come to thee there, as I was minded, I should presently have brought thee on the way which we are wending now, or one nigh to it; and that is that which leadeth to Hampton under Scaur, and the Fellowship of Champions who dwell on the rock."

Said Ralph:  "It is well; yet will I tell thee the truth, that a little sojourn in that fair house had liked me better. Fain had I been to see thee sitting in thine ivory chair in thy chamber of dais with the walls hung round with thee woven in pictures--wilt thou not tell me in words the story of those pictures? and also concerning the book which I read, which was also of thee?"

"Ah," she said, "thou hast read in the book--well, I will tell thee the story very soon, and that the more since there are matters written wrong in the book."  Therewith she hurried him on, and her feet seemed never tired, though now, to say sooth, he began to go somewhat heavily.

Then she stayed him, and laughed sweetly in his face, and said: "It is a long while now since the beginning of the June day, and meseems I know thy lack, and the slaking of it lieth somewhat nearer than Hampton under Scaur, which we shall not reach these two days if we go afoot all the way."

"My lack?" said he; "I lack nought now, that I may not have when I will." And he put his arms about her shoulders and strained her to his bosom. But she strove with him, and freed herself and laughed outright, and said:  "Thou art a bold man, and rash, my knight, even unto me. Yet must I see to it that thou die not of hunger."  He said merrily: "Yea, by St. Nicholas, true it is:  a while ago I felt no hunger, and had forgotten that men eat; for I was troubled with much longing, and in doubt concerning my life; but now am I free and happy, and hungry therewithal."

"Look," she said, pointing up to the heavens, "it is now past two hours after noon; that is nigh two hours since we left the lawn amidst the hazels, and thou longest to eat, as is but right, so lovely as thou art and young; and I withal long to tell thee something of that whereof thou hast asked me; and lastly, it is the hottest of the day, yea, so hot, that even Diana, the Wood-wife of yore agone, might have fainted somewhat, if she had been going afoot as we twain have been, and little is the risk of our resting awhile. And hereby is a place where rest is good as regards the place, whatever the resters may be; it is a little aside the straightest way, but meseems we may borrow an hour or so of our journey, and hope to pay it back ere nightfall.  Come, champion!"

Therewith she led north through a thicket of mingled trees till Ralph heard water running, and anon they came to a little space about a brook, grassy and clear of trees save a few big thorn-bushes, with a green ridge or bank on the other side. There she stayed him and said:  "Do off thy war-gear, knight. There is naught to fear here, less than there was amidst the hazels." So did he, and she kneeled down and drank of the clear water, and washed her face and hands therein, and then came and kissed him and said:  "Lovely imp of Upmeads, I have some bread of last night's meal in my scrip here, and under the bank I shall find some woodland meat withal; abide a little and the tale and the food shall come back to thee together." Therewith she stepped lightly into the stream, and stood therein a minute to let her naked feet feel the cold ripple (for she had stripped off her foot-gear as she first came to the water), and then went hither and thither gathering strawberries about the bank, while he watched her, blessing her, till he well nigh wept at the thought of his happiness.

Back she came in a little while with good store of strawberries in the lap of her gown, and they sat down on the green lip of the brook, and she drew the bread from her scrip and they ate together, and she made him drink from the hollow of her hands, and kissed him and wept over him for joy, and the eagerness of her love. So at last she sat down quietly beside him, and fell to speaking to him, as a tale is told in the ingle nook on an even of Yule-tide.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_03]

CHAPTER 3

The Lady Telleth Ralph of the Past Days of Her Life

"Now shalt thou hear of me somewhat more than the arras and the book could tell thee; and yet not all, for time would fail us therefor-- and moreover my heart would fail me.  I cannot tell where I was born nor of what lineage, nor of who were my father and mother; for this I have known not of myself, nor has any told me. But when I first remember anything, I was playing about a garden, wherein was a little house built of timber and thatched with reed, and the great trees of the forest were all about the garden save for a little croft which was grown over with high grass and another somewhat bigger, wherein were goats.  There was a woman at the door of the house and she spinning, yet clad in glittering raiment, and with jewels on her neck and fingers; this was the first thing that I remember, but all as it were a matter of every day, and use and wont, as it goes with the memories of children. Of such matters I will not tell thee at large, for thou knowest how it will be.  Now the woman, who as I came to know was neither old nor young in those days, but of middle age, I called mother; but now I know that she was not my mother. She was hard and stern with me, but never beat me in those days, save to make me do what I would not have done unbeaten; and as to meat I ate and drank what I could get, as she did, and indeed was well-fed with simple meats as thou mayest suppose from the aspect of me to-day. But as she was not fierce but rather sour to me in her daily wont in my youngest days so also she was never tender, or ever kissed me or caressed me, for as little as I was. And I loved her naught, nor did it ever come into my mind that I should love her, though I loved a white goat of ours and deemed it dear and lovely; and afterwards other things also that came to me from time to time, as a squirrel that I saved from a weasel, and a jackdaw that fell from a tall ash-tree nigh our house before he had learned how to fly, and a house-mouse that would run up and down my hand and arm, and other such-like things; and shortly I may say that the wild things, even to the conies and fawns loved me, and had but little fear of me, and made me happy, and I loved them.

"Further, as I grew up, the woman set me to do such work as I had strength for as needs was; for there was no man dwelt anigh us and seldom did I ever see man or woman there, and held no converse with any, save as I shall tell thee presently: though now and again a man or a woman passed by; what they were I knew not, nor their whence and whither, but by seeing them I came to know that there were other folk in the world besides us two. Nought else I knew save how to spin, and to tend our goats and milk them, and to set snares for birds and small deer: though when I had caught them, it irked me sore to kill them, and I had let them go again had I not feared the carline. Every day early I was put forth from the house and garth, and forbidden to go back thither till dusk.  While the days were long and the grass was growing, I had to lead our goats to pasture in the wood-lawns, and must take with me rock and spindle, and spin so much of flax or hair as the woman gave me, or be beaten. But when the winter came and the snow was on the ground, then that watching and snaring of wild things was my business.

"At last one day of late summer when I, now of some fifteen summers, was pasturing the goats not far from the house, the sky darkened, and there came up so great a storm of thunder and lightning, and huge drift of rain, that I was afraid, and being so near to the house, I hastened thither, driving the goats, and when I had tethered them in the shed of the croft, I crept trembling up to the house, and when I was at the door, heard the clack of the loom in the weaving-chamber, and deemed that the woman was weaving there, but when I looked, behold there was no one on the bench, though the shuttle was flying from side to side, and the shed opening and changing, and the sley coming home in due order.  Therewithal I heard a sound as of one singing a song in a low voice, but the words I could not understand: then terror seized on my heart, but I stepped over the threshold, and as the door of the chamber was open, I looked aside and saw therein the woman sitting stark naked on the floor with a great open book before her, and it was from her mouth that the song was coming: grim she looked, and awful, for she was a big woman, black-haired and stern of aspect in her daily wont, speaking to me as few words as might be, and those harsh enough, yea harsher than when I was but little. I stood for one moment afraid beyond measure, though the woman did not look at me, and I hoped she had not seen me; then I ran back into the storm, though it was now wilder than ever, and ran and hid myself in the thicket of the wood, half-dead with fear, and wondering what would become of me. But finding that no one followed after me, I grew calmer, and the storm also drew off, and the sun shone out a little before his setting: so I sat and spun, with fear in my heart, till I had finished my tale of thread, and when dusk came, stole back again to the house, though my legs would scarce bear me over the threshold into the chamber.

"There sat the woman in her rich attire no otherwise than her wont, nor did she say aught to me; but looked at the yarn that I had spun, to see that I had done my task, and nodded sternly to me as her wont was, and I went to bed amongst my goats as I was used to do, but slept not till towards morning, and then images of dreadful things, and of miseries that I may not tell thee of, mingled with my sleep for long.

"So I awoke and ate my meat and drank of the goats' milk with a heavy heart, and then went into the house; and when I came into the chamber the woman looked at me, and contrary to her wont spoke to me, and I shook with terror at her voice; though she said naught but this: 'Go fetch thy white goat and come back to me therewith.' I did so, and followed after her, sick with fear; and she led me through the wood into a lawn which I knew well, round which was a wall, as it were, of great yew trees, and amidst, a table of stone, made of four uprights and a great stone plank on the top of them; and this was the only thing in all the wood wherein I was used to wander which was of man's handiwork, save and except our house, and the sheds and fences about it.

"The woman stayed and leaned against this stonework and said to me: 'Go about now and gather dry sticks for a fire.'  I durst do naught else, and said to myself that I should be whipped if I were tardy, though, forsooth, I thought she was going to kill me; and I brought her a bundle, and she said, 'Fetch more.' And when I had brought her seven bundles, she said:  'It is enough: stand over against me and hearken.'  So I stood there quaking; for my fear, which had somewhat abated while I went to and fro after the wood, now came back upon me tenfold.

"She said:  'It were thy due that I should slay thee here and now, as thou slayest the partridges which thou takest in thy springes: but for certain causes I will not slay thee.  Again, it were no more than thy earnings were I to torment thee till thou shouldst cry out for death to deliver thee from the anguish; and if thou wert a woman grown, even so would I deal with thee. But thou art yet but a child, therefore I will keep thee to see what shall befall betwixt us.  Yet must I do somewhat to grieve thee, and moreover something must be slain and offered up here on this altar, lest all come to naught, both thou and I, and that which we have to do. Hold thy white goat now, which thou lovest more than aught else, that I may redden thee and me and this altar with the blood thereof.'

"I durst do naught but obey her, and I held the poor beast, that licked my hands and bleated for love of me: and now since my terror and the fear of death was lessened at her words, I wept sore for my dear friend.

"But the woman drew a strong sharp knife from her girdle and cut the beast's throat, and dipped her fingers in the blood and reddened both herself and me on the breast, and the hands, and the feet; and then she turned to the altar and smote blood upon the uprights, and the face of the stone plank. Then she bade me help her, and we laid the seven faggots on the alter, and laid the carcase of the goat upon them: and she made fire, but I saw not how, and set it to the wood, and when it began to blaze she stood before it with her arms outspread, and sang loud and hoarse to a strange tune; and though I knew not the words of her song, it filled me with dread, so that I cast myself down on the ground and hid my face in the grass.

"So she went on till the beast was all burned up and the fire became naught but red embers, and then she ceased her song and sank down upon the grass, and laid her head back and so fell asleep; but I durst not move from the place, but cowered in the grass there, I know not how long, till she arose and came to me, and smote me with her foot and cried:  'Rise up, fool! what harm hast thou? Go milk thy goats and lead them to pasture.'  And therewith she strode away home, not heeding me.

"As for me, I arose and dealt with my goats as she bade me; and presently I was glad that I had not been slain, yet thenceforth was the joy of my life that I had had amongst my goats marred with fear, and the sounds of the woodland came to me mingled with terror; and I was sore afraid when I entered the house in the morning and the evening, and when I looked on the face of the woman; though she was no harder to me than heretofore, but maybe somewhat softer.

"So wore the autumn, and winter came, and I fared as I was wont, setting springes for fowl and small-deer. And for all the roughness of the season, at that time it pleased me better than the leafy days, because I had less memory then of the sharpness of my fear on that day of the altar. Now one day as I went under the snow-laden trees, I saw something bright and big lying on the ground, and drawing nearer I saw that it was some child of man:  so I stopped and cried out, 'Awake and arise, lest death come on thee in this bitter cold,' But it stirred not; so I plucked up heart and came up to it, and lo! a woman clad in fair raiment of scarlet and fur, and I knelt down by her to see if I might help her; but when I touched her I found her cold and stiff, and dead, though she had not been dead long, for no snow had fallen on her. It still wanted more than an hour of twilight, and I by no means durst go home till nightfall; so I sat on there and watched her, and put the hood from her face and the gloves from her hands, and I deemed her a goodly and lovely thing, and was sorry that she was not alive, and I wept for her, and for myself also, that I had lost her fellowship. So when I came back to the house at dark with the venison, I knew not whether to tell my mistress and tyrant concerning this matter; but she looked on me and said at once: 'Wert thou going to tell me of something that thou hast seen?' So I told her all, even as it was, and she said to me: 'Hast thou taken aught from the corpse?'  'Nay,' said I. 'Then must I hasten,' she said, 'and be before the wolves.' Therewith she took a brand from the fire, and bade me bear one also and lead her:  so did I easily enough, for the moon was up, and what with moon and snow, it was well nigh as bright as the day. So when we came to the dead woman, my mistress kneeled down by her and undid the collar of her cloak, which I had not touched, and took something from her neck swiftly, and yet I, who was holding the torch, saw that it was a necklace of blue stones and green, with gold between--Yea, dear Champion, like unto thine as one peascod is to another," quoth she.

And therewith the distressfulness of her face which had worn Ralph's heart while she had been telling her tale changed, and she came, as it were, into her new life and the love of him again, and she kissed him and laid her cheek to his and he kissed her mouth. And then she fetched a sigh, and began with her story again.

"My mistress took the necklace and put it in her pouch, and said as to herself:  'Here, then, is another seeker who hath not found, unless one should dig a pit for her here when the thaw comes, and call it the Well at the World's End: belike it will be for her as helpful as the real one.' Then she turned to me and said:  'Do thou with the rest what thou wilt,' and therewith she went back hastily to the house. But as for me, I went back also, and found a pick and a mattock in the goat-house, and came back in the moonlight and scraped the snow away, and dug a pit, and buried the poor damsel there with all her gear.

"Wore the winter thence with naught that I need tell of, only I thought much of the words that my mistress had spoken. Spring came and went, and summer also, well nigh tidingless. But one day as I drave the goats from our house there came from the wood four men, a-horseback and weaponed, but so covered with their armour that I might see little of their faces. They rode past me to our house, and spake not to me, though they looked hard at me; but as they went past I heard one say: 'If she might but be our guide to the Well at the World's End!' I durst not tarry to speak with them, but as I looked over my shoulder I saw them talking to my mistress in the door; but meseemed she was clad but in poor homespun cloth instead of her rich apparel, and I am far-sighted and clear-sighted. After this the autumn and winter that followed it passed away tidingless.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_04]

CHAPTER 4

The Lady Tells of Her Deliverance

"Now I had outgrown my old fear, and not much befell to quicken it: and ever I was as much out of the house as I could be. But about this time my mistress, from being kinder to me than before, began to grow harder, and ofttimes used me cruelly:  but of her deeds to me, my friend, thou shalt ask me no more than I tell thee. On a day of May-tide I fared abroad with my goats, and went far with them, further from the house than I had been as yet. The day was the fairest of the year, and I rejoiced in it, and felt as if some exceeding great good were about to befall me; and the burden of fears seemed to have fallen from me. So I went till I came to a little flowery dell, beset with blossoming whitethorns and with a fair stream running through it; a place somewhat like to this, save that the stream there was bigger. And the sun was hot about noontide, so I did off my raiment, which was rough and poor, and more meet for winter than May-tide, and I entered a pool of the clear water, and bathed me and sported therein, smelling the sweet scent of the whitethorns and hearkening to the song of the many birds; and when I came forth from the water, the air was so soft and sweet to me, and the flowery grass so kind to my feet, and the May-blooms fell upon my shoulders, that I was loth to do on my rough raiment hastily, and withal I looked to see no child of man in that wilderness: so I sported myself there a long while, and milked a goat and drank of the milk, and crowned myself with white-thorn and hare-bells; and held the blossoms in my hand, and felt that I also had some might in me, and that I should not be a thrall of that sorceress for ever. And that day, my friend, belike was the spring-tide of the life and the love that thou holdest in thy kind arms.

"But as I abode thus in that fair place, and had just taken my rock and spindle in hand that I might go on with my task and give as little occasion as I might for my mistress to chastise me, I looked up and saw a child of man coming down the side of the little dale towards me, so I sprang up, and ran to my raiment and cast them on me hastily, for I was ashamed; and when I saw that it was a woman, I thought at first that it was my mistress coming to seek me; and I thought within myself that if she smote me I would bear it no more, but let it be seen which of the twain was the mightier. But I looked again and saw that it was not she but a woman smaller and older.  So I stood where I was and abode her coming, smiling and unafraid, and half-clad.

"She drew near and I saw that it was an old woman grey haired, uncomely of raiment, but with shining bright eyes in her wrinkled face. And she made an obeisance to me and said:  'I was passing through this lonely wilderness and I looked down into the little valley and saw these goats there and the lovely lady lying naked amongst them, and I said I am too old to be afraid of aught; for if she be a goddess come back again from yore agone, she can but make an end of a poor old carline, a gangrel body, who hath no joy of her life now. And if she be of the daughters of men, she will belike methink her of her mother, and be kind to me for her sake, and give me a piece of bread and a draught of her goats' milk.'

"I spake hastily, for I was ashamed of her words, though I only half understood them:  'I hear thee and deem that thou mockest me: I have never known a mother; I am but a poor thrall, a goatherd dwelling with a mistress in a nook of this wildwood: I have never a piece of bread; but as to the goats' milk, that thou shalt have at once.'  So I called one of my goats to me, for I knew them all, and milked her into a wooden bowl that I carried slung about me, and gave the old woman to drink: and she kissed my hand and drank and spake again, but no longer in a whining voice, like a beggar bidding alms in the street, but frank and free.

"'Damsel,' she said, 'now I see that thy soul goes with thy body, and that thou art kind and proud at once.  And whatever thou art, it is no mock to say of thee, that thou art as fair as the fairest; and I think that this will follow thee, that henceforth no man who seeth thee once will forget thee ever, or cease to long for thee: of a surety this is thy weird.  Now I see that thou knowest no more of the world and its ways than one of the hinds that run in these woods. So if thou wilt, I will sit down by thee and tell thee much that shall avail thee; and thou in thy turn shalt tell me all the tale concerning thy dwelling and thy service, and the like.'

"I said, 'I may not, I durst not; I serve a mighty mistress, and she would slay me if she knew that I had spoken to thee; and woe's me!  I fear that even now she will not fail to know it. Depart in peace.'

"'Nay,' she said, 'thou needest not tell me, for I have an inkling of her and her ways:  but I will give thee wisdom, and not sell it thee at a price. Sit down then, fair child, on this flowery grass, and I will sit beside thee and tell thee of many things worth thine heeding.' So there we sat awhile, and in good sooth she told me much of the world which I had not yet seen, of its fairness and its foulness; of life and death, and desire and disappointment, and despair; so that when she had done, if I were wiser than erst, I was perchance little more joyous; and yet I said to myself that come what would I would be a part of all that.

"But at last she said:  'Lo the day is waning, and thou hast two things to do; either to go home to thy mistress at once, or flee away from her by the way that I shall show thee; and if thou wilt be ruled by me, and canst bear thy thralldom yet a little while thou wilt not flee at once, but abide till thou hast seen me again. And since it is here that thou hast met me, here mayst thou meet me again; for the days are long now, and thou mayst easily win thy way hither before noon on any day.'

"So I tied my goatskin shoes to my feet, and drave my goats together, and we went up together out of the dale, and were in the wide-spreading plain of the waste; and the carline said: 'Dost thou know the quarters of the heaven by the sun?' 'Yea,' said I. 'Then,' quoth she, 'whenso thou desirest to depart and come into the world of folk that I have told thee of, set thy face a little north of west, and thou shalt fall in with something or somebody before long; but be speedy on that day as thou art light-footed, and make all the way thou canst before thy mistress comes to know of thy departure; for not lightly will any one let loose such a thrall as thou.'

"I thanked her, and she went her ways over the waste, I wotted not whither, and I drave my goats home as speedily as I might; the mistress meddled not with me by word or deed, though I was short of my due tale of yarn. The next day I longed sore to go to the dale and meet the carline but durst not, and the next day I fared in likeways; but the third day I longed so to go, that my feet must needs take me there, whatsoever might befall. And when I had been in the dale a little, thither came the carline, and sat down by me and fell to teaching me wisdom, and showed me letters and told me what they were, and I learned like a little lad in the chorister's school.

"Thereafter I mastered my fear of my mistress and went to that dale day by day, and learned of the carline; though at whiles I wondered when my mistress would let loose her fury upon me; for I called to mind the threat she had made to me on the day when she offered up my white goat. And I made up my mind to this, that if she fell upon me with deadly intent I would do my best to slay her before she should slay me. But so it was, that now again she held her hand from my body, and scarce cast a word at me ever, but gloomed at me, and fared as if hatred of me had grown great in her heart.

"So the days went by, and my feet had worn a path through the wilderness to the Dale of Lore, and May had melted into June, and the latter days of June were come.  And on Midsummer Day I went my ways to the dale according to my wont, when, as I as driving on my goats hastily I saw a bright thing coming over the heath toward me, and I went on my way to meet it, for I had no fear now, except what fear of my mistress lingered in my heart; nay, I looked that everything I saw of new should add some joy to my heart. So presently I saw that it was a weaponed man riding a white horse, and anon he had come up to me and drawn rein before me. I wondered exceedingly at beholding him and the heart leaped within me at his beauty; for though the carline had told me of the loveliness of the sons of men, that was but words and I knew not what they meant; and the others that I had seen were not young men or goodly, and those last, as I told thee, I could scarce see their faces.

"And this one was even fairer than the dead woman that I had buried, whose face was worn with toil and trouble, as now I called to mind. He was clad in bright shining armour with a gay surcoat of green, embroidered with flowers over it; he had a light sallet on his head, and the yellow locks of his hair flowed down from under, and fell on his shoulders:  his face was as beardless as thine, dear friend, but not clear brown like to thine but white and red like a blossom."

Ralph spake and said:  "Belike it was a woman;" and his voice sounded loud in the quiet place.  She smiled on him and kissed his cheek, and said:  "Nay, nay, dear Champion, it is not so. God rest his soul! many a year he has been dead."

Said Ralph:  "Many a year! what meanest thou?"  "Ah!" she said, "fear not! as I am now, so shall I be for thee many a year. Was not thy fear that I should vanish away or change into something unsightly and gruesome?  Fear not, I say; am I not a woman, and thine own?" And again she flushed bright red, and her grey eyes lightened, and she looked at him all confused and shamefaced.

He took her face between his hands and kissed her over and over; then he let her go, and said:  "I have no fear: go on with thy tale, for the words thereof are as thy kisses to me, and the embracing of thine hands and thy body: tell on, I pray thee."  She took his hand in hers and spake, telling her tale as before.

"Friend, well-beloved for ever!  This fair young knight looked on me, and as he looked, his face flushed as red as mine did even now. And I tell thee that my heart danced with joy as I looked on him, and he spake not for a little while, and then he said: 'Fair maiden, canst thou tell me of any who will tell me a word of the way to the Well at the World's End?'  I said to him, 'Nay, I have heard the word once and no more, I know not the way: and I am sorry that I cannot do for thee that which thou wouldest.' And then I spake again, and told him that he should by no means stop at our house, and I told him what it was like, so that he might give it the go by.  I said, 'Even if thou hast to turn back again, and fail to find the thing thou seekest, yet I beseech thee ride not into that trap.'

"He sat still on his saddle a while, staring at me and I at him; and then he thanked me, but with so bad a grace, that I wondered of him if he were angry; and then he shook his rein, and rode off briskly, and I looked after him a while, and then went on my way; but I had gone but a short while, when I heard horse-hoofs behind me, and I turned and looked, and lo! it was the knight coming back again. So I stayed and abided him; and when he came up to me, he leapt from his horse and stood before me and said:  'I must needs see thee once again.'

"I stood and trembled before him, and longed to touch him. And again he spake, breathlessly, as one who has been running: 'I must depart, for I have a thing to do that I must do; but I long sorely to touch thee, and kiss thee; yet unless thou freely willest it, I will refrain me.'  Then I looked at him and said, 'I will it freely.'  Then he came close up to me, and put his hand on my shoulder and kissed my cheek; but I kissed his lips, and then he took me in his arms, and kissed me and embraced me; and there in that place, and in a little while, we loved each other sorely.

"But in a while he said to me:  'I must depart, for I am as one whom the Avenger of Blood followeth; and now I will give thee this, not so much as a gift, but as a token that we have met in the wilderness, thou and I.' Therewith he put his hand to his neck, and took from it this necklace which thou seest here, and I saw that it was like that which my mistress took from the neck of the dead woman. And no less is it like to the one that thou wearest, Ralph.

"I took it in my hand and wept that I might not help him. And he said:  'It is little likely that we shall meet again; but by the token of this collar thou mayest wot that I ever long for thee till I die:  for though I am a king's son, this is the dearest of my possessions.'  I said: 'Thou art young, and I am young; mayhappen we shall meet again: but thou shalt know that I am but a thrall, a goatherd.' For I knew by what the old woman told me of somewhat of the mightiness of the kings of the world.  'Yea,' he said, and smiled most sweetly, 'that is easy to be seen: yet if I live, as I think not to do, thou shalt sit where great men shall kneel to thee; not as I kneel now for love, and that I may kiss thy knees and thy feet, but because they needs must worship thee.'

"Therewith he arose to his feet and leapt on his horse, and rode his ways speedily:  and I went upon my way with my goats, and came down into the Dale of Lore, and found the old woman abiding me; and she came to me, and took me by the hands, and touched the collar (for I had done it about my neck), and said:

"'Dear child, thou needest not to tell me thy tale, for I have seen him. But if thou must needs wear this necklace, I must give thee a gift to go with it.  But first sit down by the old carline awhile and talk with her; for meseemeth it will be but a few days ere thou shalt depart from this uttermost wilderness, and the woods before the mountains.'

"So I sat down by her, and in spite of her word I told her all that had befallen betwixt me and the king's son:  for my heart was too full that I might refrain me.  She nodded her head from time to time, but said naught, till I had made an end:  and then fell to telling me of many matters for my avail; but yet arose earlier than her wont was; and when we were about sundering on the path which I had trodden above the Dale, she said: 'Now must I give thee that gift to go along with the gift of the lover, the King's son; and I think thou wilt find it of avail before many days are gone by.'  Therewith she took from her pouch a strong sharp knife, and drew it from the sheath, and flashed it in the afternoon sun, and gave it to me; and I took it and laid it in my bosom and thanked her; for I thought that I understood her meaning, and how it would avail me. Then I went driving my goats home speedily, so that the sun was barely set when I came to the garth; and a great horror rather than a fear of my mistress was on me; and lo! she stood in the door of the house gazing down the garth and the woodland beyond, as though she were looking for my coming: and when her eyes lighted on me, she scowled, and drew her lips back from her teeth and clenched her hands with fury, though there was nought in them; and she was a tall and strong woman, though now growing somewhat old: but as for me, I had unsheathed the carline's gift before I came to the garth, and now I held it behind my back in my left hand.

"I had stayed my feet some six paces from the threshold, and my heart beat quick, but the sick fear and cowering had left me, though the horror of her grew in my heart.  My goats had all gone off quietly to their house, and there was nothing betwixt me and her. In clearing from my sleeve the arm of me which held the knife, the rough clasp which fastened my raiment together at the shoulder had given way, and the cloth had fallen and left my bosom bare, so that I knew that the collar was clearly to be seen.  So we stood a moment, and I had no words, but she spake at last in a hard, snarling voice, such as she oftenest used to me, but worse.

"'Now at last the time has come when thou art of no more use to me; for I can see thee what thou hast got for thyself. But know now that thou hast not yet drunk of the Well at the World's End, and that it will not avail thee to flee out of this wood; for as long as I live thou wilt not be able to get out of reach of my hand; and I shall live long: I shall live long.  Come, then, and give thyself up to me, that I may deal with thee as I threatened when I slew thy friend the white goat; for, indeed, I knew then that it would come to this.'

"She had but twice or thrice spoken to me so many words together as this; but I answered never a word, but stood watching her warily. And of a sudden she gave forth a dreadful screaming roar, wherewith all the wood rang again, and rushed at me; but my hand came from behind my back, and how it was I know not, but she touched me not till the blade had sunk into her breast, and she fell across my feet, her right hand clutching my raiment. So I loosed her fingers from the cloth, shuddering with horror the while, and drew myself away from her and stood a little aloof, wondering what should happen next.  And indeed I scarce believed but she would presently rise up from the ground and clutch me in her hands, and begin the tormenting of me.  But she moved no more, and the grass all about her was reddened with her blood; and at last I gathered heart to kneel down beside her, and found that she no more breathed than one of those conies or partridges which I had been used to slay for her.

"Then I stood and considered what I should do, and indeed I had been pondering this all the way from the Dale thereto, in case I should escape my mistress.  So I soon made up my mind that I would not dwell in that house even for one night; lest my mistress should come to me though dead, and torment me. I went into the house while it was yet light, and looked about the chamber, and saw three great books there laid on the lectern, but durst not have taken them even had I been able to carry them; nor durst I even to look into them, for fear that some spell might get to work in them if they were opened; but I found a rye loaf whereof I had eaten somewhat in the morning, and another untouched, and hanging to a horn of the lectern I found the necklace which my mistress had taken from the dead woman. These I put into my scrip, and as to the necklace, I will tell thee how I bestowed it later on.  Then I stepped out into the twilight which was fair and golden, and full fain I was of it. Then I drove the goats out of their house and went my way towards the Dale of Lore, and said to myself that the carline would teach me what further to do, and I came there before the summer dark had quite prevailed, and slept sweetly and softly amongst my goats after I had tethered them in the best of the pasture.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_05]

CHAPTER 5

Yet More of the Lady's Story

"Lo thou, beloved," she said, "thou hast seen me in the wildwood with little good quickened in me:  doth not thine heart sink at the thought of thy love and thy life given over to the keeping of such an one?"  He smiled in her face, and said: "Belike thou hast done worse than all thou hast told me: and these days past I have wondered often what there was in the stories which they of the Burg had against thee: yet sooth to say, they told little of what thou hast done: no more belike than being their foe."  She sighed and said: "Well, hearken; yet shall I not tell thee every deed that I have been partaker in.

"I sat in the Dale that next day and was happy, though I longed to see that fair man again:  sooth to say, since my mistress was dead, everything seemed fairer to me, yea even mine own face, as I saw it in the pools of the stream, though whiles I wondered when I should have another mistress, and how she would deal with me; and ever I said I would ask the carline when she came again to me. But all that day she came not:  nor did I marvel thereat. But when seven days passed and still she came not, I fell to wondering what I should do:  for my bread was all gone, and I durst not go back to the house to fetch meal; though there was store of it there.  Howbeit, I drank of the milk of the goats, and made curds thereof with the woodland roots, and ate of the wood-berries like as thou hast done, friend, e'en now. And it was easier for me to find a livelihood in the woods than it had been for most folk, so well as I knew them. So wore the days, and she came not, and I began to think that I should see the wise carline no more, as indeed fell out at that time; and the days began to hang heavy on my hands, and I fell to thinking of that way to the west and the peopled parts, whereof the carline had told me; and whiles I went out of the Dale and went away hither and thither through the woods, and so far, that thrice I slept away out of the Dale: but I knew that the peopled parts would be strange to me and I feared to face them all alone.

"Thus wore the days till July was on the wane, and on a morning early I awoke with unwonted sounds in mine ears; and when my eyes were fairly open I saw a man standing over me and a white horse cropping the grass hard by.  And my heart was full and fain, and I sprang to my feet and showed him a smiling happy face, for I saw at once that it was that fair man come back again. But lo! his face was pale and worn, though he looked kindly on me, and he said:  'O my beloved, I have found thee, but I am faint with hunger and can speak but little.' And even therewith he sank down on the grass.  But I bestirred myself, and gave him milk of my goats, and curds and berries, and the life came into him again, and I sat down by him and laid his head in my lap, and he slept a long while; and when he awoke (and it was towards sunset) he kissed my hands and my arms, and said to me:  'Fair child, perhaps thou wilt come with me now; and even if thou art a thrall thou mayest flee with me; for my horse is strong and fat, though I am weak, for he can make his dinner on the grass.'

"Then he laughed and I no less; but I fed him with my poor victual again, and as he ate I said:  'I am no mistress's thrall now; for the evening of the day whereon I saw thee I slew her, else had she slain me.' 'The saints be praised,' said he:  'Thou wilt come with me, then?' 'O yea,' said I. Then I felt shamefaced and I reddened; but I said: 'I have abided here many days for a wise woman who hath taught me many things; but withal I hoped that thou wouldst come also.'

"Then he put his arms about my shoulders and loved me much; but at last he said:  'Yet is it now another thing than that which I looked for, when I talked of setting thee by me on the golden throne.  For now am I a beaten man; I have failed of that I sought, and suffered shame and hunger and many ills. Yet ever I thought that I might find thee here or hereby.' Then a thought came into my mind, and I said:  'Else maybe thou hadst found what thou soughtest, and overcome the evil things.' 'Maybe,' he said; 'it is now but a little matter.'"

"As for me, I could have no guess at what were the better things he had meant for me, and my heart was full of joy, and all seemed better than well.  And we talked together long till the day was gone. Then we kissed and embraced each other in the Dale of Lore, and the darkness of summer seemed but short for our delight."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_06]

CHAPTER 6

The Lady Tells Somewhat of Her Doings After She Left the Wilderness

Ralph stayed her speech now, and said:  "When I asked of thee in the Land of Abundance, there were some who seemed to say that thou hast let more men love thee than one: and it was a torment to me to think that even so it might be. But now when thine own mouth telleth me of one of them it irks me little.  Dost thou think it little-hearted in me?"

"O friend," she said, "I see that so it is with thee that thou wouldst find due cause for loving me, whatever thou foundest true of me. Or dost thou deem that I was another woman in those days?  Nay, I was not: I can see myself still myself all along the way I have gone." She was silent a little, and then she said:  "Fear not, I will give thee much cause to love me.  But now I know thy mind the better, I shall tell thee less of what befell me after I left the wilderness; for whatever I did and whatever I endured, still it was always I myself that was there, and it is me that thou lovest.  Moreover, my life in the wilderness is a stranger thing to tell thee of than my dealings with the folk, and with Kings and Barons and Knights. But thereafter thou shalt hear of me what tales thou wilt of these matters, as the days and the years pass over our heads.

"Now on the morrow we would not depart at once, because there we had some victual, and the king's son was not yet so well fed as he should be; so we abode in that fair place another day, and then we went our ways westward, according to the rede of the carline; and it was many days before we gat us out of the wilderness, and we were often hard put to it for victual; whiles I sat behind my knight a-horseback, whiles he led the beast while I rode alone, and not seldom I went afoot, and that nowise slowly, while he rode the white horse, for I was as light-foot then as now.

"And of the way we went I will tell thee nought as now, because sure it is that if we both live, thou and I shall tread that road together, but with our faces turned the other way; for it is the road from the Well at the World's End, where I myself have been, or else never had thine eyes fallen on me."

Ralph said, "Even so much I deemed by reading in the book; yet it was not told clearly that thou hadst been there." "Yea," she said, because the said book was made not by my friends but my foes, and they would have men deem that my length of days and the endurance of my beauty and never-dying youth of my heart came from evil and devilish sources; and if thou wilt trust my word it is not so, for in the Well at the World's End is no evil, but only the Quenching of Sorrow, and Clearing of the Eyes that they may behold. And how good it is that they look on thee now.  And moreover, the history of that book is partly false of intention and ill-will, and partly a confused medley of true and false, which has come of mere chance-hap.

"Hearken now," she said, "till I tell thee in few words what befell me before I came to drink the Water of the Well. After we had passed long deserts of wood and heath, and gone through lands exceeding evil and perilous, and despaired of life for the horror of those places, and seen no men, we came at last amongst a simple folk who dealt kindly with us, yea, and more. These folk seemed to me happy and of good wealth, though to my lord they seemed poor and lacking of the goods of the world.  Forsooth, by that time we lacked more than they, for we were worn with cold and hunger, and hard life: though for me, indeed, happy had been the days of my wayfaring, but my lord remembered the days of his riches and the kingdom of his father, and the worship of mighty men, and all that he had promised me on the happy day when I first beheld him: so belike he was scarce so happy as I was.

"It was springtime when we came to that folk; for we had worn through the autumn and winter in getting clear of the wilderness. Not that the way was long, as I found out afterwards, but that we went astray in the woodland, and at last came out of it into a dreadful stony waste which we strove to cross thrice, and thrice were driven back into the greenwood by thirst and hunger; but the fourth time, having gotten us store of victual by my woodcraft, we overpassed it and reached the peopled country.

"Yea, spring was on the earth, as we, my lord and I, came down from the desolate stony heaths, and went hand and hand across the plain, where men and women of that folk were feasting round about the simple roofs and woodland halls which they had raised there.  Then they left their games and sports and ran to us, and we walked on quietly, though we knew not whether the meeting was to be for death or life. But that kind folk gathered round us, and asked us no story till they had fed us, and bathed us, and clad us after their fashion. And then, despite the nakedness and poverty wherein they had first seen us, they would have it that we were gods sent down to them from the world beyond the mountains by their fathers of old time; for of Holy Church, and the Blessed Trinity, and the Mother of God they knew no more than did I at that time, but were heathen, as the Gentiles of yore agone. And even when we put all that Godhood from us, and told them as we might and could what we were (for we had no heart to lie to such simple folk), their kindness abated nothing, and they bade us abide there, and were our loving friends and brethren.

"There in sooth had I been content to abide till eld came upon me, but my lord would not have it so, but longed for greater things for me.  Though in sooth to me it seemed as if his promise of worship of me by the folk had been already fulfilled; for when we had abided there some while, and our beauty, which had been marred by the travail of our way-faring, had come back to us in full, or it maybe increased somewhat, they did indeed deal with us with more love than would most men with the saints, were they to come back on the earth again; and their children would gather round about me and make me a partaker of their sports, and be loth to leave me; and the faces of their old folk would quicken and gladden when I drew nigh: and as for their young men, it seemed of them that they loved the very ground that my feet trod on, though it grieved me that I could not pleasure some of them in such wise as they desired. And all this was soft and full of delight for my soul: and I, whose body a little while ago had been driven to daily toil with evil words and stripes, and who had known not what words of thanks and praise might mean!

"But so it must be that we should depart, and the kind folk showed us how sore their hearts were of our departure, but they gainsaid us in nowise, but rather furthered us all they might, and we went our ways from them riding on horned neat (for they knew not of horses), and driving one for a sumpter beast before us; and they had given us bows and arrows for our defence, and that we might get us venison.

"It is not to be said that we did not encounter perils; but thereof I will tell thee naught as now.  We came to other peoples, richer and mightier than these, and I saw castles, and abbies, and churches, and walled towns, and wondered at them exceedingly. And in these places folk knew of the kingdom of my lord and his father, and whereas they were not of his foes (who lay for the more part on the other side of his land), and my lord could give sure tokens of what he was, we were treated with honour and worship, and my lord began to be himself again, and to bear him as a mighty man. And here to me was some gain in that poverty and nakedness wherewith we came out of the mountains and the raiment of the simple folk; for had I been clad in my poor cloth and goat-skins of the House of the Sorcerer, and he in his brave attire and bright armour, they would have said, it is a thrall that he is assotted of, and would have made some story and pretence of taking me from him; but they deemed me a great lady indeed, and a king's daughter, according to the tale that he told them.  Forsooth many men that saw me desired me beyond measure, and assuredly some great proud man or other would have taken me from my lord, but that they feared the wrath of his father, who was a mighty man indeed.

"Yea, one while as we sojourned by a certain town but a little outside the walls, a certain young man, a great champion and exceeding masterful, came upon me with his squires as I was walking in the meadows, and bore me off, and would have taken me to his castle, but that my lord followed with a few of the burghers, and there was a battle fought, wherein my lord was hurt; but the young champion he slew; and I cannot say but I was sorry of his death, though glad of my deliverance.

"Again, on a time we guested in a great baron's house, who dealt so foully by us that he gave my lord a sleeping potion in his good-night cup, and came to me in the dead night and required me of my love; and I would not, and he threatened me sorely, and called me a thrall and a castaway that my lord had picked up off the road: but I gat a knife in my hand and was for warding myself when I saw that my lord might not wake:  so the felon went away for that time. But on the morrow came two evil men into the hall whom he had suborned, and bore false witness that I was a thrall and a runaway. So that the baron would have held me there (being a mighty man) despite my lord and his wrath and his grief, had not a young knight of his house been, who swore that he would slay him unless he let us go; and whereas there were other knights and squires there present who murmured, the baron was in a way compelled. So we departed, and divers of the said knights and squires went with us to see us safe on the way.

"But this was nigh to the kingdom of my lord's father, and that felon baron I came across again, and he was ever after one of my worst foes.

"Moreover, that young champion who had first stood up in the hall rode with us still, when the others had turned back; and I soon saw of him that he found it hard to keep his eyes off me; and that also saw my lord, and it was a near thing that they did not draw sword thereover: yet was that knight no evil man, but good and true, and I was exceedingly sorry for him; but I could not help him in the only way he would take help of me.

"Lo you, my friend, the beginnings of evil in those long past days, and the seeds of ill-hap sown in the field of my new life even before the furrow was turned.

"Well, we came soon into my lord's country, and fair and rich and lovely was it in those days; free from trouble and unpeace, a happy abode for the tillers of the soil, and the fashioners of wares. The tidings had gone to the king that my lord was come back, and he came to meet him with a great company of knights and barons, arrayed in the noblest fashion that such folk use; so that I was bewildered with their glory, and besought my lord to let me fall back out of the way, and perchance he might find me again. But he bade me ride on his right hand, for that I was the half of his life and his soul, and that my friends were his friends and my foes his foes.

"Then there came to me an inkling of the things that should befall, and I saw that the sweet and clean happiness of my new days was marred, and had grown into something else, and I began to know the pain of strife and the grief of confusion:  but whereas I had not been bred delicately, but had endured woes and griefs from my youngest days, I was not abashed, but hardened my heart to face all things, even as my lord strove to harden his heart:  for, indeed, I said to myself that if I was to him as the half of his life, he was to me little less than the whole of my life.

"It is as if it had befallen yesterday, my friend, that I call to mind how we stood beside our horses in the midst of the ring of great men clad in gold and gleaming with steel, in the meadow without the gates, the peace and lowly goodliness whereof with its flocks and herds feeding, and husbandmen tending the earth and its increase, that great and noble array had changed so utterly.  There we stood, and I knew that the eyes of all those lords and warriors were set upon me wondering.  But the love of my lord and the late-learned knowledge of my beauty sustained me. Then the ring of men opened, and the king came forth towards us; a tall man and big, of fifty-five winters, goodly of body and like to my lord to look upon.  He cast his arms about my lord, and kissed him and embraced him, and then stood a little aloof from him and said: 'Well, son, hast thou found it, the Well at the World's End?'

"'Yea,' said my lord, and therewith lifted my hand to his lips and kissed it, and I looked the king in his face, and his eyes were turned to me, but it was as if he were looking through me at something behind me.

"Then he said:  'It is good, son:  come home now to thy mother and thy kindred.'  Then my lord turned to me while the king took no heed, and no man in the ring of knights moved from his place, and he set me in the saddle, and turned about to mount, and there came a lord from the ring of men gloriously bedight, and he bowed lowly before my lord, and held his stirrup for him: but lightly he leapt up into the saddle, and took my reins and led me along with him, so that he and the king and I went on together, and all the baronage and their folk shouted and tossed sword and spear aloft and followed after us. And we left the meadow quiet and simple again, and rode through the gate of the king's chief city, wherein was his high house and his castle, the dwelling-place of his kindred from of old.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_07]

CHAPTER 7

The Lady Tells of the Strife and Trouble That Befell After Her Coming to the Country of the King's Son

"When we came to the King's House, my lord followed his father into the hall, where sat his mother amongst her damsels: she was a fair woman, and looked rather meek than high-hearted; my lord led me up to her, and she embraced and kissed him and caressed him long; then she turned about to me and would have spoken to me, but the king, who stood behind us, scowled on her, and she forebore; but she looked me on somewhat kindly, and yet as one who is afeard.

"Thus it went for the rest of the day, and my lord had me to sit beside him in the great hall when the banquet was holden, and I ate and drank with him and beheld all the pageants by his side, and none meddled with me either to help or to hinder, because they feared the king.  Yet many eyes I saw that desired my beauty. And so when night came, he took me to his chamber and his bed, as if I were his bride new wedded, even as it had been with us on the grass of the wilderness and the bracken of the wildwood. And then, at last, he spake to me of our case, and bade me fear not, for that a band of his friends, all-armed, was keeping watch and ward in the cloister without.  And when I left the chamber on the morrow's morn, there were they yet, all in bright armour, and amongst them the young knight who had delivered me from the felon baron, and he looked mournfully at me, so that I was sorry for his sorrow.

"And I knew now that the king was minded to slay me, else had he bidden thrust me from my lord's side.

"So wore certain days; and on the seventh night, when we were come into our chamber, which was a fair as any house outside of heaven, my lord spake to me in a soft voice, and bade me not do off my raiment. 'For,' said he, 'this night we must flee the town, or we shall be taken and cast into prison to-morrow; for thus hath my father determined.' I kissed him and clung to him, and he no less was good to me. And when it was the dead of night we escaped out of our window by a knotted rope which he had made ready, and beneath was the city wall; and that company of knights, amongst whom was the young knight abovesaid, had taken a postern thereby, and were abiding us armed and with good horses.  So we came into the open country, and rode our ways with the mind to reach a hill-castle of one of those young barons, and to hold ourselves there in despite of the king.  But the king had been as wary as we were privy, and no less speedy than we; and he was a mighty and deft warrior, and he himself followed us on the spur with certain of his best men-at-arms. And they came upon us as we rested in a woodside not far from our house of refuge: and the king stood by to see the battle with his sword in his sheath, but soon was it at an end, for though our friends fought valiantly, they were everyone slain or hurt, and but few escaped with bare life; but that young man who loved me so sorely crept up to me grievously hurt, and I did not forbear to kiss him once on the face, for I deemed I should soon die also, and his blood stained my sleeve and my wrist, but he died not as then, but lived to be a dear friend to me for long.

"So we, my lord and I, were led back to the city, and he was held in ward and I was cast into prison with chains and hunger and stripes. And the king would have had me lie there till I perished, that I might be forgotten utterly; but there were many of the king's knights who murmured at this, and would not forget me; so the king being constrained, had me brought forth to be judged by his bishops of sorcery for the beguiling of my lord. Long was the tale to me then, but I will not make it long for thee; as was like to be, I was brought in guilty of sorcery, and doomed to be burned in the Great Square in three days time.

"Nay, my friend, thou hast no need to look so troubled; for thou seest that I was not burned.  This is the selfsame body that was tied to the stake in the market place of the king's city many a year ago.

"For the friends of my lord, young men for the most part, and many who had been fain to be my friends also, put on their armour, and took my lord out of the courteous prison wherein he was, and came to the Great Square whenas I stood naked in my smock bound amid the faggots; and I saw the sheriffs' men give back, and great noise and rumour rise up around me:  and then all about me was a clear space for a moment and I heard the tramp of the many horse-hoofs, and the space was full of weaponed men shouting, and crying out, 'Life for our Lord's Lady!'  Then a minute, and I was loose and in my lord's arms, and they brought me a horse and I mounted, lest the worst should come and we might have to flee. So I could see much of what went on; and I saw that all the unarmed folk and lookers-on were gone, but at our backs was a great crowd of folk with staves and bows who cried out, 'Life for the Lady!' But before us was naught but the sheriffs' sergeants and a company of knights and men-at-arms, about as many as we were, and the king in front of them, fully armed, his face hidden by his helm, and a royal surcoat over his hauberk beaten with his bearing, to wit, a silver tower on a blue sky bestarred with gold.

"And now I could see that despite the bills and bows behind us the king was going to fall on with his folk; and to say sooth I feared but little and my heart rose high within me, and I wished I had a sword in my hand to strike once for life and love.  But lo! just as the king was raising his sword, and his trumpet was lifting the brass to his lips, came a sound of singing, and there was come the Bishop and the Abbot of St. Peter's and his monks with him, and cross bearers and readers and others of the religious: and the Bishop bore in his hand the Blessed Host (as now I know it was) under a golden canopy, and he stood between the two companies and faced the king, while his folk sang loud and sweet about him.

"Then the spears went up and from the rest, and swords were sheathed, and there went forth three ancient knights from out of the king's host and came up to him and spake with him. Then he gat him away unto his High House; and the three old knights came to our folk, and spake with the chiefs; but not with my lord, and I heard not what they said. But my lord came to me in all loving-kindness and brought me into the house of one of the Lineage, and into a fair chamber there, and kissed me, and made much of me; and brought me fair raiment and did it on me with his own hands, even as his wont was to be for my tire-maiden.

"Then in a little while came those chiefs of ours and said that truce had been hanselled them for this time, but on these terms, that my lord and I and all those who had been in arms, and whosoever would, that feared the king's wrath, should have leave to depart from his city so that they went and abode no nearer than fifty miles thereof till they should know his further pleasure. Albeit that whosoever would go home peaceably might abide in the city still and need not fear the king's wrath if he stirred no further: but that in any case the Sorceress should get her gone from those walls.

"So we rode out of the gates that very day before sunset; for it was now midsummer again, and it was three hours before noon that I was to have been burned; and we were a gallant company of men-at-arms and knights; yet did I be-think me of those who were slain on that other day when we were taken, and fain had I been that they were riding with us; but at least that fair young man was in our company, though still weak with his hurts: for the prison and the process had worn away wellnigh two months. True it is that I rejoiced to see him, for I had deemed him dead.

"Dear friend, I pray thy pardon if I weary thee with making so long a tale of my friends of the past days; but needs must I tell thee somewhat of them, lest thou love that which is not. Since truly it is myself that I would have thee to love, and none other.

"Many folk gathered to us as we rode our ways to a town which was my lord's own, and where all men were his friends, so that we came there with a great host and sat down there in no fear of what the king might do against us. There was I duly wedded to my lord by a Bishop of Holy Church, and made his Lady and Queen; for even so he would have it.

"And now began the sore troubles of that land, which had been once so peaceful and happy; the tale whereof I may one day tell thee; or rather many tales of what befell me therein; but not now; for the day weareth; and I still have certain things that I must needs tell thee.

"We waged war against each other, my lord and the king, and whiles one, and whiles the other overcame.  Either side belike deemed that one battle or two would end the strife; but so it was not, but it endured year after year, till fighting became the chief business of all in the land.

"As for me, I had many tribulations.  Thrice I fled from the stricken field with my lord to hide in some stronghold of the mountains. Once was I taken of the foemen in the town where I abode when my lord was away from me, and a huge slaughter of innocent folk was made, and I was cast into prison and chains, after I had seen my son that I had borne to my lord slain before mine eyes. At last we were driven clean out of the Kingdom of the Tower, and abode a long while, some two years, in the wilderness, living like outlaws and wolves' heads, and lifting the spoil for our livelihood.  Forsooth of all the years that I abode about the Land of Tower those were the happiest. For we robbed no poor folk and needy, but rewarded them rather, and drave the spoil from rich men and lords, and hard-hearted chapmen-folk: we ravished no maid of the tillers, we burned no cot, and taxed no husbandman's croft or acre, but defended them from their tyrants.  Nevertheless we gat an ill name wide about through the kingdoms and cities; and were devils and witches to the boot of thieves and robbers in the mouths of these men; for when the rich man is hurt his wail goeth heavens high, and none may say he heareth not.

"Now it was at this time that I first fell in with the Champions of the Dry Tree; for they became our fellows and brothers in arms in the wildwood: for they had not as yet builded their stronghold of the Scaur, whereas thou and I shall be in two days time.  Many a wild deed did our folk in their company, and many that had been better undone. Whiles indeed they went on journeys wherein we were not partakers, as when they went to the North and harried the lands of the Abbot of Higham, and rode as far even as over the Downs to Bear Castle and fought a battle there with the Captain of Higham: whereas we went never out of the Wood Perilous to the northward; and lifted little save in the lands of our own proper foemen, the friends of the king.

"Now I say not of the men of the Dry Tree that they were good and peaceable men, nor would mercy hold their hands every while that they were hard bestead and thrust into a corner. Yet I say now and once for all that their fierceness was and is but kindness and pity when set against the cruelty of the Burg of the Four Friths; men who have no friend to love, no broken foe to forgive, and can scarce be kind even to themselves: though forsooth they be wise men and cautelous and well living before the world, and wealthy and holy."

She stayed her speech a while, and her eyes glittered in her flushed face and she set her teeth; and she was as one beside herself till Ralph kissed her feet, and caressed her, and she went on again.

"Dear friend, when thou knowest what these men are and have been thou wilt bless thy friend Roger for leading thee forth from the Burg by night and cloud, whatever else may happen to thee.

"Well, we abode in the wildwood, friends and good fellows from the first; and that young man, though he loved me ever, was somewhat healed of the fever of love, and was my faithful friend, in such wise that neither I nor my lord had aught to find fault with in him. Meanwhile we began to grow strong, for many joined us therein who had fled from their tyrants of the good towns and the manors of the baronage, and at last in the third year naught would please my lord but we must enter into the Kingdom of the Tower, and raise his banner in the wealthy land, and the fair cities.

"Moreover, his father, the King of the Tower, died in his bed in these days, and no word of love or peace had passed between them since that morning when I was led out to be burned in the Great Square.

"So we came forth from the forest, we, and the Champions of the Dry Tree; and made the tale a short one. For the king, the mighty warrior and wise man, was dead: and his captains of war, some of them were dead, and some weary of strife; and those who had been eager in debate were falling to ask themselves wherefore they had fought and what was to do that they should still be fighting; and lo! when it came to be looked into, it was all a matter of the life and death of one woman, to wit me myself, and why should she not live, why should she not sit upon the throne with the man who loved her?

"Therefore when at last we came out from the twilight of the woods into the sunny fields of the Land of the Tower, there was no man to naysay us; nay, the gates of the strong places flew open before the wind of our banners, and the glittering of our spears drew the folk together toward the places of rejoicing. We entered the master City in triumph, with the houses hung with green boughs and the maidens casting flowers before our feet, and I sat a crowned Queen upon the throne high raised on the very place where erst I stood awaiting the coming of the torch to the faggots which were to consume me.

"There then began the reign of the Woman of the Waste; for so it was, that my lord left to my hands the real ruling of the kingdom, though he wore the crown and set the seal to parchments. As to them of the Dry Tree, though some few of them abode in the kingdom, and became great there, the more part of them went back to the wildwood and lived the old life of the Wood, as we had found them living it aforetime.  But or ever they went, the leaders of them came before me, and kissed my feet, and with tears and prayers besought me, and bade me that if aught fell amiss to me there, I should come back to them and be their Lady and Queen; and whereas these wild men loved me well, and I deemed that I owed much to their love and their helping, I promised them and swore to them by the Water of the Well at the World's End that I would do no less than they prayed me: albeit I set no term or year for the day that I would come to them.

"And now my lord and I, we set ourselves to heal the wounds which war had made in the land:  and hard was the work, and late the harvest; so used had men become to turmoil and trouble.  Moreover, there were many, and chiefly the women who had lost husband, lover, son or brother, who laid all their griefs on my back; though forsooth how was I guilty of the old king's wrath against me, which was the cause of all? About this time my lord had the Castle of Abundance built up very fairly for me and him to dwell in at whiles; and indeed we had before that dwelt at a little manor house that was there, when we durst withdraw a little from the strife; but now he had it done as fair as ye saw it, and had those arras cloths made with the story of my sojourn in the wilderness, even as ye saw them.  But the days and the years wore, and wealth came back to the mighty of the land, and fields flourished and the acres bore increase, and fair houses were builded in the towns; and the land was called happy again.

"But for me I was not so happy:  and I looked back fondly to the days of the greenwood and the fellowship of the Dry Tree, and the days before that, of my flight with my lord. And moreover with the wearing of the years those murmurs against me and the blind causeless hatred began to grow again, and chiefly methinks because I was the king, and my lord the king's cloak: but therewith tales concerning me began to spring up, how that I was not only a sorceress, but even one foredoomed from of old and sent by the lords of hell to wreck that fair Land of the Tower and make it unhappy and desolate. And the tale grew and gathered form, till now, when the bloom of my beauty was gone, I heard hard and fierce words cried after me in the streets when I fared abroad, and that still chiefly by the women:  for yet most men looked on me with pleasure. Also my counsellors and lords warned me often that I must be wary and of great forbearance if trouble were to be kept back.

"Now amidst these things as I was walking pensively in my garden one summer day, it was told me that a woman desired to see me, so I bade them bring her.  And when she came I looked on her, and deemed that I had seen her aforetime:  she was not old, but of middle age, of dark red hair, and brown eyes somewhat small: not a big woman, but well fashioned of body, and looking as if she had once been exceeding dainty and trim.  She spake, and again I seemed to have heard her voice before:  'Hail, Queen,' she said, 'it does my heart good to see thee thus in thy glorious estate.' So I took her greeting; but those tales of my being but a sending of the Devil for the ruin of that land came into my mind, and I sent away the folk who were thereby before I said more to her. Then she spake again:  'Even so I guessed it would be that thou wouldst grow great amongst women.'

"But I said, 'What is this? and when have I known thee before-time?' She smiled and said naught; and my mind went back to those old days, and I trembled, and the flesh crept upon my bones, lest this should be the coming back in a new shape of my mistress whom I had slain. But the woman laughed, and said, as if she knew my thoughts: 'Nay, it is not so:  the dead are dead; fear not:  but hast thou forgotten the Dale of Lore?'

"'Nay,' said I, 'never; and art thou then the carline that learned me lore? But if the dead come not back, how do the old grow young again? for 'tis a score of years since we two sat in the Dale, and I longed for many things.'

"Said the woman:  'The dead may not drink of the Well at the World's End; yet the living may, even if they be old; and that blessed water giveth them new might and changeth their blood, and they are as young folk for a long while again after they have drunken.' 'And hast thou drunken?' said I.

"'Yea,' she said; 'but I am minded for another draught.'  I said: 'And wherefore hast thou come to me, and what shall I give to thee?' She said, 'I will take no gift of thee as now, for I need it not, though hereafter I may ask a gift of thee.  But I am to ask this of thee, if thou wilt be my fellow-farer on the road thither?' 'Yea?' said I, 'and leave my love and my lord, and my kingship which he hath given me? for this I will tell thee, that all that here is done, is done by me.'

"'Great is thy Kingship, Lady,' said the woman, and smiled withal. Then she sat silent a little, and said:  'When six months are worn, it will be springtide; I will come to thee in the spring days, and know what thy mind is then.  But now I must depart.' Quoth I:  'Glad shall I be to talk with thee again; for though thou hast learned me much of wisdom, yet much more I need; yea, as much as the folk here deem I have already.' 'Thou shalt have no less,' said the woman.  Then she kissed my hands and went her ways, and I sat musing still for a long while: because for all my gains, and my love that I had been loved withal, and the greatness that I had gotten, there was as it were a veil of unhappiness wrapped round about my heart.

"So wore the months, and ere the winter had come befell an evil thing, for my lord, who had loved me so, and taken me out of the wilderness, died, and was gathered to the fathers, and there was I left alone; for there was no fruit of my womb by him alive.  My first-born had been slain by those wretches, and a second son that I bore had died of a pestilence that war and famine had brought upon the land. I will not wear thy soul with words about my grief and sorrow: but it is to be told that I sat now in a perilous place, and yet I might not step down from it and abide in that land, for then it was a sure thing, that some of my foes would have laid hand on me and brought me to judgment for being but myself, and I should have ended miserably. So I gat to me all the strength that I might, and whereas there were many who loved me still, some for my own sake, and some for the sake of my lord that was, I endured in good hope that all my days were not done. Yet I longed for the coming of the Teacher of Lore; for now I made up my mind that I would go with her, and seek to the Well at the World's End for weal and woe.

"She came while April was yet young:  and I need make no long tale of how we gat us away:  for whereas she was wise in hidden lore, it was no hard matter for her to give me another semblance than mine own, so that I might have walked about the streets of our city from end to end, and none had known me. So I vanished away from my throne and my kingdom, and that name and fame of a witch-wife clove to me once and for all, and spread wide about the cities of folk and the kingdoms, and many are the tales that have arisen concerning me, and belike some of these thou hast heard told."

Ralph reddened and said:  "My soul has been vexed by some inkling of them; but now it is at rest from them for ever."

"May it be so!" she said:  "and now my tale is wearing thin for the present time.

"Back again went my feet over the ways they had trodden before, though the Teacher shortened the road much for us by her wisdom. Once again what need to tell thee of these ways when thine own eyes shall behold them as thou wendest them beside me? Be it enough to say that once again I came to that little house in the uttermost wilderness, and there once more was the garth and the goat-house, and the trees of the forest beyond it, and the wood-lawns and the streams and all the places and things that erst I deemed I must dwell amongst for ever."

Said Ralph:  "And did the carline keep troth with thee? Was she not but luring thee thither to be her thrall? Or did the book that I read in the Castle of Abundance but lie concerning thee?"

"She held her troth to me in all wise," said the Lady, "and I was no thrall of hers, but as a sister, or it may be even as a daughter; for ever to my eyes was she the old carline who learned me lore in the Dale of the wildwood.

"But now a long while, years long, we abode in that House of the Sorceress ere we durst seek further to the Well at the World's End. And yet meseems though the years wore, they wore me no older; nay, in the first days at least I waxed stronger of body and fairer than I had been in the King's Palace in the Land of the Tower, as though some foretaste of the Well was there for us in the loneliness of the desert; although forsooth the abiding there amidst the scantiness of livelihood, and the nakedness, and the toil, and the torment of wind and weather were as a penance for the days and deeds of our past lives. What more is to say concerning our lives here, saving this, that in those days I learned yet more wisdom of the Teacher of Lore, and amidst that wisdom was much of that which ye call sorcery: as the foreseeing of things to come, and the sending of dreams or visions, and certain other matters.  And I may tell thee that the holy man who came to us last even, I sent him the dream which came to him drowsing, and bade him come to the helping of Walter the Black:  for I knew that I should take thy hand and flee with thee this morning e'en as I have done: and I would fain have a good leech to Walter lest he should die, although I owe him hatred rather than love.  Now, my friend, tell me, is this an evil deed, and dost thou shrink from the Sorceress?"

He strained her to his bosom and kissed her mouth, and then he said:  "Yet thou hast never sent a dream to me." She laughed and said:  "What! hast thou never dreamed of me since we met at the want-way of the Wood Perilous?" "Never," said he.  She stroked his cheek fondly, and said: "Young art thou, sweet friend, and sleepest well a-nights. It was enough that thou thoughtest of me in thy waking hours." Then she went on with her tale.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_08]

CHAPTER 8

The Lady Maketh an End of Her Tale

"Well, my friend, after we had lived thus a long time, we set out one day to seek to the Well at the World's End, each of us signed and marked out for the quest by bearing such-like beads as thou and I both bear upon our necks today. Once again of all that befell us on that quest I will tell thee naught as now:  because to that Well have I to bring thee: though myself, belike, I need not its waters again."

Quoth Ralph:  "And must thou lead me thy very self, mayest thou not abide in some safe place my going and returning? So many and sore as the toils and perils of the way may be." "What!" she said, "and how shall I be sundered from thee now I have found thee?  Yea, and who shall lead thee, thou lovely boy? Shall it be a man to bewray thee, or a woman to bewray me? Yet need we not go tomorrow, my beloved, nor for many days: so sweet as we are to each other.

"But in those past days it was needs must we begin our quest before the burden of years was over heavy upon us. Shortly to say it, we found the Well, and drank of its waters after abundant toil and peril, as thou mayst well deem. Then the life and the soul came back to us, and the past years were as naught to us, and my youth was renewed in me, and I became as thou seest me to-day. But my fellow was as a woman of forty summers again, strong and fair as I had seen her when she came into the garden in the days of my Queenhood, and thus we returned to the House of the Sorceress, and rested there for a little from our travel and our joy.

"At last, and that was but some five years ago, the Teacher said to me: 'Sister, I have learned thee all that thine heart can take of me, and thou art strong in wisdom, and moreover again shall it be with thee, as I told of thee long ago, that no man shall look on thee that shall not love thee.  Now I will not seek to see thy life that is coming, nor what thine end shall be, for that should belike be grievous to both of us; but this I see of thee, that thou wilt now guide thy life not as I will, but as thou wilt; and since my way is not thy way, and that I see thou shalt not long abide alone, now shall we sunder; for I am minded to go to the most ancient parts of the world, and seek all the innermost of wisdom whiles I yet live; but with kings and champions and the cities of folk will I have no more to do: while thou shalt not be able to refrain from these.  So now I bid thee farewell.'

"I wept at her words, but gainsaid them naught, for I wotted that she spake but the truth; so I kissed her, and we parted; she went her ways through the wildwood, and I abode at the House of the Sorceress, and waited on the wearing of the days.

"But scarce a month after her departure, as I stood by the threshold one morning amidst of the goats, I saw men come riding from out the wood; so I abode them, and they came to the gate of the garth and there lighted down from their horses, and they were three in company; and no one of them was young, and one was old, with white locks flowing down from under his helm: for they were all armed in knightly fashion, but they had naught but white gaberdines over their hauberks, with no coat-armour or token upon them. So they came through the garth-gate and I greeted them and asked them what they would; then the old man knelt down on the grass before me and said: 'If I were as young as I am old my heart would fail me in beholding thy beauty:  but now I will ask thee somewhat:  far away beyond the forest we heard rumours of a woman dwelling in the uttermost desert, who had drunk of the Well at the World's End, and was wise beyond measure. Now we have set ourselves to seek that woman, and if thou be she, we would ask a question of thy wisdom.'

"I answered that I was even such as they had heard of, and bade them ask.

"Said the old man:

"'Fifty years ago, when I was yet but a young man, there was a fair woman who was Queen of the Land of the Tower and whom we loved sorely because we had dwelt together with her amidst tribulation in the desert and the wildwood:  and we are not of her people, but a fellowship of free men and champions hight the Men of the Dry Tree:  and we hoped that she would one day come back and dwell with us and be our Lady and Queen: and indeed trouble seemed drawing anigh her, so that we might help her and she might become our fellow again, when lo! she vanished away from the folk and none knew where she was gone. Therefore a band of us of the Dry Tree swore an oath together to seek her till we found her, that we might live and die together: but of that band of one score and one, am I the last one left that seeketh; for the rest are dead, or sick, or departed: and indeed I was the youngest of them.  But for these two men, they are my sons whom I have bred in the knowledge of these things and in the hope of finding tidings of our Lady and Queen, if it were but the place where her body lieth.  Thou art wise: knowest thou the resting place of her bones?"

"When I had heard the tale of the old man I was moved to my inmost heart, and I scarce knew what to say.  But now this long while fear was dead in me, so I thought I would tell the very sooth: but I said first:  'Sir, what I will tell, I will tell without beseeching, so I pray thee stand up.'  So did he, and I said: 'Geoffrey, what became of the white hind after the banners had left the wildwood'? He stared wild at me, and I deemed that tears began to come into his eyes; but I said again: 'What betid to dame Joyce's youngest born, the fair little maiden that we left sick of a fever when we rode to Up-castle?' Still he said naught but looked at me wondering:  and said: 'Hast thou ever again seen that great old oak nigh the clearing by the water, the half of which fell away in the summer-storm of that last July?'

"Then verily the tears gushed out of his eyes, and he wept, for as old as he was; and when he could master himself he said:  'Who art thou? Who art thou?  Art thou the daughter of my Lady, even as these are my sons?' But I said:  'Now will I answer thy first question, and tell thee that the Lady thou seekest is verily alive; and she has thriven, for she has drunk of the Well at the World's End, and has put from her the burden of the years. O Geoffrey, and dost thou not know me?'  And I held out my hand to him, and I also was weeping, because of my thought of the years gone by; for this old man had been that swain who had nigh died for me when I fled with my husband from the old king; and he became one of the Dry Tree, and had followed me with kind service about the woods in the days when I was at my happiest.

"But now he fell on his knees before me not like a vassal but like a lover, and kissed my feet, and was beside himself for joy. And his sons, who were men of some forty summers, tall and warrior-like, kissed my hands and made obeisance before me.

"Now when we had come to ourselves again, old Geoffrey, who was now naught but glad, spake and said:  'It is told amongst us that when our host departed from the Land of the Tower, after thou hadst taken thy due seat upon the throne, that thou didst promise our chieftains how thou wouldst one day come back to the fellowship of the Dry Tree and dwell amongst us. Wilt thou now hold to thy promise?'  I said:  'O Geoffrey, if thou art the last of those seekers, and thou wert but a boy when I dwelt with you of old, who of the Dry Tree is left to remember me?'  He hung his head awhile then, and spake: 'Old are we grown, yet art thou fittest to be amongst young folk: unless mine eyes are beguiled by some semblance which will pass away presently.'  'Nay,' quoth I, 'it is not so; as I am now, so shall I be for many and many a day.' 'Well,' said Geoffrey, 'wherever thou mayst be, thou shalt be Queen of men.'

"'I list not to be Queen again,' said I. He laughed and said: 'I wot not how thou mayst help it.'

"I said:  'Tell me of the Dry Tree, how the champions have sped, and have they grown greater or less.'  Said he: 'They are warriors and champions from father to son; therefore have they thriven not over well; yet they have left the thick of the wood, and built them a great castle above the little town hight Hampton; so that is now called Hampton under Scaur, for upon the height of the said Scaur is our castle builded: and there we hold us against the Burg of the Four Friths which hath thriven greatly; there is none so great as the Burg in all the lands about.'

"I said:  'And the Land of the Tower, thriveth the folk thereof at all?' 'Nay,' he said, 'they have been rent to pieces by folly and war and greediness:  in the Great City are but few people, grass grows in its streets; the merchants wend not the ways that lead thither. Naught thriveth there since thou stolest thyself away from them.'

"'Nay,' I said, 'I fled from their malice, lest I should have been brought out to be burned once more; and there would have been none to rescue then.' 'Was it so?' said old Geoffrey; 'well it is all one now; their day is done.'

"'Well,' I said, 'come into my house, and eat and drink therein and sleep here to-night, and to-morrow I shall tell thee what I will do.'

"Even so they did; and on the morrow early I spake to Geoffrey and said: 'What hath befallen the Land of Abundance, and the castle my lord built for me there; which we held as our refuge all through the War of the Tower, both before we joined us to you in the wildwood, and afterwards?'  He said: 'It is at peace still; no one hath laid hand on it; there is a simple folk dwelling there in the clearing of the wood, which forgetteth thee not; though forsooth strange tales are told of thee there; and the old men deem that it is but a little since thou hast ceased to come and go there; and they are ready to worship thee as somewhat more than the Blessed Saints, were it not for the Fathers of the Thorn who are their masters.'

"I pondered this a while, and then said:  'Geoffrey, ye shall bring me hence away to the peopled parts, and on the way, or when we are come amongst the cities and the kingdoms, we will settle it whither I shall go. See thou!  I were fain to be of the brotherhood of the Dry Tree; yet I deem it will scarce be that I shall go and dwell there straightway.'

"Therewith the old man seemed content; and indeed now that the first joy of our meeting, when his youth sprang up in him once more, was over, he found it hard to talk freely with me, and was downcast and shy before me, as if something had come betwixt us, which had made our lives cold to each other.

"So that day we left the House of the Sorceress, which I shall not see again, till I come there hand in hand with thee, beloved. When we came to the peopled parts, Geoffrey and his sons brought me to the Land of Abundance, and I found it all as he had said to me: and I took up my dwelling in the castle, and despised not those few folk of the land, but was kind to them:  but though they praised my gifts, and honoured me as the saints are honoured, and though they loved me, yet it was with fear, so that I had little part with them. There I dwelt then; and the book which thou didst read there, part true and part false, and altogether of malice against me, I bought of a monk who came our way, and who at first was sore afeared when he found that he had come to my castle.  As to the halling of the Chamber of Dais, I have told thee before how my lord, the King's Son, did do make it in memory of the wilderness wherein he found me, and the life of thralldom from which he brought me. There I dwelt till nigh upon these days in peace and quiet: not did I go to the Dry Tree for a long while, though many of them sought to me there at the Castle of Abundance; and, woe worth the while! there was oftenest but one end to their guesting, that of all gifts, they besought me but of one, which, alack!  I might not give them: and that is the love that I have given to thee, beloved.--And, oh! my fear, that it will weigh too light with thee, to win me pardon of thee for all that thou must needs pardon me, ere thou canst give me all thy love, that I long for so sorely."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_09]

CHAPTER 9

They Go On Their Way Once More

"Look now," she said, "I have held thee so long in talk, that the afternoon is waning; now is it time for us to be on the way again; not because I misdoubt me of thy foeman, but because I would take thee to a fairer dwelling of the desert, and one where I have erst abided; and moreover, there thou shalt not altogether die of hunger. See, is it not as if I had thought to meet thee here?"

"Yea, in good sooth," said he, "I wot that thou canst see the story of things before they fall."

She laughed and said:  "But all this that hath befallen since I set out to meet thee at the Castle of Abundance I foresaw not, any more than I can foresee to-morrow. Only I knew that we must needs pass by the place whereto I shall now lead thee, and I made provision there.  Lo! now the marvel slain: and in such wise shall perish other marvels which have been told of me; yet not all.  Come now, let us to the way."

So they joined hands and left the pleasant place, and were again going speedily amidst the close pine woods awhile, where it was smooth underfoot and silent of noises withal.

Now Ralph said:  "Beloved, thou hast told me of many things, but naught concerning how thou camest to be wedded to the Knight of the Sun, and of thy dealings with him."

Said she, reddening withal:  "I will tell thee no more than this, unless thou compel me:  that he would have me wed him, as it were against my will, till I ceased striving against him, and I went with him to Sunway, which is no great way from the Castle of Abundance, and there befell that treason of Walter the Black, who loved me and prayed for my love, and when I gainsaid him, swore by all that was holy, before my lord, that it was I who sought his love, and how I had told and taught him ways of witchcraft, whereby we might fulfill our love, so that the Baron should keep a wife for another man.  And the Knight of the Sun, whose heart had been filled with many tales of my wisdom, true and false, believed his friend whom he loved, and still believeth him, though he burneth for the love of me now; whereas in those first days of the treason, he burned with love turned to hatred. So of this came that shaming and casting-forth of me. Whereof I will tell thee but this, that the brother of my lord, even the tall champion whom thou hast seen, came upon me presently, when I was cast forth; because he was coming to see the Knight of the Sun at his home; and he loved me, but not after the fashion of his brother, but was kind and mild with me. So then I went with him to Hampton and the Dry Tree, and great joy made the folk thereof of my coming, whereas they remembered their asking of aforetime that I would come to be a Queen over them, and there have I dwelt ever since betwixt Hampton and the Castle of Abundance; and that tall champion has been ever as a brother unto me."

Said Ralph, "And thou art their Queen there?"  "Yea," she said, "in a fashion; yet have they another who is mightier than I, and might, if she durst, hang me over the battlements of the Scaur, for she is a fierce and hard woman, and now no longer young in years."

"Is it not so then," said Ralph, "that some of the ill deeds that are told of thee are of her doing?"

"It is even so," she said, "and whiles when she has spoken the word I may not be against her openly, therefore I use my wisdom which I have learned, to set free luckless wights from her anger and malice. More by token the last time I did thus was the very night of the day we parted, after thou hadst escaped from the Burg."

"In what wise was that?" said Ralph.  She said:  "When I rode away from thee on that happy day of my deliverance by thee, my heart laughed for joy of the life thou hadst given me, and of thee the giver, and I swore to myself that I would set free the first captive or death-doomed creature that I came across, in honour of my pleasure and delight: now speedily I came to Hampton and the Scaur; for it is not very far from the want-ways of the wood: and there I heard how four of our folk had been led away by the men of the Burg, therefore it was clear to me that I must set these men free if I could; besides, it pleased me to think that I could walk about the streets of the foemen safely, who had been but just led thitherward to the slaughter. Thou knowest how I sped therein.  But when I came back again to our people, after thou hadst ridden away from us with Roger, I heard these tidings, that there was one new-come into our prison, a woman to wit, who had been haled before our old Queen for a spy and doomed by her, and should be taken forth and slain, belike, in a day or two.  So I said to myself that I was not free of my vow as yet, because those friends of mine, I should in any case have done my best to deliver them: therefore I deemed my oath bound me to set that woman free. So in the night-tide when all was quiet I went to the prison and brought her forth, and led her past all the gates and wards, which was an easy thing to me, so much as I had learned, and came with her into the fields betwixt the thorp of Hampton and the wood, when it was more daylight than dawn, so that I could see her clearly, and no word as yet had we spoken to each other.  But then she said to me: 'Am I to be slain here or led to a crueller prison?'  And I said: 'Neither one thing nor the other:  for lo!  I have set thee free, and I shall look to it that there shall be no pursuit of thee till thou hast had time to get clear away.'  But she said: 'What thanks wilt thou have for this?  Wherefore hast thou done it?' And I said, 'It is because of the gladness I have gotten.' Said she, 'And would that I might get gladness!' So I asked her what was amiss now that she was free.  She said: 'I have lost one thing that I loved, and found another and lost it also.'  So I said:  'Mightest thou not seek for the lost?' She said, 'It is in this wood, but when I shall find it I shall not have it.'  'It is love that thou art seeking,' said I. 'In what semblance is he?'

"What wilt thou, my friend?  Straightway she fell to making a picture of thee in words; so that I knew that she had met thee, and belike after I had departed from thee, and my heart was sore thereat; for now I will tell thee the very truth, that she was a young woman and exceeding fair, as if she were of pearl all over, and as sweet as eglantine; and I feared her lest she should meet thee again in these wildwoods. And so I asked her what would she, and she said that she had a mind to seek to the Well at the World's End, which quencheth all sorrow; and I rejoiced thereat, thinking that she would be far away from thee, not thinking that thou and I must even meet to seek to it also. So I gave her the chaplet which my witch-mistress took from the dead woman's neck; and went with her into the wildwood, and taught her wisdom of the way and what she was to do. And again I say to thee that she was so sweet and yet with a kind of pity in her both of soul and body, and wise withal and quiet, that I feared her, though I loved her; yea and still do: for I deem her better than me, and meeter for thee and thy love than I be.--Dost thou know her?"

"Yea," said Ralph, "and fair and lovely she is in sooth. Yet hast thou naught to do to fear her.  And true it is that I saw her and spake with her after thou hadst ridden away. For she came by the want-ways of the Wood Perilous in the dawn of the day after I had delivered thee; and in sooth she told me that she looked either for Death, or the Water of the Well to end her sorrow."

Then he smiled and said; "As for that which thou sayest, that she had been meeter for me than thou, I know not this word. For look you, beloved, she came, and passed, and is gone, but thou art there and shalt endure."

She stayed, and turned and faced him at that word; and love so consumed her, that all sportive words failed her; yea and it was as if mirth and light-heartedness were swallowed up in the fire of her love; and all thought of other folk departed from him as he felt her tears of love and joy upon his face, and she kissed and embraced him there in the wilderness.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_10]

CHAPTER 10

Of the Desert-House and the Chamber of Love in the Wilderness

Then in a while they grew sober and went on their ways, and the sun was westering behind them, and casting long shadows. And in a little while they were come out of the thick woods and were in a country of steep little valleys, grassy, besprinkled with trees and bushes, with hills of sandstone going up from them, which were often broken into cliffs rising sheer from the tree-beset bottoms:  and they saw plenteous deer both great and small, and the wild things seemed to fear them but little. To Ralph it seemed an exceeding fair land, and he was as joyous as it was fair; but the Lady was pensive, and at last she said: "Thou deemest it fair, and so it is; yet is it the lonesomest of deserts.  I deem indeed that it was once one of the fairest of lands, with castles and cots and homesteads all about, and fair people no few, busy with many matters amongst them. But now it is all passed away, and there is no token of a dwelling of man, save it might be that those mounds we see, as yonder, and yonder again, are tofts of house-walls long ago sunken into the earth of the valley.  And now few even are the hunters or way-farers that wend through it."

Quoth Ralph:  "Thou speakest as if there had been once histories and tales of this pleasant wilderness:  tell me, has it anything to do with that land about the wide river which we went through, Roger and I, as we rode to the Castle of Abundance the other day? For he spoke of tales of deeds and mishaps concerning it." "Yea," she said, "so it is, and the little stream that runs yonder beneath those cliffs, is making its way towards that big river aforesaid, which is called the Swelling Flood. Now true it is also that there are many tales about of the wars and miseries that turned this land into a desert, and these may be true enough, and belike are true.  But these said tales have become blended with the story of those aforesaid wars of the Land of the Tower; of which indeed this desert is verily a part, but was desert still in the days when I was Queen of the Land; so thou mayst well think that they who hold me to be the cause of all this loneliness (and belike Roger thought it was so) have scarce got hold of the very sooth of the matter."

"Even so I deemed," said Ralph:  "and to-morrow we shall cross the big river, thou and I. Is there a ferry or a ford there whereas we shall come, or how shall we win over it?"

She was growing merrier again now, and laughed at this and said: "O fair boy! the crossing will be to-morrow and not to-day; let to-morrow cross its own rivers; for surely to-day is fair enough, and fairer shall it be when thou hast been fed and art sitting by me in rest and peace till to-morrow morning. So now hasten yet a little more; and we will keep the said little stream in sight as well as we may for the bushes."

So they sped on, till Ralph said:  "Will thy feet never tire, beloved?" "O child," she said, "thou hast heard my story, and mayst well deem that they have wrought many a harder day's work than this day's. And moreover they shall soon rest; for look! yonder is our house for this even, and till to-morrow's sun is high: the house for me and thee and none else with us."  And therewith she pointed to a place where the stream ran in a chain of pools and stickles, and a sheer cliff rose up some fifty paces beyond it, but betwixt the stream and the cliff was a smooth table of greensward, with three fair thorn bushes thereon, and it went down at each end to the level of the river's lip by a green slope, but amidmost, the little green plain was some ten feet above the stream, and was broken by a little undercliff, which went down sheer into the water. And Ralph saw in the face of the high cliff the mouth of a cave, however deep it might be.

"Come," said the Lady, "tarry not, for I know that hunger hath hold of thee, and look, how low the sun is growing!" Then she caught him by the hand, and fell to running with him to the edge of the stream, where at the end of the further slope it ran wide and shallow before it entered into a deep pool overhung with boughs of alder and thorn.  She stepped daintily over a row of big stones laid in the rippling shallow; and staying herself in mid-stream on the biggest of them, and gathering up her gown, looked up stream with a happy face, and then looked over her shoulder to Ralph and said: "The year has been good to me these seasons, so that when I stayed here on my way to the Castle of Abundance, I found but few stones washed away, and crossed wellnigh dry-shod, but this stone my feet are standing on now, I brought down from under the cliff, and set it amid-most, and I said that when I brought thee hither I would stay thereon and talk with thee while I stood above the freshness of the water, as I am doing now."

Ralph looked on her and strove to answer her, but no words would come to his lips, because of the greatness of his longing; she looked on him fondly, and then stooped to look at the ripples that bubbled up about her shoes, and touched them at whiles; then she said: "See how they long for the water, these feet that have worn the waste so long, and know how kind it will run over them and lap about them: but ye must abide a little, waste-wearers, till we have done a thing or two.  Come, love!"  And she reached her hand out behind her to Ralph, not looking back, but when she felt his hand touch it, she stepped lightly over the other stones, and on to the grass with him, and led him quietly up the slope that went up to the table of greensward before the cave.  But when they came on to the level grass she kissed him, and then turned toward the valley and spake solemnly: "May all blessings light on this House of the wilderness and this Hall of the Summer-tide, and the Chamber of Love that here is!"

Then was she silent a while, and Ralph brake not the silence. Then she turned to him with a face grown merry and smiling, and said: "Lo! how the poor lad yearneth for meat, as well he may, so long as the day hath been.  Ah, beloved, thou must be patient a little. For belike our servants have not yet heard of the wedding of us. So we twain must feed each the other.  Is that so much amiss?"

He laughed in her face for love, and took her by the wrist, but she drew her hand away and went into the cave, and came forth anon holding a copper kettle with an iron bow, and a bag of meal, which she laid at his feet; then she went into the cave again, and brought forth a flask of wine and a beaker; then she caught up the little cauldron, which was well-beaten, and thin and light, and ran down to the stream therewith, and came up thence presently, bearing it full of water on her head, going as straight and stately as the spear is seen on a day of tourney, moving over the barriers that hide the knight, before he lays it in the rest. She came up to him and set the water-kettle before him, and put her hands on his shoulders, and kissed his cheek, and then stepped back from him and smote her palms together, and said: "Yea, it is well!  But there are yet more things to do before we rest. There is the dighting of the chamber, and the gathering of wood for the fire, and the mixing of the meal, and the kneading and the baking of cakes; and all that is my work, and there is the bringing of the quarry for the roast, and that is thine."

Then she ran into the cave and brought forth a bow and a quiver of arrows, and said:  "Art thou somewhat of an archer?" Quoth he:  "I shoot not ill."  "And I," she said, "shoot well, all woodcraft comes handy to me.  But this eve I must trust to thy skill for my supper.  Go swiftly and come back speedily. Do off thine hauberk, and beat the bushes down in the valley, and bring me some small deer, as roe or hare or coney. And wash thee in the pool below the stepping-stones, as I shall do whiles thou art away, and by then thou comest back, all shall be ready, save the roasting of the venison."

So he did off his wargear, but thereafter tarried a little, looking at her, and she said:  "What aileth thee not to go? the hunt's up."  He said: "I would first go see the rock-hall that is for our chamber to-night; wilt thou not bring me in thither?"  "Nay," she said, "for I must be busy about many matters; but thou mayst go by thyself, if thou wilt."

So he went and stooped down and entered the cave, and found it high and wide within, and clean and fresh and well-smelling, and the floor of fine white sand without a stain.

So he knelt down and kissed the floor, and said aloud: "God bless this floor of the rock-hall whereon my love shall lie to-night!" Then he arose and went out of the cave, and found the Lady at the entry stooping down to see what he would do; and she looked on him fondly and anxiously; but he turned a merry face to her, and caught her round the middle and strained her to his bosom, and then took the bow and arrows and ran down the slope and over the stream, into the thicket of the valley.

He went further than he had looked for, ere he found a prey to his mind, and then he smote a roe with a shaft and slew her, and broke up the carcase and dight it duly, and so went his ways back. When he came to the stream he looked up and saw a little fire glittering not far from the cave, but had no clear sight of the Lady, though he thought he saw her gown fluttering nigh one of the thorn-bushes. Then he did off his raiment and entered that pool of the stream, and was glad to bathe him in the same place where her body had been but of late; for he had noted that the stones of the little shore were still wet with her feet where she had gone up from the water.

But now, as he swam and sported in the sun-warmed pool he deemed he heard the whinnying of a horse, but was not sure, so he held himself still to listen, and heard no more. Then he laughed and bethought him of Falcon his own steed, and dived down under the water; but as he came up, laughing still and gasping, he heard a noise of the clatter of horse hoofs, as if some one were riding swiftly up the further side of the grassy table, where it was stony, as he had noted when they passed by.

A deadly fear fell upon his heart as he thought of his love left all alone; so he gat him at once out of the water and cast his shirt over his head; but while his arms were yet entangled in the sleeves thereof, came to his ears a great and awful sound of a man's voice roaring out, though there were no shapen words in the roar.  Then were his arms free through the sleeves, and he took up the bow and fell to bending it, and even therewith he heard a great wailing of a woman's voice, and she cried out, piteously:  "Help me, O help, lovely creature of God!"

Yet must he needs finish bending the bow howsoever his heart died within him; or what help would there be of a naked and unarmed man? At last it was bent and an arrow nocked on the string, as he leapt over the river and up the slope.

But even as he came up to that pleasant place he saw all in a moment of time; that there stood Silverfax anigh the Cave's mouth, and the Lady lying on the earth anigh the horse; and betwixt her and him the Knight of the Sun stood up stark, his shining helm on his head, the last rays of the setting sun flashing in the broidered image of his armouries.

He turned at once upon Ralph, shaking his sword in the air (and there was blood upon the blade) and he cried out in terrible voice:  "The witch is dead, the whore is dead! And thou, thief, who hast stolen her from me, and lain by her in the wilderness, now shalt thou die, thou!"

Scarce had he spoken than Ralph drew his bow to the arrow-head and loosed; there was but some twenty paces betwixt them, and the shaft, sped by that fell archer, smote the huge man through the eye into the brain, and he fell down along clattering, dead without a word more.

But Ralph gave forth a great wail of woe, and ran forward and knelt by the Lady, who lay all huddled up face down upon the grass, and he lifted her up and laid her gently on her back. The blood was flowing fast from a great wound in her breast, and he tore off a piece of his shirt to staunch it, but she without knowledge of him breathed forth her last breath ere he could touch the hurt, and he still knelt by her, staring on her as if he knew not what was toward.

She had dight her what she could to welcome his return from the hunting, and had set a wreath of meadow-sweet on her red hair, and a garland of eglantine about her girdlestead, and left her feet naked after the pool of the stream, and had turned the bezels of her finger-rings outward, for joy of that meeting.

After a while he rose up with a most bitter cry, and ran down the green slope and over the water, and hither and thither amongst the bushes like one mad, till he became so weary that he might scarce go or stand for weariness.  Then he crept back again to that Chamber of Love, and sat down beside his new-won mate, calling to mind all the wasted words of the day gone by; for the summer night was come now, most fair and fragrant. But he withheld the sobbing passion of his heart and put forth his hand, and touched her, and she was still, and his hand felt her flesh that it was cold as marble. And he cried out aloud in the night and the wilderness, where there was none to hear him, and arose and went away from her, passing by Silverfax who was standing nearby, stretching out his head, and whinnying at whiles. And he sat on the edge of the green table, and there came into his mind despite himself thoughts of the pleasant fields of Upmeads, and his sports and pleasures there, and the even-song of the High House, and the folk of his fellowship and his love. And therewith his breast arose and his face was wryed, and he wept loud and long, and as if he should never make an end of it. But so weary was he, that at last he lay back and fell asleep, and woke not till the sun was high in the heavens. And so it was, that his slumber had been so heavy, that he knew not at first what had befallen; and one moment he felt glad, and the next as if he should never be glad again, though why he wotted not.  Then he turned about and saw Silverfax cropping the grass nearby, and the Lady lying there like an image that could move no whit, though the world awoke about her. Then he remembered, yet scarce all, so that wild hopes swelled his heart, and he rose to his knees and turned to her, and called to mind that he should never see her alive again, and sobbing and wailing broke out from him, for he was young and strong, and sorrow dealt hardly with him.

But presently he arose to his feet and went hither and thither, and came upon the quenched coals of the cooking-fire: she had baked cakes for his eating, and he saw them lying thereby, and hunger constrained him, so he took and ate of them while the tears ran down his face and mingled with the bread he ate. And when he had eaten, he felt stronger and therefore was life more grievous to him, and when he thought what he should do, still one thing seemed more irksome than the other.

He went down to the water to drink, and passed by the body of the Knight of the Sun, and wrath was fierce in his heart against him who had overthrown his happiness. But when he had drunk and washed hands and face he came back again, and hardened his heart to do what he must needs do. He took up the body of the Lady and with grief that may not be told of, he drew it into the cave, and cut boughs of trees and laid them over her face and all her body, and then took great stones from the scree at that other end of the little plain, and heaped them upon her till she was utterly hidden by them. Then he came out on to the green place and looked on the body of his foe, and said to himself that all must be decent and in order about the place whereas lay his love. And he came and stood over the body and said: "I have naught to do to hate him now:  if he hated me, it was but for a little while, and he knew naught of me. So let his bones be covered up from the wolf and the kite. Yet shall they not lie alongside of her.  I will raise a cairn above him here on this fair little plain which he spoilt of all joy." Therewith he fell to, and straightened his body, and laid his huge limbs together and closed his eyes and folded his arms over his breast; and then he piled the stones above him, and went on casting them on the heap a long while after there was need thereof.

Ralph had taken his raiment from the stream-side and done them on before this, and now he did on helm and hauberk, and girt his sword to his side. Then as he was about leaving the sorrowful place, he looked on Silverfax, who had not strayed from the little plain, and came up to him and did off saddle and bridle, and laid them within the cave, and bade the beast go whither he would.  He yet lingered about the place, and looked all around him and found naught to help him, and could frame in his mind no intent of a deed then, nor any tale of a deed he should do thereafter. Yet belike in his mind were two thoughts, and though neither softened his grief save a little, he did not shrink from them as he did from all others; and these two were of his home at Upmeads, which was so familiar to him, and of the Well at the World's End, which was but a word.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_11]

CHAPTER 11

Ralph Cometh Out of the Wilderness

Long he stood letting these thoughts run through his mind, but at last when it was now midmorning, he stirred and gat him slowly down the green slope, and for very pity of himself the tears brake out from him as he crossed the stream and came into the bushy valley.  There he stayed his feet a little, and said to himself:  "And whither then am I going?" He thought of the Castle of Abundance and the Champions of the Dry Tree, of Higham, and the noble warriors who sat at the Lord Abbot's board, and of Upmeads and his own folk:  but all seemed naught to him, and he thought:  "And how can I go back and bear folk asking me curiously of my wayfarings, and whether I will do this, that, or the other thing." Withal he thought of that fair damsel and her sweet mouth in the hostelry at Bourton Abbas, and groaned when he thought of love and its ending, and he said within himself:  "and now she is a wanderer about the earth as I am;" and he thought of her quest, and the chaplet of dame Katherine, his gossip, which he yet bore on his neck, and he deemed that he had naught to choose but to go forward and seek that he was doomed to; and now it seemed to him that there was that one thing to do and no other. And though this also seemed to him but weariness and grief, yet whereas he had ever lightly turned him to doing what work lay ready to hand; so now he knew that he must first of all get him out of that wilderness, that he might hear the talk of folk concerning the Well at the World's End, which he doubted not to hear again when he came into the parts inhabited.

So now, with his will or without it, his feet bore him on, and he followed up the stream which the Lady had said ran into the broad river called the Swelling Flood; "for," thought he, "when I come thereabout I shall presently find some castle or good town, and it is like that either I shall have some tidings of the folk thereof, or else they will compel me to do something, and that will irk me less than doing deeds of mine own will."

He went his ways till he came to where the wood and the trees ended, and the hills were lower and longer, well grassed with short grass, a down country fit for the feeding of sheep; and indeed some sheep he saw, and a shepherd or two, but far off.  At last, after he had left the stream awhile, because it seemed to him to turn and wind round over much to the northward, he came upon a road running athwart the down country, so that he deemed that it must lead one way down to the Swelling Flood; so he followed it up, and after a while began to fall in with folk; and first two Companions armed and bearing long swords over their shoulders: he stopped as they met, and stared at them in the face, but answered not their greeting; and they had no will to meddle with him, seeing his inches and that he was well armed, and looked no craven: so they went on.

Next he came on two women who had with them an ass between two panniers, laden with country stuff; and they were sitting by the wayside, one old and the other young.  He made no stay for them, and though he turned his face their way, took no heed of them more than if they were trees; though the damsel, who was well-liking and somewhat gaily clad, stood up when she saw his face anigh, and drew her gown skirt about her and moved daintily, and sighed and looked after him as he went on, for she longed for him.

Yet again came two men a-horseback, merchants clad goodly, with three carles, their servants, riding behind them; and all these had weapons and gave little more heed to him than he to them. But a little after they were gone, he stopped and said within himself: "Maybe I had better have gone their way, and this road doubtless leadeth to some place of resort."

But even therewith he heard horsehoofs behind him, and anon came up a man a-horseback, armed with jack and sallet, a long spear in his hand, and budgets at his saddle-bow, who looked like some lord's man going a message. He nodded to Ralph, who gave him good-day; for seeing these folk and their ways had by now somewhat amended his mind; and now he turned not, but went on as before.

At last the way clomb a hill longer and higher than any he had yet crossed, and when he had come to the brow and looked down, he saw the big river close below running through the wide valley which he had crossed with Roger on that other day. Then he sat down on the green bank above the way, so heavy of heart that not one of the things he saw gave him any joy, and the world was naught to him.  But within a while he came somewhat to himself, and, looking down toward the river, he saw that where the road met it, it was very wide, and shallow withal, for the waves rippled merrily and glittered in the afternoon sun, though there was no wind; moreover the road went up white from the water on the other side, so he saw clearly that this was the ford of a highway.  The valley was peopled withal: on the other side of the river was a little thorp, and there were carts and sheds scattered about the hither side, and sheep and neat feeding in the meadows, and in short it was another world from the desert.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_12]

CHAPTER 12

Ralph Falleth in With Friends and Rideth to Whitwall

Ralph looks on to the ford and sees folk riding through the thorp aforesaid and down to the river, and they take the water and are many in company, some two score by his deeming, and he sees the sun glittering on their weapons.

Now he thought that he would abide their coming and see if he might join their company, since if he crossed the water he would be on the backward way: and it was but a little while ere the head of them came up over the hill, and were presently going past Ralph, who rose up to look on them, and be seen of them, but they took little heed of him.  So he sees that though they all bore weapons, they were not all men-at-arms, nay, not more than a half score, but those proper men enough.  Of the others, some half-dozen seemed by their attire to be merchants, and the rest their lads; and withal they had many sumpter horses and mules with them. They greeted him not, nor he them, nor did he heed them much till they were all gone by save three, and then he leapt into the road with a cry, for who should be riding there but Blaise, his eldest brother, and Richard the Red with him, both in good case by seeming; for Blaise was clad in a black coat welted with gold, and rode a good grey palfrey, and Richard was armed well and knightly.

They knew him at once, and drew rein, and Blaise lighted down from his horse and cast his arms about Ralph, and said: "O happy day! when two of the Upmeads kindred meet thus in an alien land!  But what maketh thee here, Ralph? I thought of thee as merry and safe in Upmeads?"

Ralph said smiling, for his heart leapt up at the sight of his kindred: "Nay, must I not seek adventures like the rest?  So I stole myself away from father and mother."  "Ill done, little lord!" said Blaise, stroking Ralph's cheek.

Then up came Richard, and if Blaise were glad, Richard was twice glad, and quoth he:  "Said I not, Lord Blaise, that this chick would be the hardest of all to keep under the coop?  Welcome to the Highways, Lord Ralph! But where is thine horse? and whence and whither is it now? Hast thou met with some foil and been held to ransom?"

Ralph found it hard and grievous and dull work to answer; for now again his sorrow had taken hold of him:  so he said: "Yea, Richard, I have had adventures, and have lost rather than won; but at least I am a free man, and have spent but little gold on my loss."

"That is well," said Richard, "but whence gat ye any gold for spending?" Ralph smiled, but sadly, for he called to mind the glad setting forth and the kind face of dame Katherine his gossip, and he said: "Clement Chapman deemed it not unmeet to stake somewhat on my luck, therefore I am no pauper."

"Well," said Blaise, "if thou hast no great errand elsewhere, thou mightest ride with us, brother.  I have had good hap in these days, though scarce kingly or knightly, for I have been buying and selling:  what matter? few know Upmeads and its kings to wite me with fouling a fair name. Richard, go fetch a horse hither for Lord Ralph's riding, and we will tarry no longer."  So Richard trotted on, and while they abode him, Ralph asked after his brethren, and Blaise told him that he had seen or heard naught of them. Then Ralph asked of whither away, and Blaise told him to Whitwall, where was much recourse of merchants from many lands, and a noble market.

Back then cometh Richard leading a good horse while Ralph was pondering his matter, and thinking that at such a town he might well hear tidings concerning the Well at the World's End.

Now Ralph mounts, and they all ride away together.  On the way, partly for brotherhood's sake, partly that he might not be questioned overmuch himself, Ralph asked Blaise to tell him more of his farings; and Blaise said, that when he had left Upmeads he had ridden with Richard up and down and round about, till he came to a rich town which had just been taken in war, and that the Companions who had conquered it were looking for chapmen to cheapen their booty, and that he was the first or nearly the first to come who had will and money to buy, and the Companions, who were eager to depart, had sold him thieves' penny-worths, so that his share of the Upmeads' treasure had gone far; and thence he had gone to another good town where he had the best of markets for his newly cheapened wares, and had brought more there, such as he deemed handy to sell, and so had gone on from town to town, and had ever thriven, and had got much wealth:  and so at last having heard tell of Whitwall as better for chaffer than all he had yet seen, he and other chapmen had armed them, and waged men-at-arms to defend them, and so tried the adventure of the wildwoods, and come safe through.

Then at last came the question to Ralph concerning his adventures, and he enforced himself to speak, and told all as truly as he might, without telling of the Lady and her woeful ending.

Thus they gave and took in talk, and Ralph did what he might to seem like other folk, that he might nurse his grief in his own heart as far asunder from other men as might be.

So they rode on till it was even, and came to Whitwall before the shutting of the gates and rode into the street, and found it a fair and great town, well defensible, with high and new walls, and men-at-arms good store to garnish them.

Ralph rode with his brother to the hostel of the chapmen, and there they were well lodged.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_13]

CHAPTER 13

Richard Talketh With Ralph Concerning the Well at the World's End. Concerning Swevenham

On the morrow Blaise went to his chaffer and to visit the men of the Port at the Guildhall:  he bade Ralph come with him, but he would not, but abode in the hall of the hostel and sat pondering sadly while men came and went; but he heard no word spoken of the Well at the World's End. In like wise passed the next day and the next, save that Richard was among those who came into the hall, and he talked long with Ralph at whiles; that is to say that he spake, and Ralph made semblance of listening.

Now as is aforesaid Richard was old and wise, and he loved Ralph much, more belike than Lord Blaise his proper master, whereas he had no mind for chaffer, or aught pertaining to it: so he took heed of Ralph and saw that he was sad and weary-hearted; so on the sixth day of their abiding at Whitwall, in the morning when all the chapmen were gone about their business, and he and Ralph were left alone in the Hall, he spake to Ralph and said: "This is no prison, lord."  "Even so," quoth Ralph. "Nay, if thou doubtest it," said Richard, "let us go to the door and try if they have turned the key and shot the bolt on us."  Ralph smiled faintly and stood up, and said: "I will go with thee if thou willest it, but sooth to say I shall be but a dull fellow of thine to-day." Said Richard: "Wouldst thou have been better yesterday, lord, or the day before?" "Nay," said Ralph.  "Wilt thou be better to-morrow?" said Richard. Ralph shook his head.  Said Richard:  "Yea, but thou wilt be, or thou mayst call me a fool else."  "Thou art kind, Richard," said Ralph; "and I will come with thee, and do what thou biddest me; but I must needs tell thee that my heart is sick." "Yea," quoth Richard, "and thou needest not tell me so much, dear youngling; he who runs might read that in thee. But come forth."

So into the street they went, and Richard brought Ralph into the market-place, and showed him where was Blaise's booth (for he was thriving greatly) but Ralph would not go anigh it lest his brother should entangle him in talk; and they went into the Guildhall which was both great and fair, and the smell of the new-shaven oak (for the roof was not yet painted) brought back to Ralph's mind the days of his childhood when he was hanging about the building of the water-reeve's new house at Upmeads. Then they went into the Great Church and heard a Mass at the altar of St. Nicholas, Ralph's very friend; and the said church was great to the letter, and very goodly, and somewhat new also, since the blossom-tide of Whitwall was not many years old: and the altars of its chapels were beyond any thing for fairness that Ralph had seen save at Higham on the Way.

But when they came forth from the church, Ralph looked on Richard with a face that was both blank and weary, as who should say:  "What is to do now?" And forsooth so woe-begone he looked, that Richard, despite his sorrow and trouble for him, could scarce withhold his laughter.  But he said: "Well, foster son (for thou art pretty much that to me), since the good town pleasureth thee little, go we further afield."

So he led him out of the market-place, and brought him to the east gate of the town which hight Petergate Bar, and forth they went and out into the meadows under the walls, and stayed him at a little bridge over one of the streams, for it was a land of many waters; there they sat down in a nook, and spake Richard to Ralph, saying:

"Lord Ralph, ill it were if the Upmeads kindred came to naught, or even to little.  Now as for my own master Blaise, he hath, so please you, the makings of a noble chapman, but not of a noble knight; though he sayeth that when he is right rich he will cast aside all chaffer; naught of which he will do. As for the others, my lord Gregory is no better, or indeed worse, save that he shall not be rich ever, having no mastery over himself; while lord Hugh is like to be slain in some empty brawl, unless he come back speedily to Upmeads."

"Yea, yea," said Ralph, "what then?  I came not hither to hear thee missay my mother's sons."  But Richard went on: "As for thee, lord Ralph, of thee I looked for something; but now I cannot tell; for the heart in thee seemeth to be dead; and thou must look to it lest the body die also." "So be it!" said Ralph.

Said Richard:  "I am old now, but I have been young, and many things have I seen and suffered, ere I came to Upmeads. Old am I, and I cannot feel certain hopes and griefs as a young man can; yet have I bought the knowledge of them dear enough, and have not forgotten.  Whereby I wot well that my drearihead is concerning a woman.  Is it not so?"  "Yea," quoth Ralph. Said Richard:  "Now shalt thou tell me thereof, and so lighten thine heart a little."  "I will not tell thee," said Ralph; "or, rather, to speak more truly, I cannot." "Yea," said Richard, "and though it were now an easier thing for me to tell thee of the griefs of my life than for thee to hearken to the tale, yet I believe thee.  But mayhappen thou mayst tell me of one thing that thou desirest more than another." Said Ralph:  "I desire to die."  And the tears started in his eyes therewith.  But Richard spake, smiling on him kindly: "That way is open for thee on any day of the week. Why hast thou not taken it already?"  But Ralph answered naught. Richard said:  "Is it not because thou hopest to desire something; if not to-day, then to-morrow, or the next day or the next?" Still Ralph spake no word; but he wept.  Quoth Richard:  "Maybe I may help thee to a hope, though thou mayest think my words wild. In the land and the thorp where I was born and bred there was talk now and again of a thing to be sought, which should cure sorrow, and make life blossom in the old, and uphold life in the young." "Yea," said Ralph, looking up from his tears, "and what was that? and why hast thou never told me thereof before?" "Nay," said Richard, "and why should I tell it to the merry lad I knew in Upmeads? but now thou art a man, and hast seen the face of sorrow, it is meet that thou shouldest hear of THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

Ralph sprang to his feet as he said the word, and cried out eagerly: "Old friend, and where then wert thou bred and born?"  Richard laughed and said:  "See, then, there is yet a deed and a day betwixt thee and death! But turn about and look straight over the meadows in a line with yonder willow-tree, and tell me what thou seest."  Said Ralph: "The fair plain spreading wide, and a river running through it, and little hills beyond the water, and blue mountains beyond them, and snow yet lying on the tops of them, though the year is in young July." "Yea," quoth Richard; "and seest thou on the first of the little hills beyond the river, a great grey tower rising up and houses anigh it?" "Yea," said Ralph, "the tower I see, and the houses, for I am far-sighted; but the houses are small."  "So it is," said Richard; "now yonder tower is of the Church of Swevenham, which is under the invocation of the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus; and the houses are the houses of the little town. And what has that to do with me? sayest thou:  why this, that I was born and bred at Swevenham.  And indeed I it was who brought my lord Blaise here to Whitwall, with tales of how good a place it was for chaffer, that I might see the little town and the great grey tower once more. Forsooth I lied not, for thy brother is happy here, whereas he is piling up the coins one upon the other.  Forsooth thou shouldest go into his booth, fair lord; it is a goodly sight."

But Ralph was walking to and fro hastily, and he turned to Richard and said: "Well, well! but why dost thou not tell me more of the Well at the World's End?"

Said Richard:  "I was going to tell thee somewhat which might be worth thy noting; or might not be worth it:  hearken!  When I dwelt at Swevenham over yonder, and was but of eighteen winters, who am now of three score and eight, three folk of our township, two young men and one young woman, set out thence to seek the said Well: and much lore they had concerning it, which they had learned of an old man, a nigh kinsman of one of them.  This ancient carle I had never seen, for he dwelt in the mountains a way off, and these men were some five years older than I, so that I was a boy when they were men grown; and such things I heeded not, but rather sport and play; and above all, I longed for the play of war and battle.  God wot I have had my bellyful of it since those days!  Howbeit I mind me the setting forth of these three. They had a sumpter-ass with them for their livelihood on the waste; but they went afoot crowned with flowers, and the pipe and tabour playing before them, and much people brought them on the way. By St. Christopher!  I can see it all as if it were yesterday. I was sorry of the departure of the damsel; for though I was a boy I had loved her, and she had suffered me to kiss her and toy with her; but it was soon over.  Now I call to mind that they had prayed our priest, Sir Cyprian, to bless them on their departure, but he naysaid them; for he held that such a quest came of the inspiration of the devils, and was but a memory of the customs of the ancient gentiles and heathen. But as to me, I deemed it naught, and was sorry that my white-bosomed, sweet-breathed friend should walk away from me thus into the clouds."

"What came of it?" said Ralph, "did they come back, or any of them?" "I wot not," said Richard, "for I was weary of Swevenham after that, so I girt myself to a sword and laid a spear upon my shoulder and went my ways to the Castle of the Waste March, sixty miles from Swevenham town, and the Baron took me in and made me his man: and almost as little profit were in my telling thee again of my deeds there, as there was in my doing them:  but the grey tower of Swevenham I have never seen again till this hour."

Said Ralph:  "Now then it behoveth me to go to Swevenham straightway: wilt thou come with me? it seemeth to be but some four miles hence."

Richard held his peace and knit his brows as if pondering the matter, and Ralph abided till he spake:  so he said: "Foster-son, so to call thee, thou knowest the manner of up-country carles, that tales flow forth from them the better if they come without over much digging and hoeing of the ground; that is, without questioning; so meseems better it will be if I go to Swevenham alone, and better if I be asked to go, than if I go of myself. Now to-morrow is Saturday, and high market in Whitwall; and I am not so old but that it is likeliest that there will be some of my fellows alive and on their legs in Swevenham: and if such there be, there will be one at the least in the market to-morrow, and I will be there to find him out: and then it will go hard if he bring me not to Swevenham as a well-beloved guest; and when I am there, and telling my tidings, and asking them of theirs, if there be any tales concerning the Well at the World's End working in their bellies, then shall I be the midwife to bring them to birth.  Ha?  Will it do?"

"Yea," said Ralph, "but how long wilt thou be?"  Said Richard: "I shall come back speedily if I find the land barren; but if the field be in ear I shall tarry to harvest it. So keep thou thy soul in patience."  "And what shall I do now?" said Ralph.  "Wear away the hours," said Richard. "And to begin with, come back within the gates with me and let us go look at thy brother's booth in the market-place: it is the nethermost of a goodly house which he is minded to dwell in; and he will marry a wife and sit down in Whitwall, so well he seemeth like to thrive; for they have already bidden him to the freedom of the city, and to a brother of the Faring-Knights, whereas he is not only a stirring man, but of good lineage also: for now he hideth not that he is of the Upmeads kindred."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_14]

CHAPTER 14

Ralph Falleth in With Another Old Friend

Ralph went with Richard now without more words, and they came into the market-place and unto Blaise's booth and house, which was no worse than the best in the place; and the painters and stainers were at work on the upper part of it to make it as bright and goodly as might be with red and blue and green and gold, and all fair colours, and already was there a sign hung out of the fruitful tree by the water-side. As for the booth, it was full within of many wares and far-fetched and dear-bought things; as pieces of good and fine cloth plumbed with the seal of the greatest of the cities; and silk of Babylon, and spices of the hot burning islands, and wonders of the silversmith's and the goldsmith's fashioning, and fair-wrought weapons and armour of the best, and every thing that a rich chapman may deal in. And amidst of it all stood Blaise clad in fine black cloth welted with needle work, and a gold chain about his neck. He was talking with three honourable men of the Port, and they were doing him honour with kind words and the bidding of help. When he saw Ralph and Richard come in, he nodded to them, as to men whom he loved, but were beneath him in dignity, and left not talking with the great men.  Richard grinned a little thereat, as also did Ralph in his heart; for he thought: "Here then is one of the Upmeads kin provided for, so that soon he may buy with his money two domains as big as Upmeads and call them his manors."

Now Ralph looks about him, and presently he sees a man come forward to meet him from the innermost of the booth, and lo! there was come Clement Chapman.  His heart rose at the sight of him, and he thought of his kind gossip till he could scarce withhold his tears.  But Clement came to him and cast his arms about him, and kissed him, and said:  "Thou shalt pardon me for this, lord, for it is the kiss of the gossip which she bade me give thee, if I fell in with thee, as now I have, praised be the Saints! Yet it irks me that I shall see little more of thee at this time, for to-morrow early I must needs join myself to my company; for we are going south awhile to a good town some fifty miles hence.  Nevertheless, if thou dwellest here some eight days I shall see thee again belike, since thereafter I get me eastward on a hard and long journey not without peril. How sayest thou?"

"I wot not," quoth Ralph looking at Richard.  Said Richard: "Thou mayst wot well, master Clement, that my lord is anhungered of the praise of the folks, and is not like to abide in a mere merchant-town till the mould grow on his back."  "Well, well," said Clement, "however that may be, I have now done my matters with this cloth-lord, Blaise, and he has my florins in his pouch: so will not ye twain come with me and drink a cup till he hath done his talk with these magnates?"

Ralph was nothing loth, for besides that he loved master Clement, and that his being in company was like having a piece of his home anigh him, he hoped to hear some tidings concerning the Well at the World's End.

So he and Richard went with master Clement to the Christopher, a fair ale-house over against the Great Church, and sat down to good wine; and Ralph asked of Clement many things concerning dame Katherine his gossip, and Clement told him all, and that she was well, and had been to Upmeads, and had seen King Peter and the mother of Ralph; and how she had assuaged his mother's grief at his departure by forecasting fair days for her son. All this Ralph heard gladly, though he was somewhat shamefaced withal, and sat silent and thinking of many matters.  But Richard took up the word and said: "Which way camest thou from Wulstead, master Clement?"  "The nighest way I came," said Clement, "through the Woods Perilous."  Said Richard: "And they of the Dry Tree, heardest thou aught of them?"  "Yea, certes," quoth Clement, "for I fell in with their Bailiff, and paid him due scot for the passage of the Wood; he knoweth me withal, and we talked together." "And had he any tidings to tell thee of the champions?" said Richard. Said Clement, "Great tidings maybe, how that there was a rumour that they had lost their young Queen and Lady; and if that be true, it will go nigh to break their hearts, so sore as they loved her.  And that will make them bitter and fierce, till their grief has been slaked by the blood of men. And that the more as their old Queen abideth still, and she herself is ever of that mind."

Ralph hearkened, and his heart was wounded that other men should speak of his beloved:  but he heard how Richard said:  "Hast thou ever known why that company of champions took the name of the Dry Tree?"  "Why, who should know that, if thou knowest it not, Richard of Swevenham?" said Clement: "Is it not by the token of the Dry Tree that standeth in the lands on the hither side of the Wall of the World?"  Richard nodded his head; but Ralph cried out:  "O Master Clement, and hast thou seen it, the Wall of the World?" "Yea, afar off, my son," said he; "or what the folk with me called so; as to the Dry Tree, I have told thee at Wulstead that I have seen it not, though I have known men who have told me that they have seen it." "And must they who find the Well at the World's End come by the Dry Tree?" "Yea, surely," said Clement.  Quoth Richard:  "And thus have some heard, who have gone on that quest, and they have heard of the Champions of Hampton, and have gone thither, being deceived by that name of the Dry Tree, and whiles have been slain by the champions, whiles have entered their company." "Yea," said Clement, "so it is that their first error hath ended their quest. But now, lord Ralph, I will tell thee one thing; to wit, that when I return hither after eight days wearing, I shall be wending east, as I said e'en now, and what will that mean save going somewhat nigher to the Wall of the World; for my way lieth beyond the mountains that ye see from hence, and beyond the mountains that lie the other side of those; and I bid thee come with us, and I will be thy warrant that so far thou shalt have no harm: but when thou hast come so far, and hast seen three very fair cities, besides towns and castles and thorps and strange men, and fair merchandize, God forbid that thou shouldest wend further, and so cast away thy young life for a gay-coloured cloud.  Then will be the time to come back with me, that I may bring thee through the perils of the way to Wulstead, and Upmeads at the last, and the folk that love thee."

Richard held his peace at this word, but Ralph said: "I thank thee, Master Clement, for thy love and thy helping hand; and will promise thee to abide thee here eight days at the least; and meanwhile I will ponder the matter well."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_15]

CHAPTER 15

Ralph Dreams a Dream Or Sees a Vision

Therewithall they parted after more talk concerning small matters, and Ralph wore through the day, but Richard again did him to wit, that on the morrow he would find his old friends of Swevenham in the Market. And Ralph was come to life again more than he had been since that evil hour in the desert; though hard and hard he deemed it that he should never see his love again.

Now as befalleth young men, he was a good sleeper, and dreamed but seldom, save such light and empty dreams as he might laugh at, if perchance he remembered them by then his raiment was on him in the morning. But that night him-seemed that he awoke in his chamber at Whitwall, and was lying on his bed, as he verily was, and the door of the chamber opened, and there entered quietly the Lady of the Woodland, dight even as he had seen her as she lay dead beside their cooking fire on that table of greensward in the wilderness, barefoot and garlanded about her brow and her girdlestead, but fair and fresh coloured as she was before the sword had pierced her side; and he thought that he rejoiced to see her, but no wild hope rose in his heart, and no sobbing passion blinded his eyes, nor did he stretch out hand to touch her, because he remembered that she was dead. But he thought she spake to him and said:  "I know that thou wouldst have me speak, therefore I say that I am come to bid thee farewell, since there was no farewell between us in the wilderness, and I know that thou are about going on a long and hard and perilous journey: and I would that I could kiss thee and embrace thee, but I may not, for this is but the image of me as thou hast known me.  Furthermore, as I loved thee when I saw thee first, for thy youth, and thy fairness, and thy kindness and thy valiancy, so now I rejoice that all this shall endure so long in thee, as it surely shall."

Then the voice ceased, but still the image stood before him awhile, and he wondered if she would speak again, and tell him aught of the way to the Well at the World's End; and she spake again: "Nay," she said, "I cannot, since we may not tread the way together hand in hand; and this is part of the loss that thou hast had of me; and oh! but it is hard and hard."  And her face became sad and distressful, and she turned and departed as she had come.

Then he knew not if he awoke, or if it were a change in his dream; but the chamber became dark about him, and he lay there thinking of her, till, as it seemed, day began to dawn, and there was some little stir in the world without, and the new wind moved the casement. And again the door opened, and someone entered as before; and this also was a woman:  green-clad she was and barefoot, yet he knew at once that it was not his love that was dead, but the damsel of the ale-house of Bourton, whom he had last seen by the wantways of the Wood Perilous, and he thought her wondrous fair, fairer than he had deemed. And the word came from her:  "I am a sending of the woman whom thou hast loved, and I should not have been here save she had sent me." Then the words ended, while he looked at her and wondered if she also had died on the way to the Well at the World's End.  And it came into his mind that he had never known her name upon the earth. Then again came the word:  "So it is that I am not dead but alive in the world, though I am far away from this land; and it is good that thou shouldst go seek the Well at the World's End not all alone: and the seeker may find me:  and whereas thou wouldst know my name, I hight Dorothea."

So fell the words again:  and this image stood awhile as the other had done, and as the other had done, departed, and once more the chamber became dark, so that Ralph could not so much as see where was the window, and he knew no more till he woke in the early morn, and there was stir in the street and the voice of men, and the scent of fresh herbs and worts, and fruits; for it was market-day, and the country folk were early afoot, that they might array their wares timely in the market-place.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_16]

CHAPTER 16

Of the Tales of Swevenham

Old Richard was no worse than his word, and failed not to find old acquaintance of Swevenham in the Saturday's market: and Ralph saw naught of him till midweek afterwards.  And he was sitting in the chamber of the hostel when Richard came in to him. Forsooth Blaise had bidden him come dwell in his fair house, but Ralph would not, deeming that he might be hindered in his quest and be less free to go whereso he would, if he were dwelling with one who was so great with the magnates as was Blaise.

Now Ralph was reading in a book when Richard came in, but he stood up and greeted him; and Richard said smiling: "What have ye found in the book, lord?"  Said Ralph: "It telleth of the deeds of Alexander."  "Is there aught concerning the Well at the World's End therein?" said Richard. "I have not found aught thereof as yet," said Ralph; "but the book tells concerning the Dry Tree, and of kings sitting in their chairs in the mountains nearby."

"Well then," said Richard, "maybe thou wilt think me the better tale-teller." "Tell on then," quoth Richard.  So they went and sat them down in a window, and Richard said:

"When I came to Swevenham with two old men that I had known young, the folk made much of me, and made me good cheer, whereof were over long to tell thee; but to speak shortly, I drew the talk round to the matter that we would wot of:  for we spake of the Men of the Dry Tree, and an old man began to say, as master Clement the other day, that this name of theirs was but a token and an armoury which those champions have taken from the Tree itself, which Alexander the Champion saw in his wayfarings; and he said that this tree was on the hither side of the mountains called the Wall of the World, and no great way from the last of the towns whereto Clement will wend; for Clement told me the name thereof, to wit, Goldburg.  Then another and an older man, one that I remember a stout carle ere I left Swevenham, said that this was not so, but that the Tree was on the further side of the Wall of the World, and that he who could lay his hand on the bole thereof was like enough to drink of the Well at the World's End. Thereafter another spake, and told a tale of how the champions at Hampton first took the Dry Tree for a token; and he said that the rumour ran, that a woman had brought the tidings thereof to those valiant men, and had fixed the name upon them, though wherefore none knew. So the talk went on.

"But there was a carline sitting in the ingle, and she knew me and I her. And indeed in days past, when I was restless and longing to depart, she might have held me at Swevenham, for she was one of the friends that I loved there: a word and a kiss had done it, or maybe the kiss without the word: but if I had the word, I had not the kiss of her.  Well, when the talk began to fall, she spake and said to me:

"'Now it is somewhat strange that the talk must needs fall on this seeking of that which shall not be found, whereas it was but the month before thou wert last at Swevenham, that Wat Miller and Simon Bowyer set off to seek the Well at the World's End, and took with them Alice of Queenhough, whom Simon loved as well as might be, and Wat somewhat more than well. Mindest thou not?  There are more than I alive that remember it.'

"'Yea,' said I, 'I remember it well.'

"For indeed, foster-son, these were the very three of whom I told thee, though I told thee not their names.

"'Well,' said I; 'how sped they?  Came they back, or any of them?' 'Nay,' she said, 'that were scarce to be looked for.'  Said I: 'Have any other to thy knowledge gone on this said quest?'

"'Yea,' she said, 'I will tell thee all about it, and then there will be an end of the story, for none knoweth better thereof than I. First there was that old man, the wizard, to whom folk from Swevenham and other places about were used to seek for his lore in hidden matters; and some months after those three had departed, folk who went to his abode amongst the mountains found him not; and soon the word was about that he also, for as feeble as he was, had gone to seek the Well at the World's End; though may-happen it was not so.  Then the next spring after thy departure, Richard, comes home Arnold Wright from the wars, and asks after Alice; and when he heard what had befallen, he takes a scrip with a little meat for the road, lays his spear on his shoulder, and is gone seeking the lost, and the thing which they found not--that, I deem, was the end of him. Again the year after that, as I deem, three of our carles fell in with two knights riding east from Whitwall, and were questioned of them concerning the road to the said Well, and doubted not but that they were on that quest. Furthermore (and some of you wot this well enough, and more belike know it not) two of our young men were faring by night and cloud on some errand, good or bad, it matters not, on the highway thirty miles east of Whitwall: it was after harvest, and the stubble-fields lay on either side of the way, and the moon was behind thin clouds, so that it was light on the way, as they told me; and they saw a woman wending before them afoot, and as they came up with her, the moon ran out, and they saw that the woman was fair, and that about her neck was a chaplet of gems that shone in the moon, and they had a longing both for the jewel and the woman:  but before they laid hand on her they asked her of whence and whither, and she said: From ruin and wrack to the Well at the World's End, and therewith turned on them with a naked sword in her hand; so that they shrank from before her.

"'Hearken once more:  the next year came a knight to Swevenham, and guested in this same house, and he sat just where sitteth now yon yellow-headed swain, and the talk went on the same road as it hath gone to-night; and I told him all the tale as I have said it e'en now; and he asked many questions, but most of the Lady with the pair of beads. And on the morrow he departed and we saw him not again.

"Then she was silent, but the young man at whom she had pointed blushed red and stared at her wide-eyed, but said no word. But I spake:  'Well dame, but have none else gone from Swevenham, or what hath befallen them?'

"She said:  'Hearken yet!  Twenty years agone a great sickness lay heavy upon us and the folk of Whitwall, and when it was at its worst, five of our young men, calling to mind all the tales concerning the Well at the World's End, went their ways to seek it, and swore that back would they never, save they found it and could bear its water to the folk of Swevenham; and I suppose they kept their oath; for we saw naught either of the water or of them.  Well, I deem that this is the last that I have to tell thee, Richard, concerning this matter: and now is come the time for thee to tell tales of thyself.'

"Thus for that time dropped the talk of the Well at the World's End, Lord Ralph, and of the way thither.  But I hung about the township yet a while, and yesterday as I stood on their stone bridge, and looked on the water, up comes that long lad with the yellow hair that the dame had pointed at, and says to me: 'Master Richard, saving thine age and thy dignity and mastery, I can join an end to the tale which the carline began on Sunday night.'  'Yea, forsooth?' said I, 'and how, my lad?' Said he:  'Thou hast a goodly knife there in thy girdle, give it to me, and I will tell thee.'  'Yea,' quoth I, 'if thy tale be knife-worthy.'

"Well, the end of it was that he told me thus: That by night and moon he came on one riding the highway, just about where the other woman had been seen, whose tale he had heard of.  He deemed at first this rider to be a man, or a lad rather for smallness and slenderness, but coming close up he found it was a woman, and saw on her neck a chaplet of gems, and deemed it no great feat to take it of her: but he asked her of whence and whither, and she answered:

"'From unrest to the Well at the World's End.'

"Then when he put out his hand to her, he saw a great anlace gleaming in her hand, wherefore he forbore her; and this was but five days ago.

"So I gave the lad my knife, and deemed there would be little else to hear in Swevenham for this bout; and at least I heard no more tales to tell till I came away this morning; so there is my poke turned inside out for thee.  But this word further would I say to thee, that I have seen on thy neck also a pair of beads exceeding goodly. Tell me now whence came they."

"From my gossip, dame Katherine," said Ralph; "and it seems to me now, though at the time I heeded the gift little save for its kindness, that she thought something great might go with it; and there was a monk at Higham on the Way, who sorely longed to have it of me."  "Well," said Richard, "that may well come to pass, that it shall lead thee to the Well at the World's End. But as to the tales of Swevenham, what deemest thou of them?" Said Ralph:  "What are they, save a token that folk believe that there is such a thing on earth as the Well? Yet I have made up my mind already that I would so do as if I trowed in it.  So I am no nearer to it than erst. Now is there naught for it save to abide Master Clement's coming; and when he hath brought me to Goldburg, then shall I see how the quest looks by the daylight of that same city." He spake so cheerfully that Richard looked at him askance, wondering what was toward with him, and if mayhappen anything lay underneath those words of his.

But in his heart Ralph was thinking of that last tale of the woman whom the young man had met such a little while ago; and it seemed to him that she must have been in Whitwall when he first came there; and he scarce knew whether he were sorry or not that he had missed her: for though it seemed to him that it would be little more than mere grief and pain, nay, that it would be wicked and evil to be led to the Well at the World's End by any other than her who was to have brought him there; yet he longed, or thought he longed to speak with her concerning that love of his heart, so early rewarded, so speedily beggared. For indeed he doubted not that the said woman was the damsel of Bourton Abbas, whose image had named herself Dorothea to him in that dream.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_17]

CHAPTER 17

Richard Bringeth Tidings of Departing

Fell the talk between them at that time, and three days wore, and on the morning of the fourth day came Richard to Ralph, and said to him: "Foster-son, I am sorry for the word I must say, but Clement Chapman came within the gates this morning early, and the company with which he is riding are alboun for the road, and will depart at noon to-day, so that there are but four hours wherein we twain may be together; and thereafter whatso may betide thee, it may well be, that I shall see thy face no more; so what thou wilt tell me must be told straightway. And now I will say this to thee, that of all things I were fain to ride with thee, but I may not, because it is Blaise whom I am bound to serve in all ways.  And I deem, moreover, that troublous times may be at hand here in Whitwall.  For there is an Earl hight Walter the Black, a fair young man outwardly, but false at heart and a tyrant, and he had some occasion against the good town, and it was looked for that he should send his herald here to defy the Port more than a half moon ago; but about that time he was hurt in a fray as we hear, and may not back a horse in battle yet.  Albeit, fristed is not forgotten, as saith the saw; and when he is whole again, we may look for him at our gates; and whereas Blaise knows me for a deft man-at-arms or something more, it is not to be looked for that he will give me to thee for this quest. Nay, of thee also it will be looked for that thou shouldest do knightly service to the Port, and even so Blaise means it to be; therefore have I lied to him on thy behalf, and bidden Clement also to lie (which forsooth he may do better than I, since he wotteth not wholly whither thou art minded), and I have said thou wouldst go with Clement no further than Cheaping Knowe, which lieth close to the further side of these mountains, and will be back again in somewhat more than a half-moon's wearing. So now thou art warned hereof."

Ralph was moved by these words of Richard, and he spake: "Forsooth, old friend, I am sorry to depart from thee; yet though I shall presently be all alone amongst aliens, yet now is manhood rising again in me.  So for that cause at least shall I be glad to be on the way; and as a token that I am more whole than I was, I will now tell thee the tale of my grief, if thou wilt hearken to it, which the other day I might not tell thee."

"I will hearken it gladly," said Richard.  And therewith they sat down in a window, for they were within doors in the hostel, and Ralph told all that had befallen him as plainly and shortly as he might; and when he had done, Richard said:

"Thou has had much adventure in a short space, lord, and if thou mightest now refrain thy longing for that which is gone, and set it on that which is to come, thou mayest yet harden into a famous knight and a happy man." Said Ralph:  "Yea? now tell me all thy thought."

Said Richard:  "My thought is that this lady who was slain, was scarce wholly of the race of Adam; but that at the least there was some blending in her of the blood of the fays. Or how deemest thou?"

"I wot not," said Ralph sadly; "to me she seemed but a woman, though she were fairer and wiser than other women."  Said Richard: "Well, furthermore, if I heard thee aright, there is another woman in the tale who is also fairer and wiser than other women?"

"I would she were my sister!" said Ralph.  "Yea," quoth Richard, "and dost thou bear in mind what she was like?  I mean the fashion of her body." "Yea, verily," said Ralph.

Again said Richard:  "Doth it seem to thee as if the Lady of the Dry Tree had some inkling that thou shouldst happen upon this other woman: whereas she showed her of the road to the Well at the World's End, and gave her that pair of beads, and meant that thou also shouldest go thither? And thou sayest that she praised her,--her beauty and wisdom. In what wise did she praise her? how came the words forth from her? was it sweetly?"

"Like honey and roses for sweetness," said Ralph. "Yea," said Richard, "and she might have praised her in such wise that the words had came forth like gall and vinegar. Now I will tell thee of my thought, since we be at point of sundering, though thou take it amiss and be wroth with me: to wit, that thou wouldst have lost the love of this lady as time wore, even had she not been slain:  and she being, if no fay, yet wiser than other women, and foreseeing, knew that so it would be." Ralph brake in:  "Nay, nay, it is not so, it is not so!" "Hearken, youngling!" quoth Richard; "I deem that it was thus. Her love for thee was so kind that she would have thee happy after the sundering:  therefore she was minded that thou shouldest find the damsel, who as I deem loveth thee, and that thou shouldest love her truly."

"O nay, nay!" said Ralph, "all this guess of thine is naught, saying that she was kind indeed.  Even as heaven is kind to them who have died martyrs, and enter into its bliss after many torments."

And therewith he fell a-weeping at the very thought of her great kindness: for indeed to this young man she had seemed great, and exalted far above him.

Richard looked at him a while; and then said:  "Now, I pray thee be not wroth with me for the word I have spoken. But something more shall I say, which shall like thee better. To wit, when I came back from Swevenham on Wednesday I deemed it most like that the Well at the World's End was a tale, a coloured cloud only; or that at most if it were indeed on the earth, that thou shouldest never find it. But now is my mind changed by the hearing of thy tale, and I deem both that the Well verily is, and that thou thyself shalt find it; and that the wise Lady knew this, and set the greater store by thy youth and goodliness, as a richer and more glorious gift than it had been, were it as fleeting as such things mostly be.  Now of this matter will I say no more; but I think that the words that I have said, and which now seem so vain to thee, shall come into thy mind on some later day, and avail thee somewhat; and that is why I have spoken them. But this again is another word, that I have got a right good horse for thee, and other gear, such as thou mayest need for the road, and that Clement's fellowship will meet in Petergate hard by the church, and I will be thy squire till thou comest thither, and ridest thence out a-gates. Now I suppose that thou will want to bid Blaise farewell: yet thou must look to it that he will not deem thy farewell of great moment, since he swimmeth in florins and goodly wares; and moreover deemeth that thou wilt soon be back here."

"Nevertheless," said Ralph, "I must needs cast my arms about my own mother's son before I depart:  so go we now, as all this talk hath worn away more than an hour of those four that were left me."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_18]

CHAPTER 18

Ralph Departeth From Whitwall With the Fellowship of Clement Chapman

Therewithal they went together to Blaise's house, and when Blaise saw them, he said:  "Well, Ralph, so thou must needs work at a little more idling before thou fallest to in earnest. Forsooth I deem that when thou comest back thou wilt find that we have cut thee out a goodly piece of work for thy sewing. For the good town is gathering a gallant host of men; and we shall look to thee to do well in the hard hand-play, whenso that befalleth. But now come and look at my house within, how fair it is, and thou wilt see that thou wilt have somewhat to fight for, whereas I am."

Therewith he led them up a stair into the great chamber, which was all newly dight and hung with rich arras of the Story of Hercules; and there was a goodly cupboard of silver vessel, and some gold, and the cupboard was of five shelves as was but meet for a king's son. So Ralph praised all, but was wishful to depart, for his heart was sore, and he blamed himself in a manner that he must needs lie to his brother.

But Blaise brought them to the upper chamber, and showed them the goodly beds with their cloths, and hangings, and all was as fair as might be. Then Blaise bade bring wine and made them drink; and he gave Ralph a purse of gold, and an anlace very fair of fashion, and brought him to the door thereafter; and Ralph cast his arms about him, and kissed him and strained him to his breast.  But Blaise was somewhat moved thereat, and said to him:  "Why lad, thou art sorry to depart from me for a little while, and what would it be, were it for long? But ever wert thou a kind and tender-hearted youngling, and we twain are alone in an alien land.  Forsooth, I wot that thou hast, as it were, embraced the Upmeads kindred, father, mother and all; and good is that! So now God and the Saints keep thee, and bear in mind the hosting of the good town, and the raising of the banner, that shall be no great while. Fare thee well, lad!"

So they parted, and Ralph went back to the hostel, and gathered his stuff together, and laid it on a sumpter horse, and armed him, and so went into Petergate to join himself to that company. There he found the chapmen, five of them in all, and their lads, and a score of men-at-arms, with whom was Clement, not clad like a merchant, but weaponed, and bearing a coat of proof and a bright sallet on his head.

They greeted each the other, and Ralph said:  "Yea, master Clement, and be we riding to battle?"  "Maybe," quoth Clement; "the way is long, and our goods worth the lifting, and there are some rough places that we must needs pass through. But if ye like not the journey, abide here in this town the onset of Walter the Black."

Therewith he laughed, and Ralph understanding the jape, laughed also; and said:  "Well, master Clement, but tell me who be these that we shall meet."  "Yea, and I will tell thee the whole tale of them," said Clement, "but abide till we are without the gates; I am busy man e'en now, for all is ready for the road, save what I must do. So now bid thy Upmeads squire farewell, and then to horse with thee!"

So Ralph cast his arms about Richard, and kissed him and said: "This is also a farewell to the House where I was born and bred." And as he spake the thought of the House and the garden, and the pleasant fields of Upmeads came into his heart so bitter-sweet, that it mingled with his sorrow, and well-nigh made him weep. But as for Richard he forebore words, for he was sad at heart for the sundering.

Then he gat to horse, and the whole company of them bestirred them, and they rode out a-gates. And master Clement it was that ordered them, riding up and down along the array.

But Ralph fell to speech with the chapmen and men-at-arms; and both of these were very courteous with him; for they rejoiced in his company, and especially the chapmen, who were somewhat timorous of the perils of the road.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_19]

CHAPTER 19

Master Clement Tells Ralph Concerning the Lands Whereunto They Were Riding

When they were gotten a mile or two from Whitwall, and all was going smoothly, Clement came up to Ralph and rode at his left hand, and fell to speech with him, and said: "Now, lord, will I tell thee more concerning our journey, and the folk that we are like to meet upon the road. And of the perils, whatso they may be, I told thee not before, because I knew thee desirous of seeking adventures east-away, and knew that my tales would not hinder thee."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and had not this goodly fellowship been, I had gone alone, or with any carle that I could have lightly hired."

Clement laughed and said:  "Fair sir, thou wouldst have failed of hiring any one man to go with thee east-ward a many miles. For with less than a score of men well-armed the danger of death or captivity is over great, if ye ride the mountain ways unto Cheaping Knowe.  Yea, and even if a poor man who hath nothing, wend that way alone, he may well fall among thieves, and be stolen himself body and bones, for lack of anything better to steal."

Hereat Ralph felt his heart rise, when he thought of battle and strife, and he made his horse to spring somewhat, and then he said: "It liketh me well, dear friend, that I ride not with thee for naught, but that I may earn my daily bread like another."

"Yea," said Clement, looking on him kindly, "I deem of all thy brethren thou hast the biggest share of the blood of Red Robert, who first won Upmeads.  And now thou shalt know that this good town of Whitwall that lieth behind us is the last of the lands we shall come to wherein folk can any courtesy, or are ruled by the customs of the manor, or by due lawful Earls and Kings, or the laws of the Lineage or the Port, or have any Guilds for their guiding, and helping. And though these folks whereunto we shall come, are, some of them, Christian men by name, and have amongst them priests and religious; yet are they wild men of manners, and many heathen customs abide amongst them; as swearing on the altars of devils, and eating horse-flesh at the High-tides, and spell-raising more than enough, and such like things, even to the reddening of the doom-rings with the blood of men and of women, yea, and of babes:  from such things their priests cannot withhold them.  As for their towns that we shall come to, I say not but we shall find crafts amongst them, and worthy good men therein, but they have little might against the tyrants who reign over the towns, and who are of no great kindred, nor of blood better than other folk, but merely masterful and wise men who have gained their place by cunning and the high hand. Thou shalt see castles and fair strong-houses about the country-side, but the great men who dwell therein are not the natural kindly lords of the land yielding service to Earls, Dukes, and Kings, and having under them vavassors and villeins, men of the manor; but their tillers and shepherds and workmen and servants be mere thralls, whom they may sell at any market, like their horses or oxen. Forsooth these great men have with them for the more part free men waged for their service, who will not hold their hands from aught that their master biddeth, not staying to ask if it be lawful or unlawful. And that the more because whoso is a free man there, house and head must he hold on the tenure of bow and sword, and his life is like to be short if he hath not sworn himself to the service of some tyrant of a castle or a town."

"Yea, master Clement," said Ralph, "these be no peaceful lands whereto thou art bringing us, or very pleasant to dwell in."

"Little for peace, but much for profit," said Clement; "for these lands be fruitful of wine and oil and wheat, and neat and sheep; withal metals and gems are dug up out of the mountains; and on the other hand, they make but little by craftsmanship, wherefore are they the eagerer for chaffer with us merchants; whereas also there are many of them well able to pay for what they lack, if not in money, then in kind, which in a way is better. Yea, it is a goodly land for merchants."

"But I am no merchant," said Ralph.

"So it is," said Clement, "yet thou desireth something; and whither we are wending thou mayst hear tidings that shall please thee, or tidings that shall please me.  To say sooth, these two may well be adverse to each other, for I would not have thee hear so much of tidings as shall lead thee on, but rather I would have thee return with me, and not throw thy young life away: for indeed I have an inkling of what thou seekest, and meseems that Death and the Devil shall be thy faring-fellows."

Ralph held his peace, and Clement said in a cheerfuller voice: "Moreover, there shall be strange and goodly things to see; and the men of these parts be mostly goodly of body, and the women goodlier yet, as we carles deem."

Ralph sighed, and answered not at once, but presently he said: "Master Clement, canst thou give me the order of our goings for these next days?"  "Yea, certes," said Clement. "In three days' time we shall come to the entry of the mountains: two days thence we shall go without coming under any roof save the naked heavens; the day thereafter shall we come to the Mid-Mountain House, which is as it were an hostelry; but it was built and is upheld by the folks that dwell anigh, amongst whom be the folk of Cheaping Knowe; and that house is hallowed unto truce, and no man smiteth another therein; so that we oft come on the mountain strong-thieves there, and there we be blithe together and feast together in good fellowship. But when there be foemen in that house together, each man or each fellowship departing, hath grace of an hour before his foeman follow. Such are the customs of that house, and no man breaketh them ever. But when we depart thence we shall ride all day and sleep amidst the mountains, and if we be not beset that night or the morrow's morn thereof, safe and unfoughten shall we come to Cheaping Knowe.  Doth that suffice thee as at this time?" "Yea master," quoth Ralph.

So therewith their talk dropped, for the moment; but Clement talked much with Ralph that day, and honoured him much, as did all that company.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_20]

CHAPTER 20

They Come to the Mid-Mountain Guest-House

On that night they slept in their tents which they had pitched on the field of a little thorp beside a water; and there they had meat and drink and all things as they needed them. And in likewise it befell them the next day; but the third evening they set up their tents on a little hillside by a road which led into a deep pass, even the entry of the mountains, a road which went betwixt exceeding high walls of rock. For the mountain sides went up steep from the plain. There they kept good watch and ward, and naught befell them to tell of.

The next morning they entered the pass, and rode through it up to the heaths, and rode all day by wild and stony ways and came at even to a grassy valley watered by a little stream, where they guested, watching their camp well; and again none meddled with them.

As they were departing the next morn Ralph asked of Clement if he yet looked for onset from the waylayers.  Said Clement: "It is most like, lord; for we be a rich prey, and it is but seldom that such a company rideth this road.  And albeit that the wild men know not to a day when we shall pass through their country, yet they know the time within a four and twenty hours or so. For we may not hide our journey from all men's hearing; and when the ear heareth, the tongue waggeth.  But art thou yet anxious concerning this matter, son?"  "Yea," said Ralph, "for I would fain look on these miscreants."

"It is like that ye shall see them," said Clement; "but I shall look on it as a token that they are about waylaying us if we come on none of them in the Mountain House.  For they will be fearful lest their purpose leak out from unwary lips." Ralph wondered how it would be, and what might come of it, and rode on, pondering much.

The road was rough that day, and they went not above a foot-pace the more part of the time; and daylong they were going up and up, and it grew cold as the sun got low; though it was yet summer. At last at the top of a long stony ridge, which lay beneath a great spreading mountain, on the crest whereof the snow lay in plenty, Ralph saw a house, long and low, builded of great stones, both walls and roof: at sight thereof the men of the fellowship shouted for joy, and hastened on, and Clement spurred up the stony slopes all he might. But Ralph rode slowly, since he had naught to see to, save himself, so that he was presently left alone.  Now he looks aside, and sees something bright-hued lying under a big stone where the last rays of the sun just caught some corner of it.  So he goes thither, deeming that mayhappen one of the company had dropped something, pouch or clout, or what not, in his haste and hurry.  He got off his horse to pick it up, and when he had laid hand on it found it to be a hands-breadth of fine green cloth embroidered with flowers. He held it in his hand a while wondering where he could have seen such like stuff before, that it should smite a pang into his heart, and suddenly called to mind the little hall at Bourton Abbas with the oaken benches and the rush-strewn floor, and this same flower-broidered green cloth dancing about the naked feet of a fair damsel, as she moved nimbly hither and thither dighting him his bever. But his thought stayed not there, but carried him into the days when he was abiding in desire of the love that he won at last, and lost so speedily.  But as he stood pondering he heard Clement shouting to him from the garth-gate of that house. So he leapt on his horse and rode up the slope into the garth and lighted down by Clement; who fell to chiding him for tarrying, and said: "There is peril in loitering outside this garth alone; for those Sons of the Rope often lurk hard by for what they may easily pick up, and they be brisk and nimble lads."  "What ailed thee?" said Ralph. "I stayed to look at a flower which called Upmeads to my mind."

"Yea lad, yea," quoth Clement, "and art thou so soft as that? But come thou into the House; it is as I deemed it might be; besides the House-warden and his wife there is no soul therein. Thou shalt yet look on Mick Hangman's sons, as thou desirest."

So they went into the House, and men had all that they might need. The warden was an old hoar man, and his wife well-stricken in years; and after supper was talk of this and that, and it fell much, as was like to be, on those strong-thieves, and Clement asked the warden what he had seen of them of late.

The old carle answered:  "Nay, master Clement, much according to wont: a few beeves driven into our garth; a pack or two brought into the hall; and whiles one or two of them come in hither with empty hands for a sleep and a bellyful; and again a captive led in on the road to the market. Forsooth it is now a good few days ago three of them brought in a woman as goodly as mine eyes have ever seen; and she sat on the bench yonder, and seemed to heed little that she was a captive and had shackles on her feet after the custom of these men, though indeed her hands were unbound, so that she might eat her meat; and the carle thief told me that he took her but a little way from the garth, and that she made a stout defence with a sword before they might take her, but being taken, she made but little of it."

"Would he do her any hurt?" said Ralph.  "Nay, surely," said the carle; "doth a man make a hole in a piece of cloth which he is taking to market? Nay, he was courteous to her after his fashion, and bade us give her the best of all we had."

"What like was she?" said Ralph.  Said the carle: "She was somewhat tall, if I am to note such matters, grey-eyed and brown haired, and great abundance of it. Her lips very red; her cheeks tanned with the sun, but in such wise that her own white and red shone through the sun's painting, so that her face was as sweet as the best wheat-ear in a ten-acre field when the season hath been good.  Her hands were not like those of a demoiselle who sitteth in a chamber to be looked at, but brown as of one who hath borne the sickle in the sun. But when she stretched out her hand so that the wrist of her came forth from her sleeve it was as white as milk."

"Well, my man," said the carline, "thou hast a good memory for an old and outworn carle.  Why dost thou not tell the young knight what she was clad withal; since save for their raiment all women of an age are much alike?"

"Nay, do thou do it," said the carle; "she was even as fair as I have said; so that there be few like her."

Said the dame:  "Well, there is naught so much to be said for her raiment: her gown was green, of fine cloth enough; but not very new: welts of needle-work it had on it, and a wreath of needle-work flowers round the hem of the skirt; but a cantle was torn off from it; in the scuffle when she was taken, I suppose, so that it was somewhat ragged in one place.  Furthermore--"

She had been looking at Ralph as she spoke, and now she broke off suddenly, and said, still looking at him hard; "Well, it is strange!"  "What is strange?" said Clement. "O naught, naught," said the dame, "save that folk should make so much to do about this matter, when there are so many coming and going about the Midhouse of the Mountains."

But Ralph noted that she was still staring at him even after she had let the talk drop.

Waned the even, and folk began to go bedward, so that the hall grew thin of guests.  Then came up the carline to Ralph and took him aside into a nook, and said to him:  "Young knight, now will I tell thee what seemed to me strange e'en now; to wit, that the captive damsel should be bearing a necklace about her neck as like to thine as one lamb is to another: but I thought thou mightest be liever that I spake it not openly before all the other folk.  So I held my peace."

"Dame," said he, "I thank thee:  forsooth I fear sorely that this damsel is my sister; for ever we have worn the samelike pair of beads. And as for me I have come hither to find her, and evil will it be if I find her enthralled, and it may be past redemption."

And therewith he gave her a piece of the gold money of Upmeads.

"Yea," said she, "poor youth; that will be sooth indeed, for thou art somewhat like unto her, yet far goodlier. But I grieve for thee, and know not what thou wilt do; whereas by this time most like she has been sold and bought and is dwelling in some lord's strong-house; some tyrant that needeth not money, and will not let his prey go for a prayer. Here, take thou thy gold again, for thou mayst well need it, and let me shear a lock of thy golden hair, and I shall be well apaid for my keeping silence concerning thy love. For I deem that it is even so, and that she is not thy sister, else hadst thou stayed at home, and prayed for her with book and priest and altar, and not gone seeking her a weary way."

Ralph reddened but said naught, and let her put scizzors amongst his curly locks, and take what of them she would. And then he went to his bed, and pondered these matters somewhat, and said to himself that it was by this damsel's means that he should find the Well at the World's End. Yet he said also, that, whether it were so or not, he was bound to seek her, and deliver her from thralldom, since he had kissed her so sweet and friendly, like a brother, for the sweetness and kindness of her, before he had fallen into the love that had brought him such joy and such grief. And therewith he took out that piece of her gown from his pouch, and it seemed dear to him.  But it made him think sadly of what grief or pain she might even then be bearing, so that he longed to deliver her, and that longing was sweet to him. In such thoughts he fell asleep.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_21]

CHAPTER 21

A Battle in the Mountains

When it was morning they arose early and ate a morsel; and Clement gave freely to the Warden and his helpmate on behalf of the fellowship; and then they saddled their nags, and did on the loads and departed; and the way was evil otherwise, but it was down hill, and all waters ran east.

All day they rode, and at even when the sun had not quite set, they pitched their camp at the foot of a round knoll amidst a valley where was water and grass; and looking down thence, they had a sight of the fruitful plain, wherein lay Cheaping Knowe all goodly blue in the distance.

This was a fair place and a lovely, and great ease would they have had there, were it not that they must keep watch and ward with more pains than theretofore; for Clement deemed it as good as certain that the wild men would fall upon them that night.

But all was peaceful the night through, and in the morning they gat to the way speedily, riding with their armour on, and their bows bent: and three of the men-at-arms rode ahead to espy the way.

So it befell that they had not ridden two hours ere back came the fore-riders with the tidings that the pass next below them was thick with the Strong-thieves.

The fellowship were as then in such a place, that they were riding a high bare ridge, and could not be assailed to the advantage of the thieves if they abode where they were; whereas if they went forward, they must needs go down with the road into the dale that was beset by the wild men.  Now they were three-score and two all told, but of these but a score of men-at-arms besides Ralph, and Clement, who was a stout fighter when need was. Of the others, some were but lads, and of the Chapmen were three old men, and more than one blencher besides.  However, all men were armed, and they had many bows, and some of the chapmen's knaves were fell archers.

So they took counsel together, and to some it seemed better to abide the onset on their vantage ground. But to Clement and the older men-at-arms this seemed of no avail. For though they could see the plain country down below, they would have no succour of it; and Clement bade them think how the night would come at last, and that the longer they abode, the greater would be the gathering of the Strong-thieves; so that, all things considered, it were better to fall on at once and to try the adventure of the valley. And this after some talk they yea-said all, save a few who held their skins so dear that their wits wandered somewhat.

So these timorous ones they bade guard the sumpter beasts and their loads; and even so they did, and abode a little, while the men-at-arms and the bowmen went forward without more ado; and Ralph rode betwixt Clement and the captain of the men-at-arms.

Presently they were come close to the place where the way went down into the valley, cleaving through a clayey bent, so that the slippery sides of the cleft went up high to right and left; wherefore by goodhap there were no big stones anigh to roll down upon them.  Moreover the way was short, and they rode six abreast down the pass and were soon through the hollow way. As he rode Ralph saw a few of the Strong-thieves at the nether end where the pass widened out, and they let fly some arrows at the chapmen which did no hurt, though some of the shafts rattled on the armour of the companions. But when Clement saw that folk, and heard the noise of their shouting he lifted up a great axe that he bore and cried, "St. Agnes for the Mercers!" and set spurs to his horse. So did they all, and came clattering and shouting down the steep road like a stone out of a sling, and drave right into the valley one and all, the would-be laggards following after; for they were afraid to be left behind.

The wild men, who, save for wide shields which they bore, were but evilly armed, mostly in skins of beasts, made no countenance of defence, but fled all they might towards the steep slopes of the valley, and then turned and fell to shooting; for the companions durst not pursue in haste lest they should be scattered, and overwhelmed by the multitude of foemen; but they drew up along the south side of the valley, and had the mastery of the road, so that this first bout was without blood-shedding. Albeit the thieves still shot in their weak bows from the hill-side, but scarce hurt a man. Then the bowmen of the fellowship fell to shooting at the wild men, while the men-at-arms breathed their horses, and the sumpter-beasts were gathered together behind them; for they had no dread of abiding there a while, whereas behind them the ground was broken into a steep shaly cliff, bushed here and there with tough bushes, so that no man could come up it save by climbing with hand and knee, and that not easily.

Now when the archers had shot a good while, and some of the thieves had fallen before them, and men were in good heart because of the flight of the wild men, Ralph, seeing that these still hung about the slopes, cried out: "Master Clement, and thou Captain, sure it will be ill-done to leave these men unbroken behind us, lest they follow us and hang about our hindermost, slaying us both men and horses."

"Even so," quoth the captain, who was a man of few words, "let us go. But do thou, Clement, abide by the stuff with the lads and bowmen."

Then he cried out aloud:  "St. Christopher to aid!" and shook his rein, and all they who were clad in armour and well mounted spurred on with him against the strong-thieves. But these, when they saw the onset of the horsemen, but drew a little up the hill-side and stood fast, and some of the horses were hurt by their shot. So the captain bade draw rein and off horse, while Clement led his bowmen nigher, and they shot well together, and hindered the thieves from closing round the men-at-arms, or falling on the horses. So then the companions went forward stoutly on foot, and entered into the battle of the thieves, and there was the thrusting and the hewing great:  for the foemen bore axes, and malls, and spears, and were little afraid, having the vantage-ground; and they were lithe and strong men, though not tall.

Ralph played manfully, and was hurt by a spear above the knee, but not grievously; so he heeded it not, but cleared a space all about him with great strokes of the Upmeads' blade; then as the wild men gave back there was one of them who stood his ground and let drive a stroke of a long-handled hammer at him, but Ralph ran in under the stroke and caught him by the throat and drew him out of the press. And even therewith the wild men broke up before the onset of the all-armed carles, and fled up the hill, and the men-at-arms followed them but a little, for their armour made them unspeedy; so that they took no more of those men, though they slew some, but turned about and gathered round Ralph and made merry over his catch, for they were joyous with the happy end of battle; and Clement, who had left his bowmen when the Companions were mingled with the wild-men, was there amidst the nighest.

Said Ralph to him:  "Well, have I got me a servant and thrall good cheap?" "Yea," said Clement, "if thou deem a polecat a likely hound." Said the Captain:  "Put thy sword through him, knight."  Quoth another: "Let him run up hill, and our bowmen shall shoot a match at him."

"Nay," said Ralph, "they have done well with their shooting, let them rest. As to my thrusting my sword through the man, Captain, I had done that before, had I been so minded.  At any rate, I will ask him if he will serve me truly. Otherwise he seemeth a strong carle and a handy.  How sayest thou, lad, did I take thee fairly?"  "Yea," said the man, "thou art a strong lad."

He seemed to fear the swords about him but little, and forsooth he was a warrior-like man, and not ill-looking. He was of middle height, strong and well-knit, with black hair like a beast's mane for shagginess, and bright blue eyes.  He was clad in a short coat of grey homespun, with an ox-skin habergeon laced up over it; he had neither helm nor hat, nor shoes, but hosen made of a woollen clout tied about his legs; his shield of wood and ox-hide lay on the ground a few paces off, and his hammer beside it, which he had dropped when Ralph first handled him, but a great ugly knife was still girt to him.

Now Ralph saith to him:  "Which wilt thou--be slain, or serve me?" Said the carle, grinning, yet not foully:  "Guess if I would not rather serve thee!"  "Wilt thou serve me truly?" said Ralph. "Why not?" quoth the carle:  "yet I warn thee that if thou beat me, save in hot blood, I shall put a knife into thee when I may."  "O," said one, "thrust him through now at once, lord Ralph." "Nay, I will not," said Ralph; "he hath warned me fairly. Maybe he will serve me truly.  Master Clement, wilt thou lend me a horse for my man to ride?"  "Yea," said Clement; "yet I misdoubt me of thy new squire."  Then he turned to the men-at-arms and said:  "No tarrying, my masters! To horse and away before they gather gain!"

So they mounted and rode away from that valley of the pass, and Ralph made his man ride beside him.  But the man said to him, as soon as they were riding:  "Take note that I will not fight against my kindred." "None biddeth thee so," said Ralph; "but do thou take heed that if thou fight against us I will slay thee outright."  Said the man: "A fair bargain!"  "Well," said Ralph, "I will have thy knife of thee, lest it tempt thee, as is the wont of cold iron, and a maiden's body." "Nay, master," quoth the man, "leave me my knife, as thou art a good fellow. In two hours time we shall be past all peril of my people, and when we come down below I will slay thee as many as thou wilt, so it be out of the kindred.  Forsooth down there evil they be, and unkinsome."

"So be it, lad," said Ralph, laughing, "keep thy knife; but hang this word of mine thereon, that if thou slay any man of this fellowship save me, I will rather flay thee alive than slay thee." Quoth the carle:  "That is the bargain, then, and I yeasay it." "Good," said Ralph; "now tell me thy name."  "Bull Shockhead," said the carle.

But now the fellowship took to riding so fast down the slopes of the mountains on a far better road, that talking together was not easy. They kept good watch, both behind and ahead, nor were they set upon again, though whiles they saw clumps of men on the hill-sides.

So after a while, when it was a little past noon, they came adown to the lower slopes of the mountains and the foot-hills, which were green and unstony; and thereon were to be seen cattle and neatherds and shepherds, and here and there the garth of a homestead, and fenced acres about it.

So now that they were come down into the peopled parts, they displayed the banners of their fellowships, to wit, the Agnes, the White Fleece, the Christopher, and the Ship and Nicholas, which last was the banner of the Faring-knights of Whitwall; but Ralph was glad to ride under the banner of St. Nicholas, his friend, and deemed that luck might the rather come to him thereby. But they displayed their banners now, because they knew that no man of the peopled parts would be so hardy as to fall upon the Chapmen, of whom they looked to have many matters for their use and pleasure.

So now that they felt themselves safe, they stayed them, and sat down by a fair little stream, and ate their dinner of such meat and drink as they had; and Ralph departed his share with his thrall, and the man was hungry and ate well; so that Clement said mockingly: "Thou feedest thy thrall over well, lord, even for a king's son: is it so that thou art minded to fatten him and eat him?" Then some of the others took up the jest, and bade the carle refrain him of the meat, so that he might not fatten, and might live the longer. He hearkened to them, and knit his brows and looked fiercely from one to the other.  But Ralph laughed aloud, and shook his finger at him and refrained him, and his wrath ran off him and he laughed, and shoved the victual into him doughtily, and sighed for pleasure when he had made an end and drunk a draught of wine.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_22]

CHAPTER 22

Ralph Talks With Bull Shockhead

When they rode on again, Ralph rode beside Bull, who was merry and blithe now he was full of meat and drink; and he spake anon:  "So thou art a king's son, master? I deemed from the first that thou wert of lineage. For as for these churls of chapmen, and the sworders whom they wage, they know not the name of their mother's mother, nor have heard one word of the beginner of their kindred; and their deeds are like unto their kinlessness."

"And are thy deeds so good?" said Ralph.  "Are they ill," said Bull, "when they are done against the foemen?"  Said Ralph: "And are all men your foemen who pass through these mountains?" "All," said Bull, "but they be of the kindred or their known friends."

"Well, Bull," said Ralph, "I like thy deeds little, that thou shouldest ravish men and women from their good life, and sell them for a price into toil and weariness and stripes."

Said Bull:  "How much worse do we than the chapmen by his debtor, and the lord of the manor by his villein?"  Said Ralph: "Far worse, if ye did but know it, poor men!"  Quoth Bull: "But I neither know it, nor can know it, nay, not when thou sayest it; for it is not so.  And look you, master, this life of a bought thrall is not such an exceeding evil life; for oft they be dealt with softly and friendly, and have other thralls to work for them under their whips."

Ralph laughed:  "Which shall I make thee, friend Bull, the upper or the under?"  Bull reddened, but said naught.  Said Ralph: "Or where shall I sell thee, that I may make the best penny out of my good luck and valiancy?"  Bull looked chopfallen: "Nay," said he in a wheedling voice, "thou wilt not sell me, thou? For I deem that thou wilt be a good master to me:  and," he broke into sudden heat hereat, "if I have another master I shall surely slay him whate'er betide."

Ralph laughed again, and said:  "Seest thou what an evil craft ye follow, when thou deemest it better to be slain with bitter torments (as thou shouldest be if thou slewest thy master) than to be sold to any master save one exceeding good?"

Bull held his peace hereat, but presently he said: "Well, be our craft good or evil, it is gainful; and whiles there is prey taken right good, which, for my part, I would not sell, once I had my hand thereon."  "Yea, women?" said Ralph. "Even so," said Bull, "such an one was taken by my kinsman Bull Nosy but a little while agone, whom he took down to the market at Cheaping Knowe, as I had not done if I had once my arms about her. For she was as fair as a flower; and yet so well built, that she could bear as much as a strong man in some ways; and, saith Nosy, when she was taken, there was no weeping or screeching in her, but patience rather and quietness, and intent to bear all and live....Master, may I ask thee a question?"  "Ask on," said Ralph. Said Bull:  "The pair of beads about thy neck, whence came they?" "They were the gift of a dear friend," said Ralph.  "A woman?" quoth Bull.  "Yea," said Ralph.

"Now is this strange," said Bull, "and I wot not what it may betoken, but this same woman had about her neck a pair of beads as like to thine as if they had been the very same:  did this woman give thee the beads? For I will say this of thee, master, that thou art well nigh as likely a man as she is a woman."

Ralph sighed, for this talk of the woman and the beads brought all the story into his mind, so that it was as if he saw it adoing again: the Lady of the Wildwood led along to death before he delivered her, and their flight together from the Water of the Oak, and that murder of her in the desert.  And betwixt the diverse deeds of the day this had of late become somewhat dim to him.  Yet after his grief came joy that this man also had seen the damsel, whom his dream of the night had called Dorothea, and that he knew of her captors; wherefore by his means he might come on her and deliver her.

Now he spake aloud:  "Nay, it was not she that gave them to me, but yet were I fain to find this woman that thou sawest; for I look to meet a friend whenas I meet her.  So tell me, dost thou think that I may cheapen her of thy kinsman?"

Bull shook his head, and said:  "It may be:  or it may be that he hath already sold her to one who heedeth not treasure so much as fair flesh; and fair is hers beyond most.  But, lord, I will do my best to find her for thee; as thou art a king's son and no ill master, I deem."

"Do that," quoth Ralph, "and I in turn will do what more I may for thee besides making thee free."  And therewith he rode forward that he might get out of earshot, for Bull's tongue seemed like to be long. And presently he heard laughter behind him, as the carle began jesting and talking with the chapman lads.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_23]

CHAPTER 23

Of the Town of Cheaping Knowe

Now when it was evening they pitched their camp down in the plain fields amidst tall elmtrees, and had their banners still flying over the tents to warn all comers of what they were. But the next morning the chapmen and their folk were up betimes to rummage their loads, and to array their wares for the market; and they gat not to the road before mid-morning. Meantime of their riding Ralph had more talk with Bull, who said to him: "Fair lord, I rede thee when thou art in the market of Cheaping Knowe, bid master Clement bring thee to the thrall-merchant, and trust me that if such a fair image as that we were speaking of hath passed through his hands within these three months, he will remember it; and then thou shalt have at least some tale of what hath befallen her but a little while ago."

That seemed good rede to Ralph, and when they went on their way he rode beside Clement, and asked him many things concerning Cheaping Knowe; and at last about the thrall-market therein. And Clement said that, though he dealt not in such wares, he had often seen them sold, and knew the master of that market. And when Ralph asked if the said master would answer questions concerning the selling of men and of women, Clement smiled and said: "Yea, yea, he will answer; for as he lives by selling thralls, and every time a thrall is sold by him he maketh some gain by it, it is to his profit that they change masters as often as may be; and when thou askest of the woman whom thou art seeking, he will be deeming that there will be some new chaffer ahead. I will bring thee to him, and thou shalt ask him of what thou wilt, and belike he will tell thee quietly over the wine-cup."

Therewith was Ralph well content, and he grew eager to enter into the town.

They came to the gates a little before sunset, after they had passed through much fair country; but nigh to the walls it was bare of trees and thickets, whereas, said Clement, they had been cut down lest they should serve as cover to strong-thieves or folk assailing the town. The walls were strong and tall, and a great castle stood high up on a hill, about which the town was builded; so that if the town were taken there would yet be another town within it to be taken also. But the town within, save for the said castle, was scarce so fairly builded as the worst of the towns which Ralph had seen erst, though there were a many houses therein.

Much people was gathered about the gate to see the merchants enter with banners displayed; and Ralph deemed many of the folk fair, such as were goodly clad; for many had but foul clouts to cover their nakedness, and seemed needy and hunger-pinched. Withal there were many warriors amongst the throng, and most of these bore a token on their sleeves, to wit, a sword reddened with blood. And Clement, speaking softly in Ralph's ear, did him to wit that this was the token of the lord who had gotten the castle in those days, and was tyrant of the town; and how that he had so many men-at-arms ready to do his bidding that none in the town was safe from him if he deemed it more for his pleasure and profit to rob or maim, or torment or slay, than to suffer them to live peaceably. "But with us chapmen," said Clement, "he will not meddle, lest there be an end of chaffer in the town; and verily the market is good."

Thus they rode through the streets into the market place, which was wide and great, and the best houses of the town were therein, and so came to the hostel of the Merchants, called the Fleece, which was a big house, and goodly enough.

The next morning Clement and the other chapmen went up into the Castle, bearing with them gifts out of their wares for the lord, and Clement bade Ralph keep close till he came back, and especially to keep his war-caught thrall, Bull Shockhead, safe at home, lest he be taken from him, and to clothe him in the guise of the chapman lads, and to dock his hair; and even so Ralph did, though Bull were loath thereto.

About noon the chapmen came back again well pleased; and Clement gave Ralph a parchment from the lord, which bade all men help and let pass Ralph of Upmeads, as a sergeant of the chapmen's guard, and said withal that now he was free to go about the town if he listed, so that he were back at the hostel of the Fleece by nightfall.

So Ralph went in company with some of the sergeants and others, and looked at this and that about the town without hindrance, save that the guard would not suffer them to pass further than the bailey of the Castle. And for the said bailey, forsooth, they had but little stomach; for they saw thence, on the slopes of the Castle-hill, tokens of the cruel justice of the said lord; for there were men and women there, yea, and babes also, hanging on gibbets and thrust through with sharp pales, and when they asked of folk why these had suffered, they but looked at them as if astonished, and passed on without a word.

So they went thence, and found the master-church, and deemed it not much fairer than it was great; and it was nowise great, albeit it was strange and uncouth of fashion.

Then they came to great gardens within the town, and they were exceeding goodly, and had trees and flowers and fruits in them which Ralph had not seen hitherto, as lemons, and oranges, and pomegranates; and the waters were running through them in runnels of ashlar; and the weather was fair and hot; so they rested in those gardens till it was evening, and then gat them home to Fleece, where they had good entertainment.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_24]

CHAPTER 24

Ralph Heareth More Tidings of the Damsel

The second day, while the merchants saw to their chaffer, most of the men-at-arms, and Ralph with them, spent their time again in those goodly gardens; where, indeed, some of them made friends of fair women of the place; in which there was less risk than had been for aliens in some towns, whereas at Cheaping Knowe such women as were wedded according to law, or damsels in the care of their kindred, or slaves who were concubines, had not dared so much as to look on a man.

The third day time hung somewhat heavy on Ralph's hands, not but that the Companions were well at ease, but rather because himseemed that he was not stirring in the quest.

But the next day Clement bade him come see that thrall-merchant aforesaid, and brought him to a corner of the market-place, where was a throng looking on at the cheaping.  They went through the throng, and beside a stone like a leaping-on stone saw a tall man, goodly of presence, black bearded, clad in scarlet; and this was the merchant; and by him were two of his knaves and certain weaponed men who had brought their wares to the cheaping. And some of these were arrayed like those foemen of the mountains. There was a half score and three of these chattels to be sold, who stood up one after other on the stone, that folk might cheapen them.  The cheaping was long about, because they that had a mind to buy were careful to know what they were buying, like as if they had been cheapening a horse, and most of them before they bid their highest had the chattels away into the merchant's booth to strip them, lest they should buy damaged or unhandsome bodies; and this more especially if it were a woman, for the men were already well nigh naked. Of women four of them were young and goodly, and Ralph looked at them closely; but they were naught like to the woman of his quest.

Now this cheaping irked Ralph sorely, as was like to be, whereas, as hath been told, he came from a land where were no thralls, none but vavassors and good yeomen:  yet he abode till all was done, hansel paid, and the thralls led off by their new masters. Then Clement led him up to the merchant, to whom he gave the sele of the day, and said:  "Master, this is the young knight of whom I told thee, who deemeth that a woman who is his friend hath been brought to this market and sold there, and if he might, he would ransom her."

The merchant greeted Ralph courteously, and bade him and Clement come into his house, where they might speak more privily. So did they, and he treated them with honour, and set wine and spices before them, and bade Ralph say whatlike the woman was. Ralph did so, and wondered at himself how well and closely he could tell of her, like as a picture painted.  And, moreover, he drew forth that piece of her gown which he had come on by the Mid-Mountain House.

So when he had done, the merchant, who was a man sober of aspect and somewhat slow of speech, said:  "Sir, I believe surely that I have seen this damsel, but she is not with me now, nor have I sold her ever; but hither was she brought to be sold by a man of the mountain folk not very many days ago. And the man's name was Bull Nosy, or the longnosed man of the kindred of the Bull, for in such wise are named the men of that unhappy folk. Now this was the cause why I might not sell her, that she was so proud and stout that men feared her, what she might do if they had her away. And when some spake to see her body naked, she denied it utterly, saying that she would do a mischief to whomsoever tried it. So I spake to him who owned her, and asked him if he thought it good to take her a while and quell her with such pains as would spoil her but little, and then bring her to market when she was meeker. But he heeded my words little, and led her away, she riding on a horse and he going afoot beside her; for the mountain-men be no horsemen."

Said Ralph:  "Dost thou know at all whither he will have led her?" Said the merchant:  "By my deeming, he will have gone first of all to the town of Whiteness, whither thy Fellowship will betake them ere long: for he will be minded to meet there the Lord of Utterbol, who is for such like wares; and he will either give her to him as a gift, for which he will have a gift in return, or he will sell her to my lord at a price if he dare to chaffer with him.  At least so will he do if he be wise. Now if the said lord hath her, it will be somewhat more than hard for thee to get her again, till he have altogether done with her; for money and goods are naught to him beside the doing of his will. But there is this for thy comfort, that whereas she is so fair a woman, she will be well with my lord.  For I warrant me that she will not dare to be proud with him, as she was with the folk here."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and what is this lord of Utterbol that all folk, men and women, fear him so?"  Said the merchant: "Fair sir, thou must pardon me if I say no more of him. Belike thou mayst fall in with him; and if thou dost, take heed that thou make not thyself great with him."

So Ralph thanked the merchant and departed with Clement, of whom presently he asked if he knew aught of this lord of Utterbol.  Said Clement: "God forbid that I should ever meet him, save where I were many and he few. I have never seen him; but he is deemed by all men as the worst of the tyrants who vex these lands, and, maybe, the mightiest."

So was Ralph sore at heart for the damsel, and anon he spake to Bull again of her, who deemed somewhat, that his kinsman had been minded at the first to sell her to the lord of Utterbol. And Ralph thinks his game a hard one, yet deems that if he could but find out where the damsel was, he might deliver her, what by sleight, what by boldness.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_25]

CHAPTER 25

The Fellowship Comes to Whiteness

Two days thereafter the chapmen having done with their matters in Cheaping Knowe, whereas they must needs keep some of their wares for other places, and especially for Goldburg, they dight them to be gone and rode out a-gates of a mid-morning with banners displayed.

It was some fifty miles thence to Whiteness, which lay close underneath the mountains, and was, as it were, the door of the passes whereby men rode to Goldburg.  The land which they passed through was fair, both of tillage and pasture, with much cattle therein. Everywhere they saw men and women working afield, but no houses of worthy yeomen or vavassors, or cots of good husbandmen. Here and there was a castle or strong-house, and here and there long rows of ugly hovels, or whiles houses, big tall and long, but exceeding foul and ill-favoured, such as Ralph had not yet seen the like of.  And when he asked of Clement concerning all this, he said:  "It is as I have told thee, that here be no freemen who work afield, nay, nor villeins either.  All those whom ye have seen working have been bought and sold like to those whom we saw standing on the Stone in the market of Cheaping Knowe, or else were born of such cattle, and each one of them can be bought and sold again, and they work not save under the whip. And as for those hovels and the long and foul houses, they are the stables wherein this kind of cattle is harboured."

Then Ralph's heart sank, and he said:  "Master Clement, I prithee tell me; were it possible that the damsel whom I seek may be come to such a pass as one of these?" "Nay," quoth Clement, "that is little like to be; such goodly wares are kept for the adornment of great men's houses. True it is that whiles the house-thralls be sent into the fields for their punishment; yet not such as she, unless the master be wholly wearied of them, or if their wrath outrun their wits; for it is more to the master's profit to chastise them at home; so keep a good heart I bid thee, and maybe we shall have tidings at Whiteness."

So Ralph refrained his anxious heart, though forsooth his thought was much upon the damsel and of how she was faring.

It was not till the third day at sunset that they came to Whiteness; for on the last day of their riding they came amongst the confused hills that lay before the great mountains, which were now often hidden from their sight; but whenever they appeared through the openings of the near hills, they seemed very great and terrible; dark and bare and stony; and Clement said that they were little better than they looked from afar.  As to Whiteness, they saw it a long way off, as it lay on a long ridge at the end of a valley: and so long was the ridge, that behind it was nothing green; naught but the huge and bare mountains.  The westering sun fell upon its walls and its houses, so that it looked white indeed against those great cliffs and crags; though, said Clement, that these were yet a good way off.  Now when, after a long ride from the hither end of the valley, they drew nigh to the town, Ralph saw that the walls and towers were not very high or strong, for so steep was the hill whereon the town stood, that it needed not. Here also was no great castle within the town as at Cheaping Knowe, and the town itself nothing so big, but long and straggling along the top of the ridge.  Cheaping Knowe was all builded of stone; but the houses here were of timber for the most part, done over with pargeting and whitened well.  Yet was the town more cheerful of aspect than Cheaping Knowe, and the folk who came thronging about the chapmen at the gates not so woe-begone, and goodly enough.

Of the lord of Whiteness, Clement told that he paid tribute to him of Cheaping Knowe, rather for love of peace than for fear of him; for he was no ill lord, and free men lived well under him.

So the chapmen lodged in the market-place; and in two days time Ralph got speech of the Deacon of the Chapmen of the Town; who told him two matters; first that the lord of Utterbol had not been in Whiteness these six months; and next that the wild man had verily brought the damsel into the market; but he had turned away thence suddenly with her, without bringing her to the stone, and that it was most like that he would have the lord of Utterbol buy her; who, since he would be deeming that he might easily bend her to his will, would give him the better penny for her. "At the last," quoth the Deacon, "the wild man led her away toward the mountain pass that goeth to Goldburg, the damsel and he alone, and she with her hands unbound and riding a little horse." Of these tidings Ralph deemed it good that all traces of her were not lost; but his heart misgave him when he thought that by this time she must surely be in the hands of the lord of Utterbol.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_26]

CHAPTER 26

They Ride the Mountains Toward Goldburg

Five days the Fellowship abode at Whiteness, and or ever they departed Clement waged men-at-arms of the lord of the town, besides servants to look to the beasts amongst the mountains, so that what with one, what with another, they entered the gates of the mountains a goodly company of four score and ten.

Ralph asked of Bull if any of those whom he might meet in these mountains were of his kindred; and he answered, nay, unless perchance there might be some one or two going their peaceful errands there like Bull Nosy. So Ralph armed him with a good sword and a shield, and would have given him a steel hood also, but he would not bear it, saying that if sword and shield could not keep his head he had well earned a split skull.

Seven days they rode the mountains, and the way was toilsome and weary enough, for it was naught but a stony maze of the rocks where nothing living dwelt, and nothing grew, save now and again a little dwarf willow.  Yet was there naught worse to meet save toil, because they were over strong for the wild men to meddle with them, whereas the kindreds thereabout were but feeble.

But as it drew towards evening on the seventh day Ralph had ridden a little ahead with Bull alone, if he might perchance have a sight of the ending of this grievous wilderness, as Clement said might be, since now the way was down-hill, and all waters ran east. So as they rode, and it was about sunset, they saw something lying by a big stone under a cliff; so they drew nigh, and saw a man lying on his back, and they deemed he was dead. So Bull went up to him, and leapt off his horse close by him and bent over him, but straightway cast up his arms and set up a long wailing whoop, and then another and another, so that they that were behind heard it and came up upon the spur. But Ralph leapt from his horse, and ran up to Bull and said: "What aileth thee to whoop and wail?  Who is it?"  But Bull turned about and shook his head at him, and said:  "It is a man of my kindred, even he that was leading away thy she-friend; and belike she it was that slew him, or why is she not here: Ochone! ahoo! ahoo!"  Therewith fire ran through Ralph's heart, and he bethought him of that other murder in the wilderness, and he fell to wringing his hands, and cried out:  "Ah, and where is she, where is she?  Is she also taken away from me for ever? O me unhappy!"

And he drew his sword therewith, and ran about amongst the rocks and the bushes seeking her body.

And therewith came up Clement, and others of the company, and wondered to see Bull kneeling down by the corpse, and to hear him crying out and wailing, and Ralph running about like one mad, and crying out now: "Oh! that I might find her!  Mayhappen she is alive yet, and anigh here in some cleft of the rocks in this miserable wilderness.  O my love that hast lain in mine arms, wouldst thou not have me find her alive? But if she be dead, then will I slay myself, for as young as I am, that I may find thee and her out of the world, since from the world both ye are gone."

Then Clement went up to Ralph, and would have a true tale out of him, and asked him what was amiss; but Ralph stared wild at him and answered not. But Bull cried out from where he knelt:  "He is seeking the woman, and I would that he could find her; for then would I slay her on the howe of my kinsman: for she hath slain him; she hath slain him."

That word heard Ralph, and he ran at Bull with uplifted sword to slay him; but Clement tripped him and he fell, and his sword flew out of his hand. Then Clement and two of the others bound his hands with their girdles, till they might know what had befallen; for they deemed that a devil had entered into him, and feared that he would do a mischief to himself or some other.

And now was the whole Fellowship assembled, and stood in a ring round about Ralph and Bull, and the dead man; as for him, he had been dead some time, many days belike; but in that high and clear cold air, his carcase, whistled by the wind, had dried rather than rotted, and his face was clear to be seen with its great hooked nose and long black hair: and his skull was cloven.

Now Bull had done his wailing for his kinsman, and he seemed to wake up as from a dream, and looked about the ring of men and spake:  "Here is a great to do, my masters! What will ye with me?  Have ye heard, or is it your custom, that when a man cometh on the dead corpse of his brother, his own mother's son, he turneth it over with his foot, as if it were the carcase of a dog, and so goeth on his way? This I ask, that albeit I be but a war-taken thrall, I be suffered to lay my brother in earth and heap a howe over him in these mountains."

They all murmured a yeasay to this save Ralph.  He had been sobered by his fall, and was standing up now betwixt Clement and the captain, who had unbound his hands, now that the others had come up; he hung his head, and was ashamed of his fury by seeming. But when Bull had spoken, and the others had answered, Ralph said to Bull, wrathfully still, but like a man in his wits: "Why didst thou say that thou wouldest slay her?"  "Hast thou found her?" said Bull.  "Nay," quoth Ralph, sullenly.  "Well, then," said Bull, "when thou dost find her, we will speak of it." Said Ralph:  "Why didst thou say that she hath slain him?" "I was put out of my wits by the sight of him dead," said Bull; "But now I say mayhappen she hath slain him."

"And mayhappen not," said Clement; "look here to the cleaving of his skull right through this iron headpiece, which he will have bought at Cheaping Knowe (for I have seen suchlike in the armourers' booth there): it must have taken a strong man to do this."

"Yea," quoth the captain, "and a big sword to boot: this is the stroke of a strong man wielding a good weapon."

Said Bull:  "Well, and will my master bid me forego vengeance for my brother's slaying, or that I bear him to purse? Then let him slay me now, for I am his thrall."  Said Ralph: "Thou shalt do as thou wilt herein, and I also will do as I will. For if she slew him, the taking of her captive should be set against the slaying."  "That is but right," said the captain; "but Sir Ralph, I bid thee take the word of an old man-at-arms for it, that she slew him not; neither she, nor any other woman."

Said Clement:  "Well, let all this be.  But tell me, lord Ralph, what thou wouldst do, since now thou art come to thyself again?" Said Ralph:  "I would seek the wilderness hereabout, if perchance the damsel be thrust into some cleft or cavern, alive or dead."

"Well," said Clement, "this is my rede.  Since Bull Shockhead would bury his brother, and lord Ralph would seek the damsel, and whereas there is water anigh, and the sun is well nigh set, let us pitch our tents and abide here till morning, and let night bring counsel unto some of us. How say ye, fellows?"

None naysaid it, and they fell to pitching the tents, and lighting the cooking-fires; but Bull at once betook him to digging a grave for his brother, whilst Ralph with the captain and four others went and sought all about the place, and looked into all clefts of rocks, and found not the maiden, nor any token of her. They were long about it, and when they were come back again, and it was night, though the moon shone out, there was Bull Shockhead standing by the howe of his brother Bull Nosy, which was heaped up high over the place where they had found him.

So when Bull saw him, he turned to him and said: "King's son, I have done what needs was for this present. Now, wilt thou slay me for my fault, or shall I be thy man again, and serve thee truly unless the blood feud come between us?" Said Ralph:  "Thou shalt serve me truly, and help me to find him who hath slain thy brother, and carried off the damsel; for even thus it hath been done meseemeth, since about here we have seen no signs of her alive or dead. But to-morrow we shall seek wider ere I ride on my way." "Yea," said Bull, "and I will be one in the search."

So then they gat them to their sleeping-berths, and Ralph, contrary to his wont, lay long awake, pondering these things; till at last he said to himself that this woman, whom he called Dorothea, was certainly alive, and wotted that he was seeking her. And then it seemed to him that he could behold her through the darkness of night, clad in the green flowered gown as he had first seen her, and she bewailing her captivity and the long tarrying of the deliverer as she went to and fro in a great chamber builded of marble and done about with gold and bright colours: and or ever he slept, he deemed this to be a vision of what then was, rather than a memory of what had been; and it was sweet to his very soul.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_27]

CHAPTER 27

Clement Tells of Goldburg

Now when it was morning he rose early and roused Bull and the captain, and they searched in divers places where they had not been the night before, and even a good way back about the road they had ridden yesterday, but found no tidings.  And Ralph said to himself that this was naught but what he had looked for after that vision of the night.

So he rode with his fellows somewhat shamefaced that they had seen that sudden madness in him; but was presently of better cheer than he had been yet.  He rode beside Clement; they went downhill speedily, and the wilderness began to better, and there was grass at whiles, and bushes here and there.  A little after noon they came out of a pass cleft deep through the rocks by a swift stream which had once been far greater than then, and climbed up a steep ridge that lay across the road, and looking down from the top of it, beheld the open country again. But this was otherwise from what they had beheld from the mountain's brow above Cheaping Knowe.  For thence the mountains beyond Whiteness, even those that they had just ridden, were clear to be seen like the wall of the plain country.  But here, looking adown, the land below them seemed but a great spreading plain with no hills rising from it, save that far away they could see a certain break in it, and amidst that, something that was brighter than the face of the land elsewhere. Clement told Ralph that this was Goldburg and that it was built on a gathering of hills, not great, but going up steep from the plain. And the plain, said he, was not so wholly flat and even as it looked from up there, but swelled at whiles into downs and low hills. He told him that Goldburg was an exceeding fair town to behold; that the lord who had built it had brought from over the mountains masons and wood-wrights and artificers of all kinds, that they might make it as fair as might be, and that he spared on it neither wealth nor toil nor pains. For in sooth he deemed that he should find the Well at the World's End, and drink thereof, and live long and young and fair past all record; therefore had he builded this city, to be the house and home of his long-enduring joyance.

Now some said that he had found the Well, and drank thereof; others naysaid that; but all deemed that they knew how that Goldburg was not done building ere that lord was slain in a tumult, and that what was then undone was cobbled up after the uncomely fashion of the towns thereabout.

Clement said moreover that, this happy lord dead, things had not gone so well there as had been looked for.  Forsooth it had been that lord's will and meaning that all folks in Goldburg should thrive, both those who wrought and those for whom they wrought. But it went not so, but there were many poor folk there, and few wealthy.

Again said Clement that though the tillers and toilers of Goldburg were not for the most part mere thralls and chattels, as in the lands beyond the mountains behind them, yet were they little more thriving for that cause; whereas they belonged not to a master, who must at worst feed them, and to no manor, whose acres they might till for their livelihood, and on whose pastures they might feed their cattle; nor had they any to help or sustain them against the oppressor and the violent man; so that they toiled and swinked and died with none heeding them, save they that had the work of their hands good cheap; and they forsooth heeded them less than their draught beasts whom they must needs buy with money, and whose bellies they must needs fill; whereas these poor wretches were slaves without a price, and if one died another took his place on the chance that thereby he might escape present death by hunger, for there was a great many of them.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_28]

CHAPTER 28

Now They Come to Goldburg

That night they slept yet amongst the mountains, or rather in the first of the hill country at their feet; but on the morrow they rode down into the lowlands, and thereby lost all sight of Goldburg, and it was yet afar off, so that they rode four days through lands well-tilled, but for the most part ill-housed, a country of little hills and hollows and rising grounds, before they came in sight of it again heaving up huge and bright under the sun. It was built partly on three hills, the buttresses of a long ridge which turned a wide river, and on the ridge itself, and partly on the flat shore of the river, on either side, hillward and plainward: but a great white wall girt it all about, which went right over the river as a bridge, and on the plain side it was exceeding high, so that its battlements might be somewhat evened with those of the hill-wall above.  So that as they came up to the place they saw little of the town because of the enormity of the wall; scarce aught save a spire or a tall towering roof here and there.

So when they were come anigh the gate, they displayed their banners and rode right up to it; and people thronged the walls to see their riding. One by one they passed through the wicket of the gate:  which gate itself was verily huge beyond measure, all built of great ashlar-stones; and when they were within, it was like a hall somewhat long and exceeding high, most fairly vaulted; midmost of the said hall they rode through a noble arch on their right hand, and lo another hall exceeding long, but lower than the first, with many glazen windows set in its townward wall; and when they looked through these, they saw the river running underneath; for this was naught but the lower bridge of the city and they learned afterwards and saw, that above the vault of this long bridge rose up the castle, chamber on chamber, till its battlements were level with the highest towers of the wall on the hill top.

Thus they passed the bridge, and turning to the left at its ending, came into the Water-Street of Goldburg, where the river, with wide quays on either side thereof, ran betwixt the houses. As for these, beneath the dwellings went a fair arched passage like to the ambulatory of an abbey; and every house all along this street was a palace for its goodliness.  The houses were built of white stones and red and grey; with shapely pillars to the cloister, and all about carvings of imagery and knots of flowers; goodly were the windows and all glazed, as fair as might be. On the river were great barges, and other craft such as were not sea-goers, river-ships that might get them through the bridges and furnished with masts that might be lowered and shipped.

Much people was gathered to see the chapmen enter, yet scarce so many as might be looked for in so goodly a town; yea, and many of the folk were clad foully, and were haggard of countenance, and cried on the chapmen for alms. Howbeit some were clad gaily and richly enough, and were fair of favour as any that Ralph had seen since he left Upmeads: and amongst these goodly folk were women not a few, whose gear and bearing called to Ralph's mind the women of the Wheatwearers whom he had seen erst in the Burg of the Four Friths, whereas they were somewhat wantonly clad in scanty and thin raiment. And of these, though they were not all thralls, were many who were in servitude:  for, as Clement did Ralph to wit, though the tillers of the soil, and the herdsmen, in short the hewers of wood and drawers of water, were men masterless, yet rich men might and did buy both men and women for servants in their houses, and for their pleasure and profit in divers wise.

So they rode to their hostel in the market place, which lay a little back from the river in an ingle of the ridge and one of its buttresses; and all round the said market were houses as fair as the first they had seen: but above, on the hill-sides, save for the castle and palace of the Queen (for a woman ruled in Goldburg), were the houses but low, poorly built of post and pan, and thatched with straw, or reed, or shingle. But the great church was all along one side of the market place; and albeit this folk was somewhat wild and strange of faith for Christian men, yet was it dainty and delicate as might be, and its steeples and bell-towers were high and well builded, and adorned exceeding richly.

So they lighted down at their hostel, and never had Ralph seen such another, for the court within was very great and with a fair garden filled with flowers and orchard-trees, and amidst it was a fountain of fresh water, built in the goodliest fashion of many-coloured marble-stones. And the arched and pillared way about the said court was as fair as the cloister of a mitred abbey; and the hall for the guests was of like fashion, vaulted with marvellous cunning, and with a row of pillars amidmost.

There they abode in good entertainment; yet this noted Ralph, that as goodly as was the fashion of the building of that house, yet the hangings and beds, and stools, and chairs, and other plenishing were no richer or better than might be seen in the hostelry of any good town.

So they went bedward, and Ralph slept dreamlessly, as was mostly his wont.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_29]

CHAPTER 29

Of Goldburg and the Queen Thereof

On the morrow, when Ralph and Clement met in the hall, Clement spake and said:  "Lord Ralph, as I told thee in Whitwall, we chapmen are now at the end of our outward journey, and in about twenty days time we shall turn back to the mountains; but, as I deem, thou wilt be minded to follow up thy quest of the damsel, and whatsoever else thou mayst be seeking. Now this thou mayst well do whiles we are here in Goldburg, and yet come back hither in time to fare back with us: and also, if thou wilt, thou mayst have fellows in thy quest, to wit some of those our men-at-arms, who love thee well. But now, when thou hast done thy best these days during, if thou hast then found naught, I counsel thee and beseech thee to come thy ways back with us, that we twain may wend to Upmeads together, where thou shalt live well, and better all the deeds of thy father. Meseemeth this will be more meet for thee than the casting away of thy life in seeking a woman, who maybe will be naught to thee when thou hast found her; or in chasing some castle in the clouds, that shall be never the nigher to thee, how far soever thou farest. For now I tell thee that I have known this while how thou art seeking the Well at the World's End; and who knoweth that there is any such thing on the earth?  Come, then, thou art fair, and young, and strong; and if ye seek wealth thou shalt have it, and my furtherance to the utmost, if that be aught worth. Bethink thee, child, there are they that love thee in Upmeads and thereabout, were it but thy gossip, my wife, dame Katherine."

Said Ralph:  "Master Clement, I thank thee for all that thou hast said, and thy behest, and thy deeds. Thy rede is good, and in all ways will I follow it save one; to wit, that if I have not found the damsel ere ye turn back, I must needs abide in this land searching for her. And I pray the pardon both of thee and of thy gossip, if I answer not your love as ye would, and perchance as I should. Yea, and of Upmeads also I crave pardon.  But in doing as I do, my deed shall be but according to the duty bounden on me by mine oath, when Duke Osmond made me knight last year, in the church of St. Laurence of Upmeads."

Said Clement:  "I see that there is something else in it than that; I see thee to be young, and that love and desire bind thee in closer bonds than thy knightly oath.  Well, so it must be, and till thou hast her, there is but one woman in the world for thee."

"Nay, it is not so, Master Clement," said Ralph, "and I will tell thee this, so that thou mayst trow my naysay; since I departed from Upmeads, I have been taken in the toils of love, and desired a fair woman, and I have won her and death hath taken her. Trowest thou my word?"

"Yea," said Clement, "but to one of thy years love is not plucked up by the root, and it soon groweth again."  Then said Ralph, sadly: "Now tell my gossip of this when thou comest home." Clement nodded yeasay, and Ralph spake again in a moment: "And now will I begin my search in Goldburg by praying thee to bring me to speech of merchants and others who may have seen or heard tidings of my damsel."

He looked at Clement anxiously as he spoke; and Clement smiled, for he said to himself that looking into Ralph's heart on this matter was like looking into a chamber through an open window. But he said:  "Fear not but I will look to it; I am thy friend, and not thy schoolmaster."

Therewith he departed from Ralph, and within three days he had brought him to speech of all those who were like to know anything of the matter; and one and all they said that they had seen no such woman, and that as for the Lord of Utterbol, he had not been in Goldburg these three months. But one of the merchants said:  "Master Clement, if this young knight is boun for Utterbol, he beareth his life in his hand, as thou knowest full well. Now I rede thee bring him to our Queen, who is good and compassionate, and if she may not help him otherwise, yet belike she may give him in writing to show to that tyrant, which may stand him in stead: for it does not do for any man to go against the will of our Lady and Queen; who will surely pay him back for his ill-will some day or other." Said Clement:  "It is well thought of, and I will surely do as thou biddest."

So wore four days, and, that time during, Ralph was going to and fro asking questions of folk that he came across, as people new come to the city and hunters from the mountain-feet and the forests of the plain, and mariners and such like, concerning the damsel and the Lord of Utterbol; and Bull also went about seeking tidings: but whereas Ralph asked downright what he wanted to know, Bull was wary, and rather led men on to talk with him concerning those things than asked them of them in such wise that they saw the question. Albeit it was all one, and no tidings came to them; indeed, the name of the Lord of Utterbol (whom forsooth Bull named not) seemed to freeze the speech of men's tongues, and they commonly went away at once when it was spoken.

On the fifth day came Clement to Ralph and said: "Now will I bring thee to the Queen, and she is young, and so fair, and withal so wise, that it seems to me not all so sure but that the sight of her will make an end of thy quest once for all. So that meseems thou mayest abide here in a life far better than wandering amongst uncouth folk, perilous and cruel. Yea, so thou mayst have it if thou wilt, being so exceeding goodly, and wise, and well-spoken, and of high lineage."

Ralph heard and reddened, but gave him back no answer; and they went together to the High House of the Queen, which was like a piece of the Kingdom of Heaven for loveliness, so many pillars as there were of bright marble stone, and gilded, and the chapiters carved most excellently: not many hangings on the walls, for the walls themselves were carven, and painted with pictures in the most excellent manner; the floors withal were so dainty that they seemed as if they were made for none but the feet of the fairest of women. And all this was set amidst of gardens, the like of which they had never seen.

But they entered without more ado, and were brought by the pages to the Lady's innermost chamber; and if the rest of the house were goodly, this was goodlier, and a marvel, so that it seemed wrought rather by goldsmiths and jewellers than by masons and carvers. Yet indeed many had said with Clement that the Queen who sat there was the goodliest part thereof.

Now she spake to Clement and said:  "Hail, merchant! Is this the young knight of whom thou tellest, he who seeketh his beloved that hath been borne away into thralldom by evil men?"

"Even so," said Clement.  But Ralph spake:  "Nay, Lady, the damsel whom I seek is not my beloved, but my friend. My beloved is dead."

The Queen looked on him smiling kindly, yet was her face somewhat troubled. She said:  "Master chapman, thy time here is not over long for all that thou hast to do; so we give thee leave to depart with our thanks for bringing a friend to see us.  But this knight hath no affairs to look to: so if he will abide with us for a little, it will be our pleasure."

So Clement made his obeisance and went his ways.  But the Queen bade Ralph sit before her, and tell her of his griefs, and she looked so kindly and friendly upon him that the heart melted within him, and he might say no word, for the tears that brake out from him, and he wept before her; while she looked on him, the colour coming and going in her face, and her lips trembling, and let him weep on. But he thought not of her, but of himself and how kind she was to him. But after a while he mastered his passion and began, and told her all he had done and suffered.  Long was the tale in the telling, for it was sweet to him to lay before her both his grief and his hope. She let him talk on, and whiles she listened to him, and whiles, not, but all the time she gazed on him, yet sometimes askance, as if she were ashamed. As for him, he saw her face how fair and lovely she was, yet was there little longing in his heart for her, more than for one of the painted women on the wall, for as kind and as dear as he deemed her.

When he had done, she kept silence a while, but at last she enforced her, and spake:  "Sad it is for the mother that bore thee that thou art not in her house, wherein all things would be kind and familiar to thee. Maybe thou art seeking for what is not.  Or maybe thou shalt seek and shalt find, and there may be naught in what thou findest, whereof to give thee such gifts as are meet for thy faithfulness and valiancy. But in thine home shouldst thou have all gifts which thou mayest desire."

Then was she silent awhile, and then spake:  "Yet must I needs say that I would that thine home were in Goldburg."

He smiled sadly and looked on her, but with no astonishment, and indeed he still scarce thought of her as he said: "Lady and Queen, thou art good to me beyond measure. Yet, look you!  One home I had, and left it; another I looked to have, and I lost it; and now I have no home. Maybe in days to come I shall go back to mine old home; and whiles I wonder with what eyes it will look on me. For merry is that land, and dear; and I have become sorrowful."

"Fear not," she said; "I say again that in thine home shall all things look kindly on thee."

Once more she sat silent, and no word did his heart bid him speak. Then she sighed and said:  "Fair lord, I bid thee come and go in this house as thou wilt; but whereas there are many folk who must needs see me, and many things are appointed for me to do, therefore I pray thee to come hither in three days' space, and meanwhile I will look to the matter of thy search, that I may speed thee on the way to Utterness, which is no great way from Utterbol, and is the last town whereof we know aught. And I will write a letter for thee to give to the lord of Utterbol, which he will heed, if he heedeth aught my good-will or enmity. I beseech thee come for it in three days wearing."

Therewith she arose and took his hand and led him to the door, and he departed, blessing her goodness, and wondering at her courtesy and gentle speech.

For those three days he was still seeking tidings everywhere, till folk began to know of him far and wide, and to talk of him. And at the time appointed he went to the Queen's House and was brought to her chamber as before, and she was alone therein. She greeted him and smiled on him exceeding kindly, but he might not fail to note of her that she looked sad and her face was worn by sorrow.  She bade him sit beside her, and said: "Hast thou any tidings of the woman whom thou seekest?" "Nay, nay," said he, "and now I am minded to carry on the search out-a-gates. I have some good friends who will go with me awhile. But thou, Lady, hast thou heard aught?"

"Naught of the damsel," she said.  "But there is something else. As Clement told me, thou seekest the Well at the World's End, and through Utterness and by Utterbol is a way whereby folk seek thither. Mayst thou find it, and may it profit thee more than it did my kinsman of old, who first raised up Goldburg in the wilderness. Whereas for him was naught but strife and confusion, till he was slain in a quarrel, wherein to fail was to fail, and to win the day was to win shame and misery."

She looked on him sweetly and said:  "Thou art nowise such as he; and if thou drink of the Well, thou wilt go back to Upmeads, and thy father and mother, and thine own folk and thine home. But now here is the letter which thou shalt give to the Lord of Utterbol if thou meet him; and mayhappen he is naught so evil a man as the tale of him runs."

She gave him the letter into his hands, and spake again: "And now I have this to say to thee, if anything go amiss with thee, and thou be nigh enough to seek to me, come hither, and then, in whatso plight thou mayst be, or whatsoever deed thou mayst have done, here will be the open door for thee and the welcome of a friend."

Her voice shook a little as she spake, and she was silent again, mastering her trouble.  Then she said:  "At last I must say this to thee, that there may no lie be between us. That damsel of whom thou spakest that she was but thy friend, and not thy love--O that I might be thy friend in such-wise! But over clearly I see that it may not be so. For thy mind looketh on thy deeds to come, that they shall be shared by some other than me.  Friend, it seemeth strange and strange to me that I have come on thee so suddenly, and loved thee so sorely, and that I must needs say farewell to thee in so short a while.  Farewell, farewell!"

Therewith she arose, and once more she took his hand in hers, and led him to the door.  And he was sorry and all amazed: for he had not thought so much of her before, that he might see that she loved him; and he thought but that she, being happy and great, was kind to him who was hapless and homeless. And he was bewildered by her words and sore ashamed that for all his grief for her he had no speech, and scarce a look for her; he knew not what to do or say.

So he left the Queen's House and the court thereof, as though the pavement were growing red hot beneath his feet.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_30]

CHAPTER 30

Ralph Hath Hope of Tidings Concerning the Well at the World's End

Now he goes to Clement, and tells him that he deems he has no need to abide their departure from Goldburg to say farewell and follow his quest further afield; since it is clear that in Goldburg he should have no more tidings.  Clement laughed and said: "Not so fast, Lord Ralph; thou mayst yet hear a word or two." "What!" said Ralph, "hast thou heard of something new?" Said Clement:  "There has been a man here seeking thee, who said that he wotted of a wise man who could tell thee much concerning the Well at the World's End.  And when I asked him of the Damsel and the Lord of Utterbol, if he knew anything of her, he said yea, but that he would keep it for thy privy ear. So I bade him go and come again when thou shouldst be here. And I deem that he will not tarry long."

Now they were sitting on a bench outside the hall of the hostel, with the court between them and the gate; and Ralph said: "Tell me, didst thou deem the man good or bad?"  Said Clement: "He was hard to look into:  but at least he looked not a fierce or cruel man; nor indeed did he seem false or sly, though I take him for one who hath lost his manhood-- but lo you! here he comes across the court."

So Ralph looked, and saw in sooth a man drawing nigh, who came straight up to them and lowted to them, and then stood before them waiting for their word:  he was fat and somewhat short, white-faced and pink-cheeked, with yellow hair long and curling, and with a little thin red beard and blue eyes: altogether much unlike the fashion of men of those parts. He was clad gaily in an orange-tawny coat laced with silver, and broidered with colours.

Clement spake to him and said:  "This is the young knight who is minded to seek further east to wot if it be mere lies which he hath heard of the Well at the World's End."

The new-comer lowted before them again, and said in a small voice, and as one who was shy and somewhat afeared:  "Lords, I can tell many a tale concerning that Well, and them who have gone on the quest thereof. And the first thing I have to tell is that the way thereto is through Utterness, and that I can be a shower of the way and a leader to any worthy knight who listeth to seek thither; and moreover, I know of a sage who dwelleth not far from the town of Utterness, and who, if he will, can put a seeker of the Well on the right road."

He looked askance on Ralph, whose face flushed and whose eyes glittered at that word.  But Clement said:  "Yea, that seemeth fair to look to: but hark ye!  Is it not so that the way to Utterness is perilous?" Said the man:  "Thou mayst rather call it deadly, to any who is not furnished with a let-pass from the Lord of Utterbol, as I am. But with such a scroll a child or a woman may wend the road unharmed." "Where hast thou the said let-pass?" said Clement.  "Here," quoth the new-comer; and therewith he drew a scroll from out of his pouch, and opened it before them, and they read it together, and sure enough it was a writing charging all men so let pass and aid Morfinn the Minstrel (of whose aspect it told closely), under pain of falling into the displeasure of Gandolf, Lord of Utterbol; and the date thereon was but three months old.

Said Clement:  "This is good, this let-pass: see thou, Ralph, the seal of Utterbol, the Bear upon the Castle Wall. None would dare to counterfeit this seal, save one who was weary of life, and longed for torments."

Said Ralph, smiling:  "Thou seest, Master Clement, that there must be a parting betwixt us, and that this man's coming furthers it: but were he or were he not, yet the parting had come.  And wert thou not liefer that it should come in a way to pleasure and aid me, than that thou shouldst but leave me behind at Goldburg when thou departest: and I with naught done toward the achieving my quest, but merely dragging my deedless body about these streets; and at last, it may be, going on a perilous journey without guiding or safe-conduct?"

"Yea, lad," said Clement, "I wotted well that thou wouldst take thine own way, but fain had I been that it had been mine also." Then he pondered a while and said afterwards:  "I suppose that thou wilt take thy servant Bull Shockhead with thee, for he is a stout man-at-arms, and I deem him trusty, though he be a wild man. But one man is of little avail to a traveller on a perilous road, so if thou wilt I will give leave and license to a half score of our sergeants to follow thee on the road; for, as thou wottest, I may easily wage others in their place.  Or else wouldst thou ask the Queen of Goldburg to give thee a score of men-at-arms; she looked to me the other day as one who would deny thee few of thine askings."

Ralph blushed red, and said:  "Nay, I will not ask her this." Then he was silent; the new-comer looked from one to the other, and said nothing.  At last Ralph spake:  "Look you, Clement, my friend, I wot well how thou wouldst make my goings safe, even if it were to thy loss, and I thank thee for it:  but I deem I shall do no better than putting myself into this man's hands, since he has a let-pass for the lands of him of Utterbol: and meseemeth from all that I have heard, that a half score or a score, or for the matter of that an hundred men-at-arms would not be enough to fight a way to Utterbol, and their gathering together would draw folk upon them, who would not meddle with two men journeying together, even if they had no let-pass of this mighty man."  Clement sighed and grunted, and then said: "Well, lord, maybe thou art right."

"Yea," said the guide, "he is as right as may be: I have not spoken before lest ye might have deemed me untrusty: but now I tell thee this, that never should a small band of men unknown win through the lands of the Lord of Utterbol, or the land debatable that lieth betwixt them and Goldburg."

Ralph nodded friendly at him as he spake; but Clement looked on him sternly; and the man beheld his scowling face innocently, and took no heed of it.

Then said Ralph:  "As to Bull Shockhead, I will speak to him anon; but I will not take him with me; for indeed I fear lest his mountain-pride grow up over greenly at whiles and entangle me in some thicket of peril hard to win out of."

"Well," said Clement, "and when wilt thou depart?" "To-morrow," said Ralph, "if my faring-fellow be ready for me by then." "I am all ready," said the man:  "if thou wilt ride out by the east gate about two hours before noon to-morrow, I will abide thee on a good horse with all that we may need for the journey: and now I ask leave."  "Thou hast it," said Clement.

So the man departed, and those two being left alone, Master Clement said: "Well, I deemed that nothing else would come of it:  and I fear that thy gossip will be ill-content with me; for great is the peril." "Yea," said Ralph, "and great the reward."  Clement smiled and sighed, and said:  "Well, lad, even so hath a many thought before thee, wise men as well as fools."  Ralph looked at him and reddened, and departed from him a little, and went walking in the cloister there to and fro, and pondered these matters; and whatever he might do, still would that trim figure be before his eyes which he had looked on so gladly erewhile in the hostel of Bourton Abbas; and he said aloud to himself: "Surely she needeth me, and draweth me to her whether I will or no." So wore the day.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_31]

CHAPTER 31

The Beginning of the Road to Utterbol

Early next morning Ralph arose and called Bull Shockhead to him and said:  "So it is, Bull, that thou art my war-taken thrall." Bull nodded his head, but frowned therewithal.  Said Ralph: "If I bid thee aught that is not beyond reason thou wilt do it, wilt thou not?"  "Yea," said Bull, surlily.  "Well," quoth Ralph, "I am going a journey east-away, and I may not have thee with me, therefore I bid thee take this gold and go free with my goodwill." Bull's face lighted up, and the eyes glittered in his face; but he said: "Yea, king's son, but why wilt thou not take me with thee?" Said Ralph:  "It is a perilous journey, and thy being with me will cast thee into peril and make mine more.  Moreover, I have an errand, as thou wottest, which is all mine own."

Bull pondered a little and then said:  "King's son, I was thinking at first that our errands lay together, and it is so; but belike thou sayest true that there will be less peril to each of us if we sunder at this time. But now I will say this to thee, that henceforth thou shalt be as a brother to me, if thou wilt have it so, and if ever thou comest amongst our people, thou wilt be in no danger of them:  nay, they shall do all the good they may to thee."

Then he took him by the hand and kissed him, and he set his hand to his gear and drew forth a little purse of some small beast's skin that was broidered in front with a pair of bull's horns: then he stooped down and plucked a long and tough bent from the grass at his feet (for they were talking in the garden of the hostel) and twisted it swiftly into a strange knot of many plies, and opening the purse laid it therein and said: "King's son, this is the token whereby it shall be known amongst our folk that I have made thee my brother:  were the flames roaring about thee, or the swords clashing over thine head, if thou cry out, I am the brother of Bull Shockhead, all those of my kindred who are near will be thy friends and thy helpers. And now I say to thee farewell:  but it is not altogether unlike that thou mayst hear of me again in the furthest East." So Ralph departed from him, and Clement went with Ralph to the Gate of Goldburg, and bade him farewell there; and or they parted he said: "Meseems I have with me now some deal of the foreseeing of Katherine my wife, and in my mind it is that we shall yet see thee at Wulstead and Upmeads, and thou no less famous than now thou art. This is my last word to thee."  Therewith they parted, and Ralph rode his ways.

He came on his way-leader about a bowshot from the gate and they greeted each other:  the said guide was clad no otherwise than yesterday: he had saddle-bags on his horse, which was a strong black roadster: but he was nowise armed, and bore but a satchel with a case of knives done on to it, and on the other side a fiddle in its case. So Ralph smiled on him and said:  "Thou hast no weapon, then?" "What need for weapon?" said he; "since we are not of might for battle. This is my weapon," said he, touching his fiddle, "and withal it is my field and mine acre that raiseth flesh-meat and bread for me: yea, and whiles a little drink."

So they rode on together and the man was blithe and merry: and Ralph said to him:  "Since we are fellows for a good while, as I suppose, what shall I call thee?"  Said he, "Morfinn the Minstrel I hight, to serve thee, fair lord. Or some call me Morfinn the Unmanned.  Wilt thou not now ask me concerning that privy word that I had for thy ears?" "Yea," said Ralph reddening, "hath it to do with a woman?" "Naught less," said Morfinn.  "For I heard of thee asking many questions thereof in Goldburg, and I said to myself, now may I, who am bound for Utterness, do a good turn to this fair young lord, whose face bewrayeth his heart, and telleth all men that he is kind and bounteous; so that there is no doubt but he will reward me well at once for any help I may give him; and also it may be that he will do me a good turn hereafter in memory of this that I have done him."

"Speak, wilt thou not," said Ralph, "and tell me at once if thou hast seen this woman?  Be sure that I shall reward thee."  "Nay, nay, fair sir," said Morfinn; "a woman I have seen brought captive to the House of Utterbol. See thou to it if it be she whom thou seekest."

He smiled therewith, but now Ralph deemed him not so debonnaire as he had at first, for there was mocking in the smile; therefore he was wroth, but he refrained him and said: "Sir Minstrel, I wot not why thou hast come with a tale in thy mouth and it will not out of it:  lo you, will this open the doors of speech to thee" (and he reached his hand out to him with two pieces of gold lying therein) "or shall this?" and therewith he half drew his sword from his sheath.

Said Morfinn, grinning again:  "Nay, I fear not the bare steel in thine hands, Knight; for thou hast not fool written plain in thy face; therefore thou wilt not slay thy way-leader, or even anger him over much. And as to thy gold, the wages shall be paid at the journey's end. I was but seeking about in my mind how best to tell thee my tale so that thou mightest believe my word, which is true.  Thus it goes: As I left Utterbol a month ago, I saw a damsel brought in captive there, and she seemed to me so exceeding fair that I looked hard on her, and asked one of the men-at-arms who is my friend concerning the market whereat she was cheapened; and he told me that she had not been bought, but taken out of the hands of the wild men from the further mountains. Is that aught like to your story, lord?"  "Yea," said Ralph, knitting his brows in eagerness.  "Well," said Morfinn, "but there are more fair women than one in the world, and belike this is not thy friend: so now, as well as I may, I will tell thee what-like she was, and if thou knowest her not, thou mayst give me those two gold pieces and go back again.  She was tall rather than short, and slim rather than bigly made.  But many women are fashioned so: and doubtless she was worn by travel, since she has at least come from over the mountains:  but that is little to tell her by: her hands, and her feet also (for she was a horseback and barefoot) wrought well beyond most women:  yet so might it have been with some: yet few, methinks, of women who have worked afield, as I deem her to have done, would have hands and feet so shapely:  her face tanned with the sun, but with fair colour shining through it; her hair brown, yet with a fair bright colour shining therein, and very abundant: her cheeks smooth, round and well wrought as any imager could do them: her chin round and cloven:  her lips full and red, but firm-set as if she might be both valiant and wroth.  Her eyes set wide apart, grey and deep:  her whole face sweet of aspect, as though she might be exceeding kind to one that pleased her; yet high and proud of demeanour also, meseemed, as though she were come of great kindred. Is this aught like to thy friend?"

He spake all this slowly and smoothly and that mocking smile came into his face now and again.  Ralph grew pale as he spoke and knitted his brows as one in great wrath and grief; and he was slow to answer; but at last he said "Yea," shortly and sharply.

Then said Morfinn:  "And yet after all it might not be she: for there might be another or two even in these parts of whom all this might be said.  But now I will tell thee of her raiment, though there may be but little help to thee therein, as she may have shifted it many times since thou hast seen her.  Thus it was: she was clad outwardly in a green gown, short of skirt as of one wont to go afoot; somewhat straight in the sleeves as of one who hath household work to do, and there was broidery many coloured on the seams thereof, and a border of flower-work round the hem: and this I noted, that a cantle of the skirt had been rent away by some hap of the journey.  Now what sayest thou, fair lord? Have I done well to bring thee this tale?"

"O yea, yea," said Ralph, and he might not contain himself; but set spurs to his horse and galloped on ahead for some furlong or so: and then drew rein and gat off his horse, and made as if he would see to his saddle-girths, for he might not refrain from weeping the sweet and bitter tears of desire and fear, so stirred the soul within him.

Morfinn rode on quietly, and by then he came up, Ralph was mounting again, and when he was in the saddle he turned away his head from his fellow and said in a husky voice: "Morfinn, I command thee, or if thou wilt I beseech thee, that thou speak not to me again of this woman whom I am seeking; for it moveth me over much."  "That is well, lord," said Morfinn, "I will do after thy command; and there be many other matters to speak of besides one fair woman."

Then they rode on soberly a while, and Ralph kept silence, as he rode pondering much; but the minstrel hummed snatches of rhyme as he rode the way.

But at last Ralph turned to him suddenly and said:  "Tell me, way-leader, in what wise did they seem to be using that woman?" The minstrel chuckled:  "Fair lord," said he, "if I had a mind for mocking I might say of thee that thou blowest both hot and cold, since it was but half an hour ago that thou badest me speak naught of her:  but I deem that I know thy mind herein: so I will tell thee that they seemed to be using her courteously; as is no marvel; for who would wish to mar so fair an image? O, it will be well with her:  I noted that the Lord seemed to think it good to ride beside her, and eye her all over. Yea, she shall have a merry life of it if she but do somewhat after the Lord's will."

Ralph looked askance at him fiercely, but the other heeded it naught: then said Ralph, "And how if she do not his will?"  Said Morfinn, grinning: "Then hath my Lord a many servants to do his will."  Ralph held his peace for a long while; at last he turned a cleared brow to Morfinn and said; "Dost thou tell of the Lord of Utterbol that he is a good lord and merciful to his folk and servants?"

"Fair sir," said the minstrel; "thou hast bidden me not speak of one woman, now will I pray thee not to speak of one man, and that is my Lord of Utterbol."

Ralph's heart fell at this word, and he asked no question as to wherefore.

So now they rode on both, rather more than soberly for a while: but the day was fair; the sun shone, the wind blew, and the sweet scents floated about them, and Ralph's heart cast off its burden somewhat and he fell to speech again; and the minstrel answered him gaily by seeming, noting many things as they rode along, as one that took delight in the fashion of the earth.

It was a fresh and bright morning of early autumn, the sheaves were on the acres, and the grapes were blackening to the vintage, and the beasts and birds at least were merry. But little merry were the husbandmen whom they met, either carles or queans, and they were scantily and foully clad, and sullen-faced, if not hunger-pinched.

If they came across any somewhat joyous, it was here and there certain gangrel folk resting on the wayside grass, or coming out of woods and other passes by twos and threes, whiles with a child or two with them. These were of aspect like to the gipsies of our time and nation, and were armed all of them, and mostly well clad after their fashion. Sometimes when there were as many as four or five carles of them together, they would draw up amidst of the highway, but presently would turn aside at the sight either of Ralph's war-gear or of the minstrel's raiment. Forsooth, some of them seemed to know him, and nodded friendly to him as they passed by, but he gave them back no good day.

They had now ridden out of the lands of Goldburg, which were narrow on that side, and the day was wearing fast. This way the land was fair and rich, with no hills of any size. They crossed a big river twice by bridges, and small streams often, mostly by fords.

Some two hours before sunset they came upon a place where a byway joined the high road, and on the ingle stood a chapel of stone (whether of the heathen or Christian men Ralph wotted not, for it was uncouth of fashion), and by the door of the said chapel, on a tussock of grass, sat a knight all-armed save the head, and beside him a squire held his war-horse, and five other men-at-arms stood anigh bearing halberds and axes of strange fashion. The knight rose to his feet when he saw the wayfarers coming up the rising ground, and Ralph had his hand on his sword-hilt; but ere they met, the minstrel said,--

"Nay, nay, draw thy let-pass, not thy sword.  This knight shalt bid thee to a courteous joust; but do thou nay-say it, for he is a mere felon, and shalt set his men-at-arms on thee, and then will rob thee and slay thee after, or cast thee into his prison."

So Ralph drew out his parchment which Morfinn had given into his keeping, and held it open in his hand, and when the knight called out on him in a rough voice as they drew anigh, he said: "Nay, sir, I may not stay me now, need driveth me on." Quoth the knight, smoothing out a knitted brow:  "Fair sir, since thou art a friend of our lord, wilt thou not come home to my house, which is hard by, and rest awhile, and eat a morsel, and drink a cup, and sleep in a fair chamber thereafter?"

"Nay, sir," said Ralph, "for time presses;" and he passed on withal, and the knight made no step to stay him, but laughed a short laugh, like a swine snorting, and sat him down on the grass again. Ralph heeded him naught, but was glad that his let-pass was shown to be good for something; but he could see that the minstrel was nigh sick for fear and was shaking like an aspen leaf, and it was long ere he found his tongue again.

Forth then they rode till dusk, when the minstrel stayed Ralph at a place where a sort of hovels lay together about a house somewhat better builded, which Ralph took for a hostelry, though it had no sign nor bush. They entered the said house, wherein was an old woman to whom the minstrel spake a word or two in a tongue that Ralph knew not, and straightway she got them victual and drink nowise ill, and showed them to beds thereafter.

In spite of both victuals and drink the minstrel fell silent and moody; it might be from weariness, Ralph deemed; and he himself had no great lust for talk, so he went bedward, and made the bed pay for all.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_32]

CHAPTER 32

Ralph Happens on Evil Days

Early on the morrow they departed, and now in the morning light and the sun the minstrel seemed glad again, and talked abundantly, even though at whiles Ralph answered him little.

As they rode, the land began to get less fertile and less, till at last there was but tillage here and there in patches: of houses there were but few, and the rest was but dark heathland and bog, with scraggy woods scattered about the country-side.

Naught happened to tell of, save that once in the afternoon, as they were riding up to the skirts of one of the woods aforesaid, weaponed men came forth from it and drew up across the way; they were a dozen in all, and four were horsed.  Ralph set his hand to his sword, but the minstrel cried out, "Nay, no weapons, no weapons! Pull out thy let-pass again and show it in thine hand, and then let us on."

So saying he drew a white kerchief from his hand, and tied it to the end of his riding staff, and so rode trembling by Ralph's side: therewith they rode on together towards those men, whom as they drew nearer they heard laughing and jeering at them, though in a tongue that Ralph knew not.

They came so close at last that the waylayers could see the parchment clearly, with the seal thereon, and then they made obeisance to it, as though it were the relic of a saint, and drew off quietly into the wood one by one. These were big men, and savage-looking, and their armour was utterly uncouth.

The minstrel was loud in his mirth when they were well past these men; but Ralph rode on silently, and was somewhat soberly.

"Fair sir," quoth the minstrel, "I would wager that I know thy thought."  "Yea," said Ralph, "what is it then?" Said the minstrel:  "Thou art thinking what thou shalt do when thou meetest suchlike folk on thy way back; but fear not, for with that same seal thou shalt pass through the land again." Said Ralph:  "Yea, something like that, forsooth, was my thought. But also I was pondering who should be my guide when I leave Utterbol."  The minstrel looked at him askance; quoth he: "Thou mayst leave thinking of that awhile."  Ralph looked hard at him, but could make naught of the look of his face; so he said:  "Why dost thou say that?"  Said Morfinn: "Because I know whither thou art bound, and have been wondering this long while that thou hast asked me not about the way to the WELL at the WORLD'S END:  since I told thy friend the merchant that I could tell thee somewhat concerning it. But I suppose thou hast been thinking of something else?"

"Well," said Ralph, "tell me what thou hast to say of the Well." Said Morfinn:  "This will I tell thee first:  that if thou hast any doubt that such a place there is, thou mayst set that aside; for we of Utterness and Utterbol are sure thereof; and of all nations and peoples whereof we know, we deem that we are the nighest thereto.  How sayest thou, is that not already something?" "Yea, verily," said Ralph.

"Now," said Morfinn, "the next thing to be said is that we are on the road thereto:  but the third thing again is this, lord, that though few who seek it find it, yet we know that some have failed not of it, besides that lord of Goldburg, of whom I know that thou hast heard. Furthermore, there dwelleth a sage in the woods not right far from Utterbol, a hermit living by himself; and folk seek to him for divers lore, to be holpen by him in one way or other, and of him men say that he hath so much lore concerning the road to the Well (whether he hath been there himself they know not certainly), that if he will, he can put anyone on the road so surely that he will not fail to come there, but he be slain on the way, as I said to thee in Goldburg. True it is that the said sage is chary of his lore, and if he think any harm of the seeker, he will show him naught; but, fair sir, thou art so valiant and so goodly, and as meseemeth so good a knight per amours, that I deem it a certain thing that he will tell thee the uttermost of his knowledge."

Now again waxed Ralph eager concerning his quest; for true it is that since he had had that story of the damsel from the minstrel, she had stood in the way before the Well at the World's End. But now he said:  "And canst thou bring me to the said sage, good minstrel?" "Without doubt," quoth Morfinn, "when we are once safe at Utterbol. From Utterbol ye may wend any road."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and there are perils yet a few on the way, is it not so?" "So it is," said the minstrel; "but to-morrow shall try all."  Said Ralph: "And is there some special peril ahead to-morrow? And if it be so, what is it?"  Said his fellow:  "It would avail thee naught to know it. What then, doth that daunt thee?"  "No," said Ralph, "by then it is nigh enough to hurt us, we shall be nigh enough to see it."  "Well said!" quoth the minstrel; "but now we must mend our pace, or dark night shall overtake us amid these rough ways."

Wild as the land was, they came at even to a place where were a few houses of woodmen or hunters; and they got off their horses and knocked at the door of one of these, and a great black-haired carle opened to them, who, when he saw the knight's armour, would have clapped the door to again, had not Ralph by the minstrel's rede held out the parchment to him, who when he saw it became humble indeed, and gave them such guesting as he might, which was scant indeed of victual or drink, save wild-fowl from the heath. But they had wine with them from the last guest-house, whereof they bade the carle to drink; but he would not, and in all wise seemed to be in dread of them.

When it was morning early they rode their ways, and the carle seemed glad to be rid of them.  After they had ridden a few miles the land bettered somewhat; there were islands of deep green pasture amidst the blackness of the heath, with cattle grazing on them, and here and there was a little tillage: the land was little better than level, only it swelled a little this way and that.  It was a bright sunny day and the air very clear, and as they rode Ralph said:  "Quite clear is the sky, and yet one cloud there is in the offing; but this is strange about it, though I have been watching it this half hour, and looking to see the rack come up from that quarter, yet it changes not at all. I never saw the like of this cloud."

Said the minstrel:  "Yea, fair sir, and of this cloud I must tell thee that it will change no more till the bones of the earth are tumbled together. Forsooth this is no cloud, but the topmost head of the mountain ridge which men call the Wall of the World:  and if ever thou come close up to the said Wall, that shall fear thee, I deem, however fearless thou be." "Is it nigh to Utterness?" said Ralph.  "Nay," said the minstrel, "not so nigh; for as huge as it seemeth thence."

Said Ralph:  "Do folk tell that the Well at the World's End lieth beyond it?" "Surely," said the minstrel.

Said Ralph, his face flushing:  "Forsooth, that ancient lord of Goldburg came through those mountains, and why not I?" "Yea," said the minstrel, "why not?"  And therewith he looked uneasily on Ralph, who heeded his looks naught, for his mind was set on high matters.

On then they rode, and when trees or some dip in the land hid that mountain top from them, the way seemed long to Ralph.

Naught befell to tell of for some while; but at last, when it was drawing towards evening again, they had been riding through a thick pine-wood for a long while, and coming out of it they beheld before them a plain country fairly well grassed, but lo! on the field not far from the roadside a pavilion pitched and a banner on the top thereof, but the banner hung down about the staff, so that the bearing was not seen: and about this pavilion, which was great and rich of fashion, were many tents great and small, and there were horses tethered in the field, and men moving about the gleam of armour.

At this sight the minstrel drew rein and stared about him wildly; but Ralph said:  "What is this, is it the peril aforesaid?" "Yea," quoth the minstrel, shivering with fear.  "What aileth thee?" said Ralph; "have we not the let-pass, what then can befall us? If this be other than the Lord of Utterbol, he will see our let-pass and let us alone; or if it be he indeed, what harm shall he do to the bearers of his own pass? Come on then, or else (and therewith he half drew his sword) is this Lord of Utterbol but another name for the Devil in Hell?"

But the minstrel still stared wild and trembled; then he stammered out: "I thought I should bring thee to Utterness first, and that some other should lead thee thence, I did not look to see him.  I dare not, I dare not! O look, look!"

As he spake the wind arose and ran along the wood-side, and beat back from it and stirred the canvas of the tents and raised the folds of the banner, and blew it out, so that the bearing was clear to see; yet Ralph deemed it naught dreadful, but an armoury fit for a baron, to wit, a black bear on a castle-wall on a field of gold.

But as Ralph sat on his horse gazing, himseemed that men were looking towards him, and a great horn was sounded hard by the pavilion; then Ralph looked toward the minstrel fiercely, and laughed and said:  "I see now that thou art another traitor: so get thee gone; I have more to do than the slaying of thee." And therewith he turned his horse's head, and smote the spurs into the sides of him, and went a great gallop over the field on the right side of the road, away from the gay pavilion; but even therewith came a half-score of horsemen from the camp, as if they were awaiting him, and they spurred after him straightway.

The race was no long one, for Ralph's beast was wearied, and the other horses were fresh, and Ralph knew naught of the country before him, whereas those riders knew it well. Therefore it was but a few minutes till they came up with him, and he made no show of defence, but suffered them to lead him away, and he crossed the highway, where he saw no token of the minstrel.

So they brought him to the pavilion, and made him dismount and led him in. The dusk had fallen by now, but within it was all bright with candles. The pavilion was hung with rich silken cloth, and at the further end, on a carpet of the hunting, was an ivory chair, whereon sat a man, who was the only one sitting.  He was clad in a gown of blue silk, broidered with roundels beaten with the Bear upon the Castle-wall.

Ralph deemed that this must be no other than the Lord of Utterbol, yet after all the tales he had heard of that lord, he seemed no such terrible man:  he was short of stature, but broad across the shoulders, his hair long, strait, and dark brown of hue, and his beard scanty: he was straight-featured and smooth-faced, and had been no ill-looking man, save that his skin was sallow and for his eyes, which were brown, small, and somewhat bloodshot.

Beside him stood Morfinn bowed down with fear and not daring to look either at the Lord or at Ralph.  Wherefore he knew for certain that when he had called him traitor even now, that it was no more than the very sooth, and that he had fallen into the trap; though how or why he wotted not clearly. Well then might his heart have fallen, but so it was, that when he looked into the face of this Lord, the terror of the lands, hatred of him so beset his heart that it swallowed up fear in him. Albeit he held himself well in hand, for his soul was waxing, and he deemed that he should yet do great deeds, therefore he desired to live, whatsoever pains or shame of the passing day he might suffer.

Now this mighty lord spake, and his voice was harsh and squeaking, so that the sound of it was worse than the sight of his face; and he said:  "Bring the man forth, that I may see him." So they brought up Ralph, till he was eye to eye with the Lord, who turned to Morfinn and said:  "Is this thy catch, lucky man?" "Yea," quavered Morfinn, not lifting his eyes; "Will he do, lord?"

"Do?" said the lord, "How can I see him when he is all muffled up in steel? Ye fools! doff his wargear."

Speedily then had they stripped Ralph of hauberk, and helm, and arm and leg plates, so that he stood up in his jerkin and breeches, and the lord leaned forward to look on him as if he were cheapening a horse; and then turned to a man somewhat stricken in years, clad in scarlet, who stood on his other hand, and said to him: "Well, David the Sage, is this the sort of man?  Is he goodly enough?"

Then the elder put on a pair of spectacles and eyed Ralph curiously a while, and then said:  "There are no two words to be said about it; he is a goodly and well-fashioned a young man as was ever sold."

"Well," said the lord, turning towards Morfinn, "the catch is good, lucky man:  David will give thee gold for it, and thou mayst go back west when thou wilt.  And thou must be lucky again, moreover; because there are women needed for my house; and they must be goodly and meek, and not grievously marked with stripes, or branded, so that thou hadst best take them, luckily if thou mayst, and not buy them. Now go, for there are more than enough men under this woven roof, and we need no half-men to boot."

Said David, the old man, grinning:  "He will hold him well paid if he go unscathed from before thee, lord:  for he looked not to meet thee here, but thought to bring the young man to Utterness, that he might be kept there till thou camest."

The lord said, grimly:  "He is not far wrong to fear me, maybe: but he shall go for this time.  But if he bring me not those women within three months' wearing, and if there be but two uncomely ones amongst them, let him look to it.  Give him his gold, David. Now take ye the new man, and let him rest, and give him meat and drink. And look you, David, if he be not in condition when he cometh home to Utterbol, thou shalt pay for it in one way or other, if not in thine own person, since thou art old, and deft of service, then through those that be dear to thee.  Go now!"

David smiled on Ralph and led him out unto a tent not far off, and there he made much of him, and bade bring meat and drink and all he needed. Withal he bade him not to try fleeing, lest he be slain; and he showed him how nigh the guards were and how many.

Glad was the old man when he saw the captive put a good face on matters, and that he was not down-hearted. In sooth that hatred of the tyrant mingled with hope sustained Ralph's heart. He had been minded when he was brought before the lord to have shown the letter of the Queen of Goldburg, and to defy him if he still held him captive.  But when he had beheld him and his fellowship a while he thought better of it. For though they had abundance of rich plenishing, and gay raiment, and good weapons and armour, howbeit of strange and uncouth fashion, yet he deemed when he looked on them that they would scarce have the souls of men in their bodies, but that they were utterly vile through and through, like the shapes of an evil dream. Therefore he thought shame of it to show the Queen's letter to them, even as if he had shown them the very naked body of her, who had been so piteous kind to him.  Also he had no mind to wear his heart on his sleeve, but would keep his own counsel, and let his foemen speak and show what was in their minds. For this cause he now made himself sweet, and was of good cheer with old David, deeming him to be a great man there; as indeed he was, being the chief counsellor of the Lord of Utterbol; though forsooth not so much his counsellor as that he durst counsel otherwise than as the Lord desired to go; unless he thought that it would bring his said Lord, and therefore himself, to very present peril and damage. In short, though this man had not been bought for money, he was little better than a thrall of the higher sort, as forsooth were all the Lord's men, saving the best and trustiest of his warriors: and these were men whom the Lord somewhat feared himself: though, on the other hand, he could not but know that they understood how the dread of the Lord of Utterbol was a shield to them, and that if it were to die out amongst men, their own skins were not worth many days' purchase.

So then David spake pleasantly with Ralph, and ate and drank with him, and saw that he was well bedded for the night, and left him in the first watch.  But Ralph lay down in little more trouble than the night before, when, though he were being led friendly to Utterness, yet he had not been able to think what he should do when he came there:  whereas now he thought: Who knoweth what shall betide? and for me there is nought to do save to lay hold of the occasion that another may give me. And at the worst I scarce deem that I am being led to the slaughter.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_33]

CHAPTER 33

Ralph is Brought on the Road Towards Utterbol

But now when it was morning they struck the tents and laded them on wains, and went their ways the selfsame road that Ralph had been minded for yesterday; to wit the road to Utterness; but now must he ride it unarmed and guarded:  other shame had he none. Indeed David, who stuck close to his side all day, was so sugary sweet with him, and praised and encouraged him so diligently, that Ralph began to have misgivings that all this kindness was but as the flower-garlands wherewith the heathen times men were wont to deck the slaughter-beasts for the blood-offering. Yea, and into his mind came certain tales of how there were heathen men yet in the world, who beguiled men and women, and offered them up to their devils, whom they called gods: but all this ran off him soon, when he bethought him how little wisdom there was in running to meet the evil, which might be on the way, and that way a rough and perilous one. So he plucked up heart, and spake freely and gaily with David and one or two others who rode anigh.

They were amidst of the company:  the Lord went first after his fore-runners in a litter done about with precious cloths; and two score horsemen came next, fully armed after their manner. Then rode Ralph with David and a half dozen of the magnates: then came a sort of cooks and other serving men, but none without a weapon, and last another score of men-at-arms: so that he saw that fleeing was not to be thought of though he was not bound, and save for lack of weapons rode like a free man.

The day was clear as yesterday had been, wherefore again Ralph saw the distant mountain-top like a cloud; and he gazed at it long till David said:  "I see that thou art gazing hard at the mountains, and perchance art longing to be beyond them, were it but to see what like the land is on the further side. If all tales be true thou art best this side thereof, whatever thy lot may be."

"Lieth death on the other side then?" quoth Ralph.  "Yea," said David, "but that is not all, since he is not asleep elsewhere in the world: but men say that over there are things to be seen which might slay a strong man for pure fear, without stroke of sword or dint of axe."

"Yea," said Ralph, "but how was it then with him that builded Goldburg?"

"O," said David, "hast thou heard that tale?  Well, they say of him, who certes went over those mountains, and drank of the Well at the World's End, that he was one of the lucky: yet for all his luck never had he drunk the draught had he not been helped by one who had learned many things, a woman to wit. For he was one of them with whom all women are in love; and thence indeed was his luck....Moreover, when all is said, 'tis but a tale."

"Yea," quoth Ralph laughing, "even as the tales of the ghosts and bugs that abide the wayfarer on the other side of yonder white moveless cloud."

David laughed in his turn and said:  "Thou hast me there; and whether or no, these tales are nothing to us, who shall never leave Utterbol again while we live, save in such a company as this." Then he held his peace, but presently spake again:  "Hast thou heard anything, then, of those tales of the Well at the World's End? I mean others beside that concerning the lord of Goldburg?"

"Yea, surely I have," said Ralph, nowise changing countenance.  Said David: "Deemest thou aught of them? deemest thou that it may be true that a man may drink of the Well and recover his youth thereby?"

Ralph laughed and said:  "Master, it is rather for me to ask thee hereof, than thou me, since thou dwellest so much nigher thereto than I have done heretofore."

David drew up close to him, and said softly:  "Nigher?  Yea, but belike not so much nigher."

"How meanest thou?" said Ralph.

Said David:  "Is it so nigh that a man may leave home and come thereto in his life-time?"

"Yea," said Ralph, "in my tales it is."

Said the old man still softlier:  "Had I deemed that true I had tried the adventure, whatever might lie beyond the mountains, but (and he sighed withal) I deem it untrue."

Therewith dropped the talk of that matter:  and in sooth Ralph was loath to make many words thereof, lest his eagerness shine through, and all the story of him be known.

Anon it was noon, and the lord bade all men stay for meat: so his serving men busied them about his dinner, and David went with them. Then the men-at-arms bade Ralph sit among them and share their meat. So they sat down all by the wayside, and they spake kindly and friendly to Ralph, and especially their captain, a man somewhat low of stature, but long-armed like the Lord, a man of middle age, beardless and spare of body, but wiry and tough-looking, with hair of the hue of the dust of the sandstone quarry.  This man fell a-talking with Ralph, and asked him of the manner of tilting and courteous jousting between knights in the countries of knighthood, till that talk dropped between them. Then Ralph looked round upon the land, which had now worsened again, and was little better than rough moorland, little fed, and not at all tilled, and he said:  "This is but a sorry land for earth's increase."

"Well," said the captain, "I wot not; it beareth plover and whimbrel and conies and hares; yea, and men withal, some few. And whereas it beareth naught else, that cometh of my lord's will: for deemest thou that he should suffer a rich land betwixt him and Goldburg, that it might sustain an host big enough to deal with him?"

"But is not this his land?" said Ralph.

Said the captain:  "Nay, and also yea.  None shall dwell in it save as he willeth, and they shall pay him tribute, be it never so little. Yet some there are of them, who are to him as the hounds be to the hunter, and these same he even wageth, so that if aught rare and goodly cometh their way they shall bring it to his hands; as thou thyself knowest to thy cost."

"Yea," said Ralph smiling, "and is Morfinn the Unmanned one of these curs?" "Yea," said the captain, with a grin, "and one of the richest of them, in despite of his fiddle and minstrel's gear, and his lack of manhood: for he is one of the cunningest of men.  But my Lord unmanned him for some good reason."

Ralph kept silence and while and then said:  "Why doth the Goldburg folk suffer all this felony, robbery and confusion, so near their borders, and the land debateable?"

Said the captain, and again he grinned:  "Passing for thy hard words, sir knight, why dost thou suffer me to lead thee along whither thou wouldest not?"

"Because I cannot help myself," said Ralph.

Said the captain:  "Even so it is with the Goldburg folk: if they raise hand against some of these strong-thieves or man-stealers, he has but to send the war-arrow round about these deserts, as ye deem them, and he will presently have as rough a company of carles for his fellows as need be, say ten hundred of them. And the Goldburg folk are not very handy at a fray without their walls. Forsooth within them it is another matter, and beside not even our Lord of Utterbol would see Goldburg broken down, no, not for all that he might win there."

"Is it deemed a holy place in the land, then?" said Ralph.

"I wot not the meaning of holy," said the other:  "but all we deem that when Goldburg shall fall, the world shall change, so that living therein shall be hard to them that have not drunk of the water of the Well at the World's End."

Ralph was silent a while and eyed the captain curiously: then he said:  "Have the Goldburgers so drunk?"  Said the captain: "Nay, nay; but the word goes that under each tower of Goldburg lieth a youth and a maiden that have drunk of the water, and might not die save by point and edge."

Then was Ralph silent again, for once more he fell pondering the matter if he had been led away to be offered as a blood offering to some of evil gods of the land. But as he pondered a flourish of trumpets was blown, and all men sprang up, and the captain said to Ralph: "Now hath our Lord done his dinner and we must to horse." Anon they were on the way again, and they rode long and saw little change in the aspect of the land, neither did that cloudlike token of the distant mountains grow any greater or clearer to Ralph's deeming.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_34]

CHAPTER 34

The Lord of Utterbol Will Wot of Ralph's Might and Minstrelsy

A little before sunset they made halt for the night, and Ralph was shown to a tent as erst, and had meat and drink good enough brought to him. But somewhat after he had done eating comes David to him and says: "Up, young man! and come to my lord, he asketh for thee."

"What will he want with me?" said Ralph.

"Yea, that is a proper question to ask!" quoth David; "as though the knife should ask the cutler, what wilt thou cut with me? Dost thou deem that I durst ask him of his will with thee?" "I am ready to go with thee," said Ralph.

So they went forth; but Ralph's heart fell and he sickened at the thought of seeing that man again.  Nevertheless he set his face as brass, and thrust back both his fear and his hatred for a fitter occasion.

Soon they came into the pavilion of the Lord, who was sitting there as yester eve, save that his gown was red, and done about with gold and turquoise and emerald.  David brought Ralph nigh to his seat, but spake not.  The mighty lord was sitting with his head drooping, and his arm hanging over his knee, with a heavy countenance as though he were brooding matters which pleased him naught. But in a while he sat up with a start, and turned about and saw David standing there with Ralph, and spake at once like a man waking up: "He that sold thee to me said that thou wert of avail for many things. Now tell me, what canst thou do?"

Ralph so hated him, that he was of half a mind to answer naught save by smiting him to slay him; but there was no weapon anigh, and life was sweet to him with all the tale that was lying ahead. So he answered coldly:  "It is sooth, lord, that I can do more than one deed."

"Canst thou back a horse?" said the Lord.  Said Ralph:  "As well as many." Said the Lord:  "Canst thou break a wild horse, and shoe him, and physic him?"

"Not worse than some," said Ralph.

"Can'st thou play with sword and spear?" said the Lord.

"Better than some few," said Ralph.  "How shall I know that?" said the Lord. Said Ralph:  "Try me, lord!"  Indeed, he half hoped that if it came to that, he might escape in the hurley.

The Lord looked on him and said:  "Well, it may be tried. But here is a cold and proud answerer, David.  I misdoubt me whether it be worth while bringing him home."

David looked timidly on Ralph and said:  "Thou hast paid the price for him, lord."

"Yea, that is true," said the Lord.  "Thou! can'st thou play at the chess?" "Yea," said Ralph.  "Can'st thou music?" said the other.  "Yea," said Ralph, "when I am merry, or whiles indeed when I am sad."

The lord said:  "Make thyself merry or sad, which thou wilt; but sing, or thou shalt be beaten.  Ho!  Bring ye the harp." Then they brought it as he bade.

But Ralph looked to right and left and saw no deliverance, and knew this for the first hour of his thralldom. Yet, as he thought of it all, he remembered that if he would do, he must needs bear and forbear; and his face cleared, and he looked round about again and let his eyes rest calmly on all eyes that he met till they came on the Lord's face again. Then he let his hand fall into the strings and they fell a-tinkling sweetly, like unto the song of the winter robin, and at last he lifted his voice and sang:

    Still now is the stithy this morning unclouded,
     Nought stirs in the thorp save the yellow-haired maid
     A-peeling the withy last Candlemas shrouded
     From the mere where the moorhen now swims unafraid.

    For over the Ford now the grass and the clover
     Fly off from the tines as the wind driveth on;
     And soon round the Sword-howe the swathe shall lie over,
     And to-morrow at even the mead shall be won.

    But the Hall of the Garden amidst the hot morning,
     It drew my feet thither; I stood at the door,
     And felt my heart harden 'gainst wisdom and warning
     As the sun and my footsteps came on to the floor.

    When the sun lay behind me, there scarce in the dimness
     I say what I sought for, yet trembled to find;
     But it came forth to find me, until the sleek slimness
     Of the summer-clad woman made summer o'er kind.

    There we the once-sundered together were blended,
     We strangers, unknown once, were hidden by naught.
     I kissed and I wondered how doubt was all ended,
     How friendly her excellent fairness was wrought.

    Round the hall of the Garden the hot sun is burning,
     But no master nor minstrel goes there in the shade,
     It hath never a warden till comes the returning,
     When the moon shall hang high and all winds shall be laid.

    Waned the day and I hied me afield, and thereafter
     I sat with the mighty when daylight was done,
     But with great men beside me, midst high-hearted laughter,
     I deemed me of all men the gainfullest one.

    To wisdom I hearkened; for there the wise father
     Cast the seed of his learning abroad o'er the hall,

    Till men's faces darkened, but mine gladdened rather
     With the thought of the knowledge I knew over all.

    Sang minstrels the story, and with the song's welling
     Men looked on each other and glad were they grown,
     But mine was the glory of the tale and its telling
     How the loved and the lover were naught but mine own.

    When he was done all kept silence till they should know whether
     the lord should praise the song or blame; and he said naught
     for a good while, but sat as if pondering:  but at last he spake:
     "Thou art young, and would that we were young also!
     Thy song is sweet, and it pleaseth me, who am a man of war,
     and have seen enough and to spare of rough work, and would
     any day rather see a fair woman than a band of spears.
     But it shall please my lady wife less:  for of love, and fair women,
     and their lovers she hath seen enough; but of war nothing save
     its shows and pomps; wherefore she desireth to hear thereof.
     Now sing of battle!"

Ralph thought awhile and began to smite the harp while he conned over a song which he had learned one yule-tide from a chieftain who had come to Upmeads from the far-away Northland, and had abided there till spring was waning into summer, and meanwhile he taught Ralph this song and many things else, and his name was Sir Karr Wood-neb. This song now Ralph sang loud and sweet, though he were now a thrall in an alien land:

     Leave we the cup!
     For the moon is up,
     And bright is the gleam
     Of the rippling stream,
     That runneth his road
     To the old abode,
     Where the walls are white
     In the moon and the night;
     The house of the neighbour that drave us away
     When strife ended labour amidst of the hay,
     And no road for our riding was left us but one
     Where the hill's brow is hiding that earth's ways are done,
     And the sound of the billows comes up at the last
     Like the wind in the willows ere autumn is past.

    But oft and again
     Comes the ship from the main,
     And we came once more
     And no lading we bore
     But the point and the edge,
     And the ironed ledge,
     And the bolt and the bow,
     And the bane of the foe.
     To the House 'neath the mountain we came in the morn,
     Where welleth the fountain up over the corn,
     And the stream is a-running fast on to the House
     Of the neighbours uncunning who quake at the mouse,
     As their slumber is broken; they know not for why;
     Since yestreen was not token on earth or in sky.

    Come, up, then up!
     Leave board and cup,
     And follow the gleam
     Of the glittering stream
     That leadeth the road To the old abode,
     High-walled and white
     In the moon and the night;
     Where low lies the neighbour that drave us away
     Sleep-sunk from his labour amidst of the hay.
     No road for our riding is left us save one,
     Where the hills' brow is hiding the city undone,
     And the wind in the willows is with us at last,
     And the house of the billows is done and o'er-past.

    Haste! mount and haste
     Ere the short night waste,
     For night and day,
     Late turned away,
     Draw nigh again
     All kissing-fain;
     And the morn and the moon
     Shall be married full soon.
     So ride we together with wealth-winning wand,
     The steel o'er the leather, the ash in the hand.
     Lo! white walls before us, and high are they built;
     But the luck that outwore us now lies on their guilt;
     Lo! the open gate biding the first of the sun,
     And to peace are we riding when slaughter is done.

When Ralph had done singing, all folk fell to praising his song, whereas the Lord had praised the other one; but the Lord said, looking at Ralph askance meanwhile:  "Yea, if that pleaseth me not, and I take but little keep of it, it shall please my wife to her heart's root; and that is the first thing. Hast thou others good store, new-comer?" "Yea, lord," said Ralph.  "And canst thou tell tales of yore agone, and of the fays and such-like? All that she must have." "Some deal I can of that lore," said Ralph.

Then the Lord sat silent, and seemed to be pondering: at last he said, as if to himself:  "Yet there is one thing: many a blencher can sing of battle; and it hath been seen, that a fair body of a man is whiles soft amidst the hard hand-play. Thou! Morfinn's luck! art thou of any use in the tilt-yard?" "Wilt thou try me, lord?" said Ralph, looking somewhat brisker. Said the Lord:  "I deem that I may find a man or two for thee, though it is not much our manner here; but now go thou! David, take the lad away to his tent, and get him a flask of wine of the best to help out thy maundering with him."

Therewith they left the tent, and Ralph walked by David sadly and with hanging head at first; but in a while he called to mind that, whatever betid, his life was safe as yet; that every day he was drawing nigher to the Well at the World's End; and that it was most like that he shall fall in with that Dorothea of his dream somewhere on the way thereto. So he lifted up his head again, and was singing to himself as he stooped down to enter into his tent.

Next day naught happed to tell of save that they journeyed on; the day was cloudy, so that Ralph saw no sign of the distant mountains; ever the land was the same, but belike somewhat more beset with pinewoods; they saw no folk at all on the road.  So at even Ralph slept in his tent, and none meddled with him, save that David came to talk with him or he slept, and was merry and blithe with him, and he brought with him Otter, the captain of the guard, who was good company.

Thus wore three days that were hazy and cloudy, and the Lord sent no more for Ralph, who on the road spake for the more part with Otter, and liked him not ill; howbeit it seemed of him that he would make no more of a man's life than of a rabbit's according as his lord might bid slay or let live.

The three hazy days past, it fell to rain for four days, so that Ralph could see little of the face of the land; but he noted that they went up at whiles, and never so much down as up, so that they were wending up hill on the whole.

On the ninth day of his captivity the rain ceased and it was sunny and warm but somewhat hazy, so that naught could be seen afar, but the land near-hand rose in long, low downs now, and was quite treeless, save where was a hollow here and there and a stream running through it, where grew a few willows, but alders more abundantly.

This day he rode by Otter, who said presently: "Well, youngling of the North, to-morrow we shall see a new game, thou and I, if the weather be fair." "Yea," said Ralph, "and what like shall it be?"  Said Otter, "At mid-morn we shall come into a fair dale amidst the downs, where be some houses and a tower of the Lord's, so that that place is called the Dale of the Tower:  there shall we abide a while to gather victual, a day or two, or three maybe: so my Lord will hold a tourney there:  that is to say that I myself and some few others shall try thy manhood somewhat." "What?" said Ralph, "are the new colt's paces to be proven? And how if he fail?"

Quoth Otter, laughing:  "Fail not, I rede thee, or my lord's love for thee shall be something less than nothing." "And then will he slay me?" said Ralph.  Said Otter: "Nay I deem not, at least not at first:  he will have thee home to Utterbol, to make the most of his bad bargain, and there shalt thou be a mere serving-thrall, either in the house or the field: where thou shalt be well-fed (save in times of scarcity), and belike well beaten withal."  Said Ralph, somewhat downcast: "Yea, I am a thrall, who was once a knight.  But how if thou fail before me?"  Otter laughed again:  "That is another matter; whatever I do my Lord will not lose me if he can help it; but as for the others who shall stand before thy valiancy, there will be some who will curse the day whereon my lord bought thee, if thou turnest out a good spear, as ye call it in your lands. Howsoever, that is not thy business; and I bid thee fear naught; for thou seemest to be a mettle lad."

So they talked, and that day wore like the others, but the haze did not clear off, and the sun went down red. In the evening David talked with Ralph in his tent, and said: "If to-morrow be clear, knight, thou shalt see a new sight when thou comest out from the canvas."  Said Ralph:  "I suppose thy meaning is that we shall see the mountains from hence?" "Yea," said David; "so hold up thine heart when that sight first cometh before thine eyes.  As for us, we are used to the sight, and that from a place much nigher to the mountains: yet they who are soft-hearted amongst us are overcome at whiles, when there is storm and tempest, and evil tides at hand."

Said Ralph:  "And how far then are we from Utterbol?"  Said David: "After we have left Bull-mead in the Dale of the Tower, where to-morrow thou art to run with the spear, it is four days' ride to Utterness; and from Utterness ye may come (if my lord will) unto Utterbol in twelve hours. But tell me, knight, how deemest thou of thy tilting to-morrow?" Said Ralph:  "Little should I think of it, if little lay upon it." "Yea," said David, "but art thou a good tilter?"  Ralph laughed: quoth he, "That hangs on the goodness of him that tilteth against me: I have both overthrown, and been overthrown oft enough.  Yet again, who shall judge me? for I must tell thee, that were I fairly judged, I should be deemed no ill spear, even when I came not uppermost: for in all these games are haps which no man may foresee."

"Well, then," said David, "all will go well with thee for this time: for my lord will judge thee, and if it be seen that thou hast spoken truly, and art more than a little deft at the play, he will be like to make the best of thee, since thou art already paid for." Ralph laughed:  yet as though the jest pleased him but little; and they fell to talk of other matters.  And so David departed, and Ralph slept.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_35]

CHAPTER 35

Ralph Cometh To the Vale of the Tower

But when it was morning Ralph awoke, and saw that the sun was shining brightly; so he cast his shirt on him, and went out at once, and turned his face eastward, and, scarce awake, said to himself that the clouds lay heavy in the eastward heavens after last night's haze: but presently his eyes cleared, and he saw that what he had taken for clouds was a huge wall of mountains, black and terrible, that rose up sharp and clear into the morning air; for there was neither cloud nor mist in all the heavens.

Now Ralph, though he were but little used to the sight of great mountains, yet felt his heart rather rise than fall at the sight of them; for he said: "Surely beyond them lieth some new thing for me, life or death: fair fame or the forgetting of all men."  And it was long that he could not take his eyes off them.

As he looked, came up the Captain Otter, and said:  "Well, Knight, thou hast seen them this morn, even if ye die ere nightfall." Said Ralph:  "What deemest thou to lie beyond them?"

"Of us none knoweth surely," said Otter; "whiles I deem that if one were to get to the other side there would be a great plain like to this:  whiles that there is naught save mountains beyond, and yet again mountains, like the waves of a huge stone sea. Or whiles I think that one would come to an end of the world, to a place where is naught but a ledge, and then below it a gulf filled with nothing but the howling of winds, and the depth of darkness. Moreover this is my thought, that all we of these parts should be milder men and of better conditions, if yonder terrible wall were away. It is as if we were thralls of the great mountains."

Said Ralph, "Is this then the Wall of the World?" "It may well be so," said Otter; "but this word is at whiles said of something else, which no man alive amongst us has yet seen. It is a part of the tale of the seekers for the Well at the World's End, whereof we said a word that other day."

"And the Dry Tree," said Ralph, "knowest thou thereof?" said Ralph. "Such a tree, much beworshipped," said Otter, "we have, not very far from Utterbol, on the hither side of the mountains. Yet I have heard old men say that it is but a toy, and an image of that which is verily anigh the Well at the World's End. But now haste thee to do on thy raiment, for we must needs get to horse in a little while."  "Yet one more word," said Ralph; "thou sayest that none alive amongst you have seen the Wall of the World?"  "None alive," quoth Otter; "forsooth what the dead may see, that is another question." Said Ralph:  "But have ye not known of any who have sought to the Well from this land, which is so nigh thereunto?" "Such there have been," said Otter; "but if they found it, they found something beyond it, or came west again by some way else than by Utterbol; for they never came back again to us."

Therewith he turned on his heel, and went his ways, and up came David and one with him bringing victual; and David said:  "Now, thou lucky one, here is come thy breakfast! for we shall presently be on our way. Cast on thy raiment, and eat and strengthen thyself for the day's work. Hast thou looked well on the mountains?"  "Yea," said Ralph, "and the sight of them has made me as little downhearted as thou art. For thou art joyous of mood this morning."  David nodded and smiled, and looked so merry that Ralph wondered what was toward. Then he went into his tent and clad himself, and ate his breakfast, and then gat to horse and rode betwixt two of the men-at-arms, he and Otter; for David was ridden forward to speak with the Lord. Otter talked ever gaily enough; but Ralph heeded him little a while, but had his eyes ever on the mountains, and could see that for all they were so dark, and filled up so much of the eastward heaven, they were so far away that he could see but little of them save that they were dark blue and huge, and one rising up behind the other.

Thus they rode the down country, till at last, two hours before noon, coming over the brow of a long down, they had before them a shallow dale, pleasanter than aught they had yet seen. It was well-grassed, and a little river ran through it, from which went narrow leats held up by hatches, so that the more part of the valley bottom was a water-meadow, wherein as now were grazing many kine and sheep.  There were willows about the banks of the river, and in an ingle of it stood a grange or homestead, with many roofs half hidden by clumps of tall old elm trees. Other houses there were in the vale; two or three cots, to wit, on the slope of the hither down, and some half-dozen about the homestead; and above and beyond all these, on a mound somewhat away from the river and the grange, a great square tower, with barriers and bailey all dight ready for war, and with a banner of the Lord's hanging out. But between the tower and the river stood as now a great pavilion of snow-white cloth striped with gold and purple; and round about it were other tents, as though a little army were come into the vale.

So when they looked into that fair place, Otter the Captain rose in the stirrups and cast up his hand for joy, and cried out aloud:  "Now, young knight, now we are come home: how likest thou my Lord's land?"

"It is a fair land," said Ralph; "but is there not come some one to bid thy Lord battle for it? or what mean the tents down yonder?"

Said Otter, laughing:  "Nay, nay, it hath not come to that yet. Yonder is my Lord's lady-wife, who hath come to meet him, but in love, so to say, not in battle--not yet.  Though I say not that the cup of love betwixt them be brim-full. But this it behoveth me not to speak of, though thou art to be my brother-in-arms, since we are to tilt together presently: for lo! yonder the tilt-yard, my lad."

Therewith he pointed to the broad green meadow:  but Ralph said: "How canst thou, a free man, be brother-in-arms to a thrall?" "Nay, lad," quoth Otter, "let not that wasp sting thee: for even such was I, time was.  Nay, such am I now, but that a certain habit of keeping my wits in a fray maketh me of avail to my Lord, so that I am well looked to. Forsooth in my Lord's land the free men are of little account, since they must oftenest do as my Lord and my Lord's thralls bid them.  Truly, brother, it is we who have the wits and the luck to rise above the whipping-post and the shackles that are the great men hereabouts.  I say we, for I deem that thou wilt do no less, whereas thou hast the lucky look in thine eyes. So let to-day try it."

As he spake came many glittering figures from out of those tents, and therewithal arose the sound of horns and clashing of cymbals, and their own horns gave back the sound of welcome. Then Ralph saw a man in golden armour of strange, outlandish fashion, sitting on a great black horse beside the Lord's litter; and Otter said:  "Lo! my Lord, armed and a-horseback to meet my lady: she looketh kinder on him thus; though in thine ear be it said, he is no great man of war; nor need he be, since he hath us for his shield and his hauberk."

Herewith were they come on to the causeway above the green meadows, and presently drew rein before the pavilion, and stood about in a half-ring facing a two score of gaily clad men-at-arms, who had come with the Lady and a rout of folk of the household. Then the Lord gat off his horse, and stood in his golden armour, and all the horns and other music struck up, and forth from the pavilion came the Lady with a half-score of her women clad gaily in silken gowns of green, and blue, and yellow, broidered all about with gold and silver, but with naked feet, and having iron rings on their arms, so that Ralph saw that they were thralls. Something told him that his damsel should be amongst these, so he gazed hard on them, but though they were goodly enough there was none of them like to her.

As to the Queen, she was clad all in fine linen and gold, with gold shoes on her feet:  her arms came bare from out of the linen: great they were, and the hands not small; but the arms round and fair, and the hands shapely, and all very white and rosy: her hair was as yellow as any that can be seen, and it was plenteous, and shed all down about her.  Her eyes were blue and set wide apart, her nose a little snubbed, her mouth wide, full-lipped and smiling. She was very tall, a full half-head taller than any of her women: yea, as tall as a man who is above the middle height of men.

Now she came forward hastily with long strides, and knelt adown before the Lord, but even as she kneeled looked round with a laughing face. The Lord stooped down to her and took her by both hands, and raised her up, and kissed her on the cheek (and he looked but little and of no presence beside her:) and he said:  "Hail to thee, my Lady; thou art come far from thine home to meet me, and I thank thee therefor. Is it well with our House?"

She spake seeming carelessly and loud; but her voice was somewhat husky: "Yea, my Lord, all is well; few have done amiss, and the harvest is plenteous."  As she spake the Lord looked with knit brows at the damsels behind her, as if he were seeking something; and the Lady followed his eyes, smiling a little and flushing as if with merriment.

But the Lord was silent a while, and then let his brow clear and said: "Yea, Lady, thou art thanked for coming to meet us; and timely is thy coming, since there is game and glee for thee at hand; I have cheapened a likely thrall of Morfinn the Unmanned, and he is a gift to thee; and he hath given out that he is no ill player with the spear after the fashion of them of the west; and we are going to prove his word here in this meadow presently."

The Lady's face grew glad, and she said, looking toward the ring of new comers:  "Yea, Lord, and which of these is he, if he be here?"

The Lord turned a little to point out Ralph, but even therewith the Lady's eyes met Ralph's, who reddened for shame of being so shown to a great lady; but as for her she flushed bright red all over her face and even to her bosom, and trouble came into her eyes, and she looked adown.  But the Lord said: "Yonder is the youngling, the swordless one in the green coat; a likely lad, if he hath not lied about his prowess; and he can sing thee a song withal, and tell a piteous tale of old, and do all that those who be reared in the lineages of the westlands deem meet and due for men of knightly blood. Dost thou like the looks of him, lady! wilt thou have him?"

The Lady still held her head down, and tormented the grass with her foot, and murmured somewhat; for she could not come to herself again as yet. So the Lord looked sharply on her and said:  "Well, when this tilting is over, thou shalt tell me thy mind of him; for if he turn out a dastard I would not ask thee to take him."

Now the lady lifted up her face, and she was grown somewhat pale; but she forced her speech to come, and said:  "It is well, Lord, but now come thou into my pavilion, for thy meat is ready, and it lacketh but a minute or so of noon."  So he took her hand and led her in to the pavilion, and all men got off their horses, and fell to pitching the tents and getting their meat ready; but Otter drew Ralph apart into a nook of the homestead, and there they ate their meat together.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_36]

CHAPTER 36

The Talk of Two Women Concerning Ralph

But when dinner was done, came David and a man with him bringing Ralph's war gear, and bade him do it on, while the folk were fencing the lists, which they were doing with such stuff as they had at the Tower; and the Lord had been calling for Otter that he might command him what he should tell to the marshals of the lists and how all should be duly ordered, wherefore he went up unto the Tower whither the Lord had now gone. So Ralph did on his armour, which was not right meet for tilting, being over light for such work; and his shield in especial was but a target for a sergeant, which he had brought at Cheaping Knowe; but he deemed that his deftness and much use should bear him well through.

Now, the Lady had abided in her pavilion when her Lord went abroad; anon after she sent all her women away, save one whom she loved, and to whom she was wont to tell the innermost of her mind; though forsooth she mishandled her at whiles; for she was hot of temper, and over-ready with her hands when she was angry; though she was nowise cruel. But the woman aforesaid, who was sly and sleek, and somewhat past her first youth, took both her caresses and her buffets with patience, for the sake of the gifts and largesse wherewith they were bought. So now she stood by the board in the pavilion with her head drooping humbly, yet smiling to herself and heedful of whatso might betide. But the Lady walked up and down the pavilion hastily, as one much moved.

At last she spake as she walked and said:  "Agatha, didst thou see him when my Lord pointed him out?"  "Yea," said the woman lifting her face a little.

"And what seemed he to thee?" said the Lady.  "O my Lady," quoth Agatha, "what seemed he to thee?"  The lady stood and turned and looked at her; she was slender and dark and sleek; and though her lips moved not, and her eyes did not change, a smile seemed to steal over her face whether she would or not. The Lady stamped her foot and lifted her hand and cried out. "What! dost thou deem thyself meet for him?" And she caught her by the folds over her bosom.  But Agatha looked up into her face with a simple smile as of a child: "Dost thou deem him meet for thee, my Lady--he a thrall, and thou so great?"  The Lady took her hand from her, but her face flamed with anger and she stamped on the ground again: "What dost thou mean?" she said; "am I not great enough to have what I want when it lieth close to my hand?" Agatha looked on her sweetly, and said in a soft voice: "Stretch out thine hand for it then."  The Lady looked at her grimly, and said:  "I understand thy jeer; thou meanest that he will not be moved by me, he being so fair, and I being but somewhat fair. Wilt thou have me beat thee?  Nay, I will send thee to the White Pillar when we come home to Utterbol."

The woman smiled again, and said:  "My Lady, when thou hast sent me to the White Pillar, or the Red, or the Black, my stripes will not mend the matter for thee, or quench the fear of thine heart that by this time, since he is a grown man, he loveth some other.  Yet belike he will obey thee if thou command, even to the lying in the same bed with thee; for he is a thrall." The Lady hung her head, but Agatha went on in her sweet clear voice: "The Lord will think little of it, and say nothing of it unless thou anger him otherwise; or unless, indeed, he be minded to pick a quarrel with thee, and hath baited a trap with this stripling. But that is all unlike:  thou knowest why, and how that he loveth the little finger of that new-come thrall of his (whom ye left at home at Utterbol in his despite), better than all thy body, for all thy white skin and lovely limbs.  Nay, now I think of it, I deem that he meaneth this gift to make an occasion for the staying of any quarrel with thee, that he may stop thy mouth from crying out at him--well, what wilt thou do? he is a mighty Lord."

The Lady looked up (for she had hung her head at first), her face all red with shame, yet smiling, though ruefully, and she said: "Well, thou art determined that if thou art punished it shall not be for naught.  But thou knowest not my mind." "Yea, Lady," said Agatha, smiling in despite of herself, "that may well be."

Now the Lady turned from her, and went and sat upon a stool that was thereby, and said nothing a while; only covering her face with her hands and rocking herself to and fro, while Agatha stood looking at her.  At last she said: "Hearken, Agatha, I must tell thee what lieth in mine heart, though thou hast been unkind to me and hast tried to hurt my soul. Now, thou art self-willed, and hot-blooded, and not unlovely, so that thou mayst have loved and been loved ere now. But thou art so wily and subtle that mayhappen thou wilt not understand what I mean, when I say that love of this young man hath suddenly entered into my heart, so that I long for him more this minute than I did the last, and the next minute shall long still more. And I long for him to love me, and not alone to pleasure me."

"Mayhappen it will so betide without any pushing the matter," said Agatha.

"Nay," said the Lady, "Nay; my heart tells me that it will not be so; for I have seen him, that he is of higher kind than we be; as if he were a god come down to us, who if he might not cast his love upon a goddess, would disdain to love an earthly woman, little-minded and in whom perfection is not."  Therewith the tears began to run from her eyes; but Agatha looked on her with a subtle smile and said:  "O my Lady! and thou hast scarce seen him!  And yet I will not say but that I understand this.  But as to the matter of a goddess, I know not. Many would say that thou sitting on thine ivory chair in thy golden raiment, with thy fair bosom and white arms and yellow hair, wert not ill done for the image of a goddess; and this young man may well think so of thee. However that may be, there is something else I will say to thee; (and thou knowest that I speak the truth to thee--most often-- though I be wily). This is the word, that although thou hast time and again treated me like the thrall I am, I deem thee no ill woman, but rather something overgood for Utterbol and the dark lord thereof."

Now sat the Lady shaken with sobs, and weeping without stint; but she looked up at that word and said:  "Nay, nay, Agatha, it is not so. To-day hath this man's eyes been a candle to me, that I may see myself truly; and I know that though I am a queen and not uncomely, I am but coarse and little-minded. I rage in my household when the whim takes me, and I am hot-headed, and masterful, and slothful, and should belike be untrue if there were any force to drive me thereto. And I suffer my husband to go after other women, and this new thrall is especial, so that I may take my pleasure unstayed with other men whom I love not greatly.  Yes, I am foolish, and empty-headed, and unclean. And all this he will see through my queenly state, and my golden gown, and my white skin withal."

Agatha looked on her curiously, but smiling no more.  At last she said: "What is to do, then? or must I think of something for thee?"

"I know not, I know not," said the Lady between her sobs; "yet if I might be in such case that he might pity me; belike it might blind his eyes to the ill part of me.  Yea," she said, rising up and falling walking to and fro swiftly, "if he might hurt me and wound me himself, and I so loving him."

Said Agatha coldly:  "Yes, Lady, I am not wily for naught; and I both deem that I know what is in thine heart, and that it is good for something; and moreover that I may help thee somewhat therein.  So in a few days thou shalt see whether I am worth something more than hard words and beating. Only thou must promise in all wise to obey me, though I be the thrall, and thou the Lady, and to leave all the whole matter in my hands."

Quoth the Lady:  "That is easy to promise; for what may I do by myself?"

Then Agatha fell pondering a while, and said thereafter: "First, thou shalt get me speech with my Lord, and cause him to swear immunity to me, whatsoever I shall say or do herein." Said the Lady:  "Easy is this.  What more hast thou?"

Said Agatha:  "It were better for thee not to go forth to see the jousting; because thou art not to be trusted that thou show not thy love openly when the youngling is in peril; and if thou put thy lord to shame openly before the people, he must needs thwart thy will, and be fierce and cruel, and then it will go hard with thy darling. So thou shalt not go from the pavilion till the night is dark, and thou mayst feign thyself sick meantime."

"Sick enough shall I be if I may not go forth to see how my love is faring in his peril:  this at least is hard to me; but so be it! At least thou wilt come and tell me how he speedeth." "Oh yes," said Agatha, "if thou must have it so; but fear thou not, he shall do well enough."

Said the Lady:  "Ah, but thou wottest how oft it goes with a chance stroke, that the point pierceth where it should not; nay, where by likelihood it could not."

"Nay," said Agatha, "what chance is there in this, when the youngling knoweth the whole manner of the play, and his foemen know naught thereof? It is as the chance betwixt Geoffrey the Minstrel and Black Anselm, when they play at chess together, that Anselm must needs be mated ere he hath time to think of his fourth move.  I wot of these matters, my Lady.  Now, further, I would have thy leave to marshal thy maids about the seat where thou shouldest be, and moreover there should be someone in thy seat, even if I sat in it myself."  Said the Lady: "Yea, sit there if thou wilt."

"Woe's me!" said Agatha laughing, "why should I sit there? I am like to thee, am I not?"  "Yea," said the Lady, "as the swan is like to the loon."  "Yea, my Lady," said Agatha, "which is the swan and which the loon?  Well, well, fear not; I shall set Joyce in thy seat by my Lord's leave; she is tall and fair, and forsooth somewhat like to thee." "Why wilt thou do this?" quoth the Lady; "Why should thralls sit in my seat?"  Said Agatha:  "O, the tale is long to tell; but I would confuse that young man's memory of thee somewhat, if his eyes fell on thee at all when ye met e'en now, which is to be doubted."

The Lady started up in sudden wrath, and cried out: "She had best not be too like to me then, and strive to draw his eyes to her, or I will have her marked for diversity betwixt us. Take heed, take heed!"

Agatha looked softly on her and said:  "My Lady.  Ye fair-skinned, open-faced women should look to it not to show yourselves angry before men-folk. For open wrath marreth your beauty sorely. Leave scowls and fury to the dark-browed, who can use them without wrying their faces like a three months' baby with the colic. Now that is my last rede as now.  For methinks I can hear the trumpets blowing for the arraying of the tourney. Wherefore I must go to see to matters, while thou hast but to be quiet. And to-night make much of my Lord, and bid him see me to-morrow, and give heed to what I shall say to him.  But if I meet him without, now, as is most like, I shall bid him in to thee, that thou mayst tell him of Joyce, and her sitting in thy seat. Otherwise I will tell him as soon as he is set down in his place. Sooth to say, he is little like to quarrel with either thee or me for setting a fair woman other than thee by his side."

Therewith she lifted the tent lap and went out, stepping daintily, and her slender body swaying like a willow branch, and came at once face to face with the Lord of Utterbol, and bowed low and humbly before him, though her face, unseen of him, smiled mockingly.  The Lord looked on her greedily, and let his hand and arm go over her shoulder, and about her side, and he drew her to him, and kissed her, and said: "What, Agatha! and why art thou not bringing forth thy mistress to us?" She raised her face to him, and murmured softly, as one afraid, but with a wheedling smile on her face and in her eyes: "Nay, my Lord, she will abide within to-day, for she is ill at ease; if your grace goeth in, she will tell thee what she will have."

"Agatha," quoth he, "I will hear her, and I will do her pleasure if thou ask me so to do."  Then Agatha cast down her eyes, and her speech was so low and sweet that it was as the cooing of a dove, as she said: "O my Lord, what is this word of thine?"

He kissed her again, and said:  "Well, well, but dost thou ask it?" "O yea, yea, my Lord," said she.

"It is done then," said the Lord; and he let her go; for he had been stroking her arm and shoulder, and she hurried away, laughing inwardly, to the Lady's women. But he went into the pavilion after he had cast one look at her.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_37]

CHAPTER 37

How Ralph Justed With the Aliens

Meanwhile Captain Otter had brought Ralph into the staked-out lists, which, being hastily pitched, were but slenderly done, and now the Upmeads stripling stood there beside a good horse which they had brought to him, and Otter had been speaking to him friendly. But Ralph saw the Lord come forth from the pavilion and take his seat on an ivory chair set on a turf ridge close to the stakes of the lists:  for that place was used of custom for such games as they exercised in the lands of Utterbol. Then presently the Lady's women came out of their tents, and, being marshalled by Agatha, went into the Queen's pavilion, whence they came forth again presently like a bed of garden flowers moving, having in the midst of them a woman so fair, and clad so gloriously, that Ralph must needs look on her, though he were some way off, and take note of her beauty. She went and sat her down beside the Lord, and Ralph doubted not that it was the Queen, whom he had but glanced at when they first made stay before the pavilion. Sooth to say, Joyce being well nigh as tall as the Queen, and as white of skin, was otherwise a far fairer woman.

Now spake Otter to Ralph:  "I must leave thee here, lad, and go to the other side, as I am to run against thee."  Said Ralph: "Art thou to run first?"  "Nay, but rather last," said Otter; "they will try thee first with one of the sergeants, and if he overcome thee, then all is done, and thou art in an evil plight. Otherwise will they find another and another, and at last it will be my turn.  So keep thee well, lad."

Therewith he rode away, and there came to Ralph one of the sergeants, who brought him a spear, and bade him to horse. So Ralph mounted and took the spear in hand; and the sergeant said: "Thou art to run at whatsoever meeteth thee when thou hast heard the third blast of the horn.  Art thou ready?"  "Yea, yea," said Ralph; "but I see that the spear-head is not rebated, so that we are to play at sharps."

"Art thou afraid, youngling?" said the sergeant, who was old and crabbed, "if that be so, go and tell the Lord: but thou wilt find that he will not have his sport wholly spoiled, but will somehow make a bolt or a shaft out of thee."

Said Ralph:  "I did but jest; I deem myself not so near my death to-day as I have been twice this summer or oftener." Said the sergeant, "It is ill jesting in matters wherein my Lord hath to do.  Now thou hast heard my word: do after it."

Therewith he departed, and Ralph laughed and shook the spear aloft, and deemed it not over strong; but he said to himself that the spears of the others would be much the same.

Now the horn blew up thrice, and at the latest blast Ralph pricked forth, as one well used to the tilt, but held his horse well in hand; and he saw a man come driving against him with his spear in the rest, and deemed him right big; but this withal he saw, that the man was ill arrayed, and was pulling on his horse as one not willing to trust him to the rush; and indeed he came on so ill that it was clear that he would never strike Ralph's shield fairly. So he swerved as they met, so that his spear-point was never near to Ralph, who turned his horse toward him a little, and caught his foeman by the gear about his neck, and spurred on, so that he dragged him clean out of his saddle, and let him drop, and rode back quietly to his place, and got off his horse to see to his girths; and he heard great laughter rising up from the ring of men, and from the women also.  But the Lord of Utterbol cried out: "Bring forth some one who doth not eat my meat for nothing: and set that wretch and dastard aside till the tilting be over, and then he shall pay a little for his wasted meat and drink."

Ralph got into his saddle again, and saw a very big man come forth at the other end of the lists, and wondered if he should be overthrown of him; but noted that his horse seemed not over good.  Then the horn blew up and he spurred on, and his foeman met him fairly in the midmost of the lists: yet he laid his spear but ill, and as one who would thrust and foin with it rather than letting it drive all it might, so that Ralph turned the point with his shield that it glanced off, but he himself smote the other full on the shoulder, and the shaft brake, but the point had pierced the man's armour, and the truncheon stuck in the wound: yet since the spear was broken he kept his saddle. The Lord cried out, "Well, Black Anselm, this is better done; yet art thou a big man and a well-skilled to be beaten by a stripling."

So the man was helped away and Ralph went back to his place again.

Then another man was gotten to run against Ralph, and it went the same-like way:  for Ralph smote him amidst of the shield, and the spear held, so that he fell floundering off his horse.

Six of the stoutest men of Utterbol did Ralph overthrow or hurt in this wise; and then he ran three courses with Otter, and in the first two each brake his spear fairly on the other; but in the third Otter smote not Ralph squarely, but Ralph smote full amidst of his shield, and so dight him that he well-nigh fell, and could not master his horse, but yet just barely kept his saddle.

Then the Lord cried out:  "Now make we an end of it! We have no might against this youngling, man to man: or else would Otter have done it.  This comes of learning a craft diligently."

So Ralph got off his horse, and did off his helm and awaited tidings; and anon comes to him the surly sergeant, and brought him a cup of wine, and said:  "Youngling, thou art to drink this, and then go to my Lord; and I deem that thou art in favour with him.  So if thou art not too great a man, thou mightest put in a word for poor Redhead, that first man that did so ill.  For my Lord would have him set up, and head down and buttocks aloft, as a target for our bowmen. And it will be his luck if he be sped with the third shot, and last not out to the twentieth."

"Yea, certes," said Ralph, "I will do no less, even if it anger the Lord."  "O thou wilt not anger him," said the man, "for I tell thee, thou art in favour.  Yea, and for me also thou mightest say a word also, when thou becomest right great; for have I not brought thee a good bowl of wine?" "Doubt it not, man," said Ralph, "if I once get safe to Utterbol: weary on it and all its ways!"  Said the sergeant: "That is an evil wish for one who shall do well at Utterbol. But come, tarry not."

So he brought Ralph to the Lord, who still sat in his chair beside that fair woman, and Ralph did obeysance to him; yet he had a sidelong glance also for that fair seeming-queen, and deemed her both proud-looking, and so white-skinned, that she was a wonder, like the queen of the fays: and it was just this that he had noted of the Queen as he stood before her earlier in the day when they first came into the vale; therefore he had no doubt of this damsel's queenship.

Now the Lord spake to him and said:  "Well, youngling, thou hast done well, and better than thy behest:  and since ye have been playing at sharps, I deem thou would'st not do ill in battle, if it came to that. So now I am like to make something other of thee than I was minded to at first:  for I deem that thou art good enough to be a man. And if thou wilt now ask a boon of me, if it be not over great, I will grant it thee."

Ralph put one knee to the ground, and said:  "Great Lord, I thank thee:  but whereas I am in an alien land and seeking great things, I know of no gift which I may take for myself save leave to depart, which I deem thou wilt not grant me. Yet one thing thou mayst do for my asking if thou wilt. If thou be still angry with the carle whom I first unhorsed, I pray thee pardon him his ill-luck."

"Ill-luck!" said the Lord, "Why, I saw him that he was downright afraid of thee.  And if my men are to grow blenchers and soft-hearts what is to do then?  But tell me, Otter, what is the name of this carle?" Said Otter, "Redhead he hight, Lord."  Said the Lord:  "And what like a man is he in a fray?"  "Naught so ill, Lord," said Otter. "This time, like the rest of us, he knew not this gear. It were scarce good to miss him at the next pinch. It were enough if he had the thongs over his back a few dozen times; it will not be the first day of such cheer to him."

"Ha!" said the Lord, "and what for, Otter, what for?" "Because he was somewhat rough-handed, Lord," said Otter. "Then shall we need him and use him some day.  Let him go scot free and do better another bout.  There is thy boon granted for thee, knight; and another day thou mayst ask something more. And now shall David have a care of thee.  And when we come to Utterbol we shall see what is to be done with thee."

Then Ralph rose up and thanked him, and David came forward, and led him to his tent.  And he was wheedling in his ways to him, as if Ralph were now become one who might do him great good if so his will were.

But the Lord went back again into the Tower.

As to the Lady, she abode in her pavilion amidst many fears and desires, till Agatha entered and said:  "My Lady, so far all has gone happily." Said the Lady:  "I deemed from the noise and the cry that he was doing well. But tell me, how did he?"  "My Lady," quoth Agatha, "he knocked our folk about well-favouredly, and seemed to think little of it."

"And Joyce," said the Lady, "how did she?"  "She looked a queen, every inch of her, and she is tall," said Agatha:  "soothly some folk stared on her, but not many knew of her, since she is but new into our house.  Though it is a matter of course that all save our new-come knight knew that it was not thou that sat there. And my Lord was well-pleased, and now he hath taken her by the hand and led her into the Tower."

The Lady reddened and scowled, and said:  "And he... did he come anigh her?" "O yea," said Agatha, "whereas he stood before my Lord a good while, and then kneeled to him to pray pardon for one of our men who had done ill in the tilting:  yea, he was nigh enough to her to touch her had he dared, and to smell the fragrance of her raiment. And he seemed to think it good to look out of the corners of his eyes at her; though I do not say that she smiled on him." The Lady sprang up, her cheeks burning, and walked about angrily a while, striving for words, till at last she said:  "When we come home to Utterbol, my lord will see his new thrall again, and will care for Joyce no whit: then will I have my will of her; and she shall learn, she, whether I am verily the least of women at Utterbol!  Ha! what sayest thou? Now why wilt thou stand and smile on me?--Yea, I know what is in thy thought; and in very sooth it is good that the dear youngling hath not seen this new thrall, this Ursula.  Forsooth, I tell thee that if I durst have her in my hands I would have a true tale out of her as to why she weareth ever that pair of beads about her neck."

"Now, our Lady," said Agatha, "thou art marring the fairness of thy face again.  I bid thee be at peace, for all shall be well, and other than thou deemest.  Tell me, then, didst thou get our Lord to swear immunity for me?"  Said the Lady: "Yea, he swore on the edge of the sword that thou mightest say what thou wouldst, and neither he nor any other should lay hand on thee."

"Good," said Agatha; "then will I go to him to-morrow morning, when Joyce has gone from him.  But now hold up thine heart, and keep close for these two days that we shall yet abide in Tower Dale: and trust me this very evening I shall begin to set tidings going that shall work and grow, and shall one day rejoice thine heart."

So fell the talk betwixt them.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_38]

CHAPTER 38

A Friend Gives Ralph Warning

 On the morrow Ralph wandered about the Dale where he would, and none meddled with him.  And as he walked east along the stream where the valley began to narrow, he saw a man sitting on the bank fishing with an angle, and when he drew near, the man turned about, and saw him. Then he lays down his angling rod and rises to his feet, and stands facing Ralph, looking sheepish, with his hands hanging down by his sides; and Ralph, who was thinking of other folk, wondered what he would. So he said:  "Hail, good fellow!  What wouldst thou?"  Said the man: "I would thank thee."  "What for?" said Ralph, but as he looked on him he saw that it was Redhead, whose pardon he had won of the Lord yesterday; so he held out his hand, and took Redhead's, and smiled friendly on him. Redhead looked him full in the face, and though he was both big and very rough-looking, he had not altogether the look of a rascal.

He said:  "Fair lord, I would that I might do something for thine avail, and perchance I may:  but it is hard to do good deeds in Hell, especially for one of its devils."

"Yea, is it so bad as that?" said Ralph.  "For thee not yet," said Redhead, "but it may come to it.  Hearken, lord, there is none anigh us that I can see, so I will say a word to thee at once.  Later on it may be over late: Go thou not to Utterbol whatever may betide."

"Yea," said Ralph, "but how if I be taken thither?"  Quoth Redhead: "I can see this, that thou art so favoured that thou mayst go whither thou wilt about the camp with none to hinder thee. Therefore it will be easy for thee to depart by night and cloud, or in the grey of morning, when thou comest to a good pass, whereof I will tell thee.  And still I say, go thou not to Utterbol: for thou art over good to be made a devil of, like to us, and therefore thou shalt be tormented till thy life is spoilt, and by that road shalt thou be sent to heaven."

"But thou saidst even now," said Ralph, "that I was high in the Lord's grace."  "Yea," said Redhead, "that may last till thou hast command to do some dastard's deed and nay-sayest it, as thou wilt: and then farewell to thee; for I know what my Lord meaneth for thee." "Yea," said Ralph, "and what is that?"  Said Redhead; "He hath bought thee to give to his wife for a toy and a minion, and if she like thee, it will be well for a while:  but on the first occasion that serveth him, and she wearieth of thee (for she is a woman like a weather-cock), he will lay hand on thee and take the manhood from thee, and let thee drift about Utterbol a mock for all men. For already at heart he hateth thee."

Ralph stood pondering this word, for somehow it chimed in with the thought already in his heart.  Yet how should he not go to Utterbol with the Damsel abiding deliverance of him there: and yet again, if they met there and were espied on, would not that ruin everything for her as well as for him?

At last he said:  "Good fellow, this may be true, but how shall I know it for true before I run the risk of fleeing away, instead of going on to Utterbol, whereas folk deem honour awaiteth me."

Said Redhead:  "There is no honour at Utterbol save for such as are unworthy of honour.  But thy risk is as I say, and I shall tell thee whence I had my tale, since I love thee for thy kindness to me, and thy manliness.  It was told me yester-eve by a woman who is in the very privity of the Lady of Utterbol, and is well with the Lord also: and it jumpeth with mine own thought on the matter; so I bid thee beware: for what is in me to grieve would be sore grieved wert thou cast away."  "Well," said Ralph, "let us sit down here on the bank and then tell me more; but go on with thine angling the while, lest any should see us."

So they sat down, and Redhead did as Ralph bade; and he said: "Lord, I have bidden thee to flee; but this is an ill land to flee from, and indeed there is but one pass whereby ye may well get away from this company betwixt this and Utterbol; and we shall encamp hard by it on the second day of our faring hence. Yet I must tell thee that it is no road for a dastard; for it leadeth through the forest up into the mountains:  yet such as it is, for a man bold and strong like thee, I bid thee take it: and I can see to it that leaving this company shall be easy to thee: only thou must make up thy mind speedily, since the time draws so nigh, and when thou art come to Utterbol with all this rout, and the house full, and some one or other dogging each footstep of thine, fleeing will be another matter.  Now thus it is: on that same second night, not only is the wood at hand to cover thee, but I shall be chief warder of the side of the camp where thou lodgest, so that I can put thee on the road: and if I were better worth, I would say, take me with thee, but as it is, I will not burden thee with that prayer."

"Yea," said Ralph, "I have had one guide in this country-side and he bewrayed me.  This is a matter of life and death, so I will speak out and say how am I to know but that thou also art going about to bewray me?"

Redhead lept up to his feet, and roared out:  "What shall I say? what shall I say?  By the soul of my father I am not bewraying thee. May all the curses of Utterbol be sevenfold heavier on me if I am thy traitor and dastard."

"Softly lad, softly," said Ralph, "lest some one should hear thee. Content thee, I must needs believe thee if thou makest so much noise about it."

Then Redhead sat him down again, and for all that he was so rough and sturdy a carle he fell a-weeping.

"Nay, nay," said Ralph, "this is worse in all wise than the other noise.  I believe thee as well as a man can who is dealing with one who is not his close friend, and who therefore spareth truth to his friend because of many years use and wont. Come to thyself again and let us look at this matter square in the face, and speedily too, lest some unfriend or busybody come on us. There now!  Now, in the first place dost thou know why I am come into this perilous and tyrannous land?"

Said Redhead:  "I have heard it said that thou art on the quest of the Well at the World's End."

"And that is but the sooth," said Ralph.  "Well then," quoth Redhead, "there is the greater cause for thy fleeing at the time and in the manner I have bidden thee.  For there is a certain sage who dwelleth in the wildwood betwixt that place and the Great Mountains, and he hath so much lore concerning the Mountains, yea, and the Well itself, that if he will tell thee what he can tell, thou art in a fair way to end thy quest happily. What sayest thou then?"

Said Ralph, "I say that the Sage is good if I may find him. But there is another cause why I have come hither from Goldburg." "What is that?" said Redhead.  "This," said Ralph, "to come to Utterbol." "Heaven help us!" quoth Redhead, "and wherefore?"

Ralph said:  "Belike it is neither prudent nor wise to tell thee, but I do verily trust thee; so hearken!  I go to Utterbol to deliver a friend from Utterbol; and this friend is a woman--hold a minute-- and this woman, as I believe, hath been of late brought to Utterbol, having been taken out of the hands of one of the men of the mountains that lie beyond Cheaping Knowe."

Redhead stared astonished, and kept silence awhile; then he said:  "Now all the more I say, flee! flee! flee! Doubtless the woman is there, whom thou seekest; for it would take none less fair and noble than that new-come thrall to draw to her one so fair and noble as thou art.  But what availeth it? If thou go to Utterbol thou wilt destroy both her and thee. For know, that we can all see that the Lord hath set his love on this damsel; and what better can betide, if thou come to Utterbol, but that the Lord shall at once see that there is love betwixt you two, and then there will be an end of the story."

"How so?" quoth Ralph.  Said Redhead:  "At Utterbol all do the will of the Lord of Utterbol, and he is so lustful and cruel, and so false withal, that his will shall be to torment the damsel to death, and to geld and maim thee; so that none hereafter shall know how goodly and gallant thou hast been."

"Redhead," quoth Ralph much moved, "though thou art in no knightly service, thou mayst understand that it is good for a friend to die with a friend."

"Yea, forsooth," said Redhead, "If he may do no more to help than that! Wouldst thou not help the damsel?  Now when thou comest back from the quest of the Well at the World's End, thou wilt be too mighty and glorious for the Lord of Utterbol to thrust thee aside like to an over eager dog; and thou mayst help her then.  But now I say to thee, and swear to thee, that three days after thou hast met thy beloved in Utterbol she will be dead. I would that thou couldst ask someone else nearer to the Lord than I have been.  The tale would be the same as mine."

Now soothly to say it, this was even what Ralph had feared would be, and he could scarce doubt Redhead's word.  So he sat there pondering the matter a good while, and at last he said: "My friend, I will trust thee with another thing; I have a mind to flee to the wildwood, and yet come to Utterbol for the damsel's deliverance." "Yea," said Redhead, "and how wilt thou work in the matter?" Said Ralph; "How would it be if I came hither in other guise than mine own, so that I should not be known either by the damsel or her tyrants?"

Said Redhead:  "There were peril in that; yet hope also. Yea, and in one way thou mightest do it; to wit, if thou wert to find that Sage, and tell him thy tale:  if he be of good will to thee, he might then change not thy gear only, but thy skin also; for he hath exceeding great lore."

"Well," said Ralph, "Thou mayst look upon it as certain that on that aforesaid night, I will do my best to shake off this company of tyrant and thralls, unless I hear fresh tidings, so that I must needs change my purpose. But I will ask thee to give me some token that all holds together some little time beforehand."  Quoth Redhead:  "Even so shall it be; thou shalt see me at latest on the eve of the night of thy departure; but on the night before that if it be anywise possible."

"Now will I go away from thee," said Ralph, "and I thank thee heartily for thine help, and deem thee my friend.  And if thou think better of fleeing with me, thou wilt gladden me the more." Redhead shook his head but spake not, and Ralph went his ways down the dale.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_39]

CHAPTER 39

The Lord of Utterbol Makes Ralph a Free Man

He went to and fro that day and the next, and none meddled with him; with Redhead he spake not again those days, but had talk with Otter and David, who were blithe enough with him.  Agatha he saw not at all; nor the Lady, and still deemed that the white-skinned woman whom he had seen sitting by the Lord after the tilting was the Queen.

As for the Lady she abode in her pavilion, and whiles lay in a heap on the floor weeping, or dull and blind with grief; whiles she walked up and down mad wroth with whomsoever came in her way, even to the dealing out of stripes and blows to her women.

But on the eve before the day of departure Agatha came into her, and chid her, and bade her be merry:  "I have seen the Lord and told him what I would, and found it no hard matter to get him to yeasay our plot, which were hard to carry out without his goodwill. Withal the seed that I have sowed two days or more ago is bearing fruit; so that thou mayst look to it that whatsoever plight we may be in, we shall find a deliverer."

"I wot not thy meaning," quoth the Lady, "but I deem thou wilt now tell me what thou art planning, and give me some hope, lest I lay hands on myself."

Then Agatha told her without tarrying what she was about doing for her, the tale of which will be seen hereafter; and when she had done, the Lady mended her cheer, and bade bring meat and drink, and was once more like a great and proud Lady.

On the morn of departure, when Ralph arose, David came to him and said: "My Lord is astir already, and would see thee for thy good." So Ralph went with David, who brought him to the Tower, and there they found the Lord sitting in a window, and Otter stood before him, and some others of his highest folk.  But beside him sat Joyce, and it seemed that he thought it naught but good to hold her hand and play with the fingers thereof, though all those great men were by; and Ralph had no thought of her but that she was the Queen.

So Ralph made obeisance to the Lord and stood awaiting his word; and the Lord said:  "We have been thinking of thee, young man, and have deemed thy lot to be somewhat of the hardest, if thou must needs be a thrall, since thou art both young and well-born, and so good a man of thine hands.  Now, wilt thou be our man at Utterbol?"

Ralph delayed his answer a space and looked at Otter, who seemed to him to frame a Yea with his lips, as who should say, take it.  So he said: "Lord, thou art good to me, yet mayst thou be better if thou wilt."

"Yea, man!" said the Lord knitting his brows; "What shall it be? say thy say, and be done with it."

"Lord," said Ralph, "I pray thee to give me my choice, whether I shall go with thee to Utterbol or forbear going?"

"Why, lo you!" said the Lord testily, and somewhat sourly; "thou hast the choice.  Have I not told thee that thou art free?" Then Ralph knelt before him, and said:  "Lord, I thank thee from a full heart, in that thou wilt suffer me to depart on mine errand, for it is a great one."  The scowl deepened on the Lord's face, and he turned away from Ralph, and said presently: "Otter take the Knight away and let him have all his armour and weapons and a right good horse; and then let him do as he will, either ride with us, or depart if he will, and whither he will. And if he must needs ride into the desert, and cast himself away in the mountains, so be it.  But whatever he hath a mind to, let none hinder him, but further him rather; hearest thou? take him with thee."

Then was Ralph overflowing with thanks, but the Lord heeded him naught, but looked askance at him and sourly.  And he rose up withal, and led the damsel by the hand into another chamber; and she minced in her gait and leaned over to the Lord and spake softly in his ear and laughed, and he laughed in his turn and toyed with her neck and shoulders.

But the great men turned and went their ways from the Tower, and Ralph went with Otter and was full of glee, and as merry as a bird.  But Otter looked on him, and said gruffly: "Yea now, thou art like a song-bird but newly let out of his cage. But I can see the string which is tied to thy leg, though thou feelest it not."

"Why, what now?" quoth Ralph, making as though he were astonished. "Hearken," said Otter:  "there is none nigh us, so I will speak straight out; for I love thee since the justing when we tried our might together. If thou deemest that thou art verily free, ride off on the backward road when we go forward; I warrant me thou shalt presently meet with an adventure, and be brought in a captive for the second time." "How then," said Ralph, "hath not the Lord good will toward me?"

Said Otter:  "I say not that he is now minded to do thee a mischief for cruelty's sake; but he is minded to get what he can out of thee. If he use thee not for the pleasuring of his wife (so long as her pleasure in thee lasteth) he will verily use thee for somewhat else. And to speak plainly, I now deem that he will make thee my mate, to use with me, or against me as occasion may serve; so thou shalt be another captain of his host."  He laughed withal, and said again: "But if thou be not wary, thou wilt tumble off that giddy height, and find thyself a thrall once more, and maybe a gelding to boot." Now waxed Ralph angry and forgat his prudence, and said: "Yea, but how shall he use me when I am out of reach of his hand?" "Oho, young man," said Otter, "whither away then, to be out of his reach?"

"Why," quoth Ralph still angrily, "is thy Lord master of all the world?"  "Nay," said the captain, "but of a piece thereof. In short, betwixt Utterbol and Goldburg, and Utterbol and the mountains, and Utterbol and an hundred miles north, and an hundred miles south, there is no place where thou canst live, no place save the howling wilderness, and scarcely there either, where he may not lay hand on thee if he do but whistle.  What, man! be not downhearted! come with us to Utterbol, since thou needs must. Be wise, and then the Lord shall have no occasion against thee; above all, beware of crossing him in any matter of a woman. Then who knows" (and here he sunk his voice well nigh to a whisper) "but thou and I together may rule in Utterbol and make better days there."

Ralph was waxen master of himself by now, and was gotten wary indeed, so he made as if he liked Otter's counsel well, and became exceeding gay; for indeed the heart within him was verily glad at the thought of his escaping from thralldom; for more than ever now he was fast in his mind to flee at the time appointed by Redhead.

So Otter said:  "Well, youngling, I am glad that thou takest it thus, for I deem that if thou wert to seek to depart, the Lord would make it an occasion against thee."

"Such an occasion shall he not have, fellow in arms," quoth Ralph. "But tell me, we ride presently, and I suppose are bound for Utterness by the shortest road?"  "Yea," said Otter, "and anon we shall come to the great forest which lieth along our road all the way to Utterness and beyond it; for the town is, as it were, an island in the sea of woodland which covers all, right up to the feet of the Great Mountains, and does what it may to climb them whereso the great wall or its buttresses are anywise broken down toward our country; but the end of it lieth along our road, as I said, and we do but skirt it. A woeful wood it is, and save for the hunting of the beasts, which be there in great plenty, with wolves and bears, yea, and lions to boot, which come down from the mountains, there is no gain in it. No gain, though forsooth they say that some have found it gainful."

"How so?" said Ralph.  Said Otter:  "That way lieth the way to the Well at the World's End, if one might find it. If at any time we were clear of Utterbol, I have a mind for the adventure along with thee, lad, and so I deem hast thou from all the questions thou hast put to me thereabout."

Ralph mastered himself so that his face changed not, and he said: "Well, Captain, that may come to pass; but tell me, are there any tokens known whereby a man shall know that he is on the right path to the Well?"

"The report of folk goeth," said Otter, "concerning one token, where is the road and the pass through the Great Mountains, to wit, that on the black rock thereby is carven the image of a Fighting Man, or monstrous giant, of the days long gone by. Of other signs I can tell thee naught; and few of men are alive that can.  But there is a Sage dwelleth in the wood under the mountains to whom folk seek for his diverse lore; and he, if he will, say men, can set forth all the way, and its perils, and how to escape them.  Well, knight, when the time comes, thou and I will go find him together, for he at least is not hard to find, and if he be gracious to us, then will we on our quest. But as now, see ye, they have struck our tents and the Queen's pavilion also; so to horse, is the word."

"Yea," quoth Ralph, looking curiously toward the place where the Queen's pavilion had stood; "is not yonder the Queen's litter taking the road?" "Yea, surely," said Otter.

"Then the litter will be empty," said Ralph.  "Maybe, or maybe not," said Otter; "but now I must get me gone hastily to my folk; doubtless we shall meet upon the road to Utterbol."

So he turned and went his ways; and Ralph also ran to his horse, whereby was David already in the saddle, and so mounted, and the whole rout moved slowly from out of Vale Turris, Ralph going ever by David. The company was now a great one, for many wains were joined to them, laden with meal, and fleeces, and other household stuff, and withal there was a great herd of neat, and of sheep, and of goats, which the Lord's men had been gathering in the fruitful country these two days; but the Lord was tarrying still in the tower.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_40]

CHAPTER 40

They Ride Toward Utterness From Out of Vale Turris

So they rode by a good highway, well beaten, past the Tower and over the ridge of the valley, and came full upon the terrible sight of the Great Mountains, and the sea of woodland lay before them, swelling and falling, and swelling again, till it broke grey against the dark blue of the mountain wall.  They went as the way led, down hill, and when they were at the bottom, thence along their highway parted the tillage and fenced pastures from the rough edges of the woodland like as a ditch sunders field from field. They had the wildwood ever on their right hand, and but a little way from where they rode the wood thickened for the more part into dark and close thicket, the trees whereof were so tall that they hid the overshadowing mountains whenso they rode the bottoms, though when the way mounted on the ridges, and the trees gave back a little, they had sight of the woodland and the mountains. On the other hand at whiles the thicket came close up to the roadside.

Now David biddeth press on past the wains and the driven beasts, which were going very slowly.  So did they, and at last were well nigh at the head of the Lord's company, but when Ralph would have pressed on still, David refrained him, and said that they must by no means outgo the Queen's people, or even mingle with them; so they rode on softly. But as the afternoon was drawing toward evening they heard great noise of horns behind them, and the sound of horses galloping. Then David drew Ralph to the side of the way, and everybody about, both before and behind them, drew up in wise at the wayside, and or ever Ralph could ask any question, came a band of men-at-arms at the gallop led by Otter, and after them the Lord on his black steed, and beside him on a white palfrey the woman whom Ralph had seen in the Tower, and whom he had taken for the Queen, her light raiment streaming out from her, and her yellow hair flying loose. They passed in a moment of time, and then David and Ralph and the rest rode on after them.

Then said Ralph:  "The Queen rideth well and hardily." "Yea," said David, screwing his face into a grin, would he or no. Ralph beheld him, and it came into his mind that this was not the Queen whom he had looked on when they first came into Vale Turris, and he said: "What then! this woman is not the Queen?"

David spake not for a while, and then he answered: "Sir Knight, there be matters whereof we servants of my Lord say little or nothing, and thou wert best to do the like." And no more would he say thereon.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_41]

CHAPTER 41

Redhead Keeps Tryst

They rode not above a dozen miles that day, and pitched their tents and pavilions in the fair meadows by the wayside looking into the thick of the forest.  There this betid to tell of, that when Ralph got off his horse, and the horse-lads were gathered about the men-at-arms and high folk, who should take Ralph's horse but Redhead, who made a sign to him by lifting his eyebrows as if he were asking him somewhat; and Ralph took it as a question as to whether his purpose held to flee on the morrow night; so he nodded a yeasay, just so much as Redhead might note it; and naught else befell betwixt them.

When it was barely dawn after that night, Ralph awoke with the sound of great stir in the camp, and shouting of men and lowing and bleating of beasts; so he looked out, and saw that the wains and the flocks and herds were being got on to the road, so that they might make good way before the company of the camp took the road. But he heeded it little and went to sleep again.

When it was fully morning he arose, and found that the men were not hastening their departure, but were resting by the wood-side and disporting them about the meadow; so he wandered about amongst the men-at-arms and serving-men, and came across Redhead and hailed him; and there was no man very nigh to them; so Redhead looked about him warily, and then spake swiftly and softly: "Fail not to-night! fail not!  For yesterday again was I told by one who wotteth surely, what abideth thee at Utterbol if thou go thither. I say if thou fail, thou shalt repent but once--all thy life long to wit."

Ralph nodded his head, and said:  "Fear not, I will not fail thee." And therewith they turned away from each other lest they should be noted.

About two hours before noon they got to horse again, and, being no more encumbered with the wains and the beasts, rode at a good pace. As on the day before the road led them along the edge of the wildwood, and whiles it even went close to the very thicket. Whiles again they mounted somewhat, and looked down on the thicket, leagues and leagues thereof, which yet seemed but a little space because of the hugeness of the mountain wall which brooded over it; but oftenest the forest hid all but the near trees.

Thus they rode some twenty miles, and made stay at sunset in a place that seemed rather a clearing of the wood than a meadow; for they had trees on their left hand at a furlong's distance, as well as on their right at a stone's throw.

Ralph saw not Redhead as he got off his horse, and David according to his wont went with him to his tent.  But after they had supped together, and David had made much of Ralph, and had drank many cups to his health, he said to him: "The night is yet young, yea, but new-born; yet must I depart from thee, if I may, to meet a man who will sell me a noble horse good cheap; and I may well leave thee now, seeing that thou hast become a free man; so I bid thee goodnight."

Therewith he departed, and was scarce gone out ere Redhead cometh in, and saith in his wonted rough loud voice:  "Here, knight, here is the bridle thou badest me get mended; will the cobbling serve?" Then seeing no one there, he fell to speaking softer and said: "I heard the old pimp call thee a free man e'en now: I fear me that thou art not so free as he would have thee think. Anyhow, were I thou, I would be freer in two hours space. Is it to be so?"

"Yea, yea," said Ralph.  Redhead nodded:  "Good is that," said he; "I say in two hours' time all will be quiet, and we are as near the thicket as may be; there is no moon, but the night is fair and the stars clear; so all that thou hast to do is to walk out of this tent, and turn at once to thy right hand: come out with me now quietly, and I will show thee."

They went out together and Redhead said softly:  "Lo thou that doddered oak yonder; like a piece of a hay-rick it looks under the stars; if thou seest it, come in again at once."

Ralph turned and drew Redhead in, and said when they were in the tent again: "Yea, I saw it:  what then?"

Said Redhead:  "I shall be behind it abiding thee." "Must I go afoot?" said Ralph, "or how shall I get me a horse?" "I have a horse for thee," said Redhead, "not thine own, but a better one yet, that hath not been backed to-day. Now give me a cup of wine, and let me go."

Ralph filled for him and took a cup himself, and said: "I pledge thee, friend, and wish thee better luck; and I would have thee for my fellow in this quest."

"Nay," said Redhead, "it may not be:  I will not burden thy luck with my ill-luck...and moreover I am seeking something which I may gain at Utterbol, and if I have it, I may do my best to say good-night to that evil abode."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and I wish thee well therein." Said Redhead, stammering somewhat; "It is even that woman of the Queen's whereof I told thee.  And now one last word, since I must not be over long in thy tent, lest some one come upon us.  But, fair sir, if thy mind misgive thee for this turning aside from Utterbol; though it is not to be doubted that the damsel whom thou seekest hath been there, it is not all so sure that thou wouldst have found her there. For of late, what with my Lord and my Lady being both away, the place hath been scant of folk; and not only is the said damsel wise and wary, but there be others who have seen her besides my Lord, and who so hath seen her is like to love her; and such is she, that whoso loveth her is like to do her will. So I bid thee in all case be earnest in thy quest; and think that if thou die on the road thy damsel would have died for thee; and if thou drink of the Well and come back whole and safe, I know not why thou shouldest not go straight to Utterbol and have the damsel away with thee, whosoever gainsay it. For they (if there be any such) who have drunk of the Well at the World's End are well looked to in this land. Now one more word yet; when I come to Utterbol, if thy damsel be there still, fear not but I will have speech of her, and tell of thee, and what thou wert looking to, and how thou deemedst of her."

Therewith he turned and departed hastily.

But Ralph left alone was sorely moved with hope and fear, and a longing that grew in him to see the damsel.  For though he was firmly set on departure, and on seeking the sage aforesaid, yet his heart was drawn this way and that: and it came into his mind how the damsel would fare when the evil Lord came home to Utterbol; and he could not choose but make stories of her meeting of the tyrant, and her fear and grief and shame, and the despair of her heart. So the minutes went slow to him, till he should be in some new place and doing somewhat toward bringing about the deliverance of her from thralldom, and the meeting of him and her.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_01]

BOOK THREE

The Road To The Well At World's End.

CHAPTER 1

An Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountains

Now was the night worn to the time appointed, for it was two hours after midnight, so he stepped out of his tent clad in all his war gear, and went straight to the doddered oak, and found Redhead there with but one horse, whereby Ralph knew that he held to his purpose of going his ways to Utterbol: so he took him by the shoulders and embraced him, rough carle as he was, and Redhead kneeled to him one moment of time and then arose and went off into the night.  But Ralph got a-horseback without delay and rode his ways warily across the highway and into the wood, and there was none to hinder him. Though it was dark but for the starlight, there was a path, which the horse, and not Ralph, found, so that he made some way even before the first glimmer of dawn, all the more as the wood was not very thick after the first mile, and there were clearings here and there.

So rode Ralph till the sun was at point to rise, and he was about the midst of one of those clearings or wood-lawns, on the further side whereof there was more thicket, as he deemed, then he had yet come to; so he drew rein and looked about him for a minute.  Even therewith he deemed he heard a sound less harsh than the cry of the jay in the beech-trees, and shriller than the moaning of the morning breeze in the wood. So he falls to listening with both ears, and this time deems that he hears the voice of a woman:  and therewith came into his mind that old and dear adventure of the Wood Perilous; for he was dreamy with the past eagerness of his deeds, and the long and lonely night. But yet he doubted somewhat of the voice when it had passed his ears, so he shook his rein, for he thought it not good to tarry.

Scarce then had his horse stepped out, ere there came a woman running out of the thicket before him and made toward him over the lawn. So he gat off his horse at once and went to meet her, leading his horse; and as he drew nigh he could see that she was in a sorry plight; she had gathered up her skirts to run the better, and her legs and feet were naked: the coif was gone from her head and her black hair streamed out behind her: her gown was rent about the shoulders and bosom, so that one sleeve hung tattered, as if by the handling of some one.

So she ran up to him crying out:  "Help, knight, help us!" and sank down therewith at his feet panting and sobbing. He stooped down to her, and raised her up, and said in a kind voice: "What is amiss, fair damsel, that thou art in such a plight; and what may I for thine avail?  Doth any pursue thee, that thou fleest thus?"

She stood sobbing awhile, and then took hold of his two hands and said: "O fair lord, come now and help my lady! for as for me, since I am with thee, I am safe."

"Yea," said he, "Shall I get to horse at once?" And therewith he made as if he would move away from her; but she still held his hands, and seemed to think it good so to do, and she spake not for a while but gazed earnestly into his face. She was a fair woman, dark and sleek and lithe...for in good sooth she was none other than Agatha, who is afore told of.

Now Ralph is somewhat abashed by her eagerness, and lets his eyes fall before hers; and he cannot but note that despite the brambles and briars of the wood that she had run through, there were no scratches on her bare legs, and that her arm was unbruised where the sleeve had been rent off.

At last she spake, but somewhat slowly, as if she were thinking of what she had to say:  "O knight, by thy knightly oath I charge thee come to my lady and help and rescue her: she and I have been taken by evil men, and I fear that they will put her to shame, and torment her, ere they carry her off; for they were about tying her to a tree when I escaped: for they heeded not me who am but the maid, when they had the mistress in their hands."  "Yea," said he, "and who is thy mistress?" Said the damsel:  "She is the Lady of the Burnt Rock; and I fear me that these men are of the Riders of Utterbol; and then will it go hard with her; for there is naught but hatred betwixt my lord her husband and the tyrant of Utterbol." Said Ralph:  "And how many were they?"  "O but three, fair sir, but three," she said; "and thou so fair and strong, like the war-god himself."

Ralph laughed:  "Three to one is long odds," quoth he, "but I will come with thee when thou hast let go my hands so that I may mount my horse. But wilt thou not ride behind me, fair damsel; so wearied and spent as thou wilt be by thy night."

She looked on him curiously, and laid a hand on his breast, and the hauberk rings tinkled beneath the broidered surcoat; then she said:  "Nay, I had best go afoot before thee, so disarrayed as I am."

Then she let him go, but followed him still with her eyes as he gat him into the saddle.  She walked on beside his horse's head; and Ralph marvelled of her that for all her haste she had been in, she went somewhat leisurely, picking her way daintily so as to tread the smooth, and keep her feet from the rough.

Thus they went on, into the thicket and through it, and the damsel put the thorns and briars aside daintily as she stepped, and went slower still till they came to a pleasant place of oak-trees with greensward beneath them; and then she stopped, and turning, faced Ralph, and spoke with another voice than heretofore, whereas there was naught rueful or whining therein, but somewhat both of glee and of mocking as it seemed.  "Sir knight," she said, "I have a word or two for thy ears; and this is a pleasant place, and good for us to talk together, whereas it is neither too near to her, nor too far from her, so that I can easily find my way back to her. Now, lord, I pray thee light down and listen to me."  And therewith she sat down on the grass by the bole of a great oak.

"But thy lady," said Ralph, "thy lady?"  "O sir," she said; "My lady shall do well enough:  she is not tied so fast, but she might loose herself if the need were pressing. Light down, dear lord, light down!"

But Ralph sat still on his horse, and knit his brows, and said: "What is this, damsel? hast thou been playing a play with me? Where is thy lady whom thou wouldst have me deliver? If this be but game and play, let me go my ways; for time presses, and I have a weighty errand on hand."

She rose up and came close to him, and laid a hand on his knee and looked wistfully into his face as she said:  "Nay then, I can tell thee all the tale as thou sittest in thy saddle; for meseems short will be thy farewell when I have told it." And she sighed withal.

Then Ralph was ashamed to gainsay her, and she now become gentle and sweet and enticing, and sad withal; so he got off his horse and tied him to a tree, and went and stood by the damsel as she lay upon the grass, and said: "I prithee tell thy tale and let me depart if there be naught for me to do."

Then she said:  "This is the first word, that as to the Red Rock, I lied; and my lady is the Queen of Utterbol, and I am her thrall, and it is I who have drawn thee hither from the camp."

The blood mounted to Ralph's brow for anger; when he called to mind how he had been led hither and thither on other folk's errands ever since he left Upmeads.  But he said naught, and Agatha looked on him timidly and said: "I say I am her thrall, and I did it to serve her and because she bade me." Said Ralph roughly:  "And Redhead, him whom I saved from torments and death; dost thou know him? didst thou know him?"

"Yea," she said, "I had from him what he had learned concerning thee from the sergeants and others, and then I put words into his mouth." "Yea then," quoth Ralph, "then he also is a traitor!"  "Nay, nay," she said, "he is a true man and loveth thee, and whatever he hath said to thee he troweth himself.  Moreover, I tell thee here and now that all that he told thee of the affairs of Utterbol, and thine outlook there, is true and overtrue."

She sprang to her feet therewith, and stood before him and clasped her hands before him and said:  "I know that thou seekest the Well at the World's End and the deliverance of the damsel whom the Lord ravished from the wild man: now I swear it by thy mouth, that if thou go to Utterbol thou art undone and shalt come to the foulest pass there, and moreover that so going thou shalt bring the uttermost shame and torments on the damsel."

Said Ralph:  "Yea, but what is her case as now? tell me."

Quoth Agatha:  "She is in no such evil case; for my lady hateth her not as yet, or but little; and, which is far more, my lord loveth her after his fashion, and withal as I deem feareth her; for though she hath utterly gainsaid his desire, he hath scarce so much as threatened her.  A thing unheard of. Had it been another woman she had by this time known all the bitterness that leadeth unto death at Utterbol." Ralph paled and he scowled on her, then he said: "And how knowest thou all the privity of the Lord of Utterbol? who telleth thee of all this?"  She smiled and spake daintily: "Many folk tell me that which I would know; and that is because whiles I conquer the tidings with my wits, and whiles buy it with my body.  Anyhow what I tell thee is the very sooth concerning this damsel, and this it is: that whereas she is but in peril, she shall be in deadly peril, yea and that instant, if thou go to Utterbol, thou, who art her lover..." "Nay," said Ralph angrily, "I am not her lover, I am but her well-willer." "Well," quoth Agatha looking down and knitting her brows, "when thy good will towards her has become known, then shall she be thrown at once into the pit of my lord's cruelty.  Yea, to speak sooth, even as it is, for thy sake (for her I heed naught) I would that the lord might find her gone when he cometh back to Utterbol."

"Yea," said Ralph, reddening, "and is there any hope for her getting clear off?"  "So I deem," said Agatha. She was silent awhile and then spake in a low voice: "It is said that each man that seeth her loveth her; yea, and will befriend her, even though she consent not to his desire. Maybe she hath fled from Utterbol."

Ralph stood silent awhile with a troubled face; and then he said: "Yet thou hast not told me the why and wherefore of this play of thine, and the beguiling me into fleeing from the camp. Tell it me that I may pardon thee and pass on."

She said:  "By thine eyes I swear that this is sooth, and that there is naught else in it than this:  My lady set her love, when first she set her eyes upon thee--as forsooth all women must: as for me, I had not seen thee (though I told my lady that I had) till within this hour that we met in the wood."

She sighed therewith, and with her right hand played with the rent raiment about her bosom.  Then she said: "She deemed that if thou camest a mere thrall to Utterbol, though she might command thy body, yet she would not gain thy love; but that if perchance thou mightest see her in hard need, and evilly mishandled, and mightest deliver her, there might at least grow up pity in thee for her, and that love might come thereof, as oft hath happed aforetime; for my lady is a fair woman. Therefore I, who am my lady's servant and thrall, and who, I bid thee remember, had not seen thee, took upon me to make this adventure, like to a minstrel's tale done in the flesh. Also I spake to my lord and told him thereof; and though he jeered at my lady to me, he was content, because he would have her set her heart on thee utterly; since he feared her jealousy, and would fain be delivered of it, lest she should play some turn to his newly beloved damsel and do her a mischief. Therefore did he set thee free (in words) meaning, when he had thee safe at Utterbol again (as he nowise doubted to have thee) to do as he would with thee, according as occasion might serve. For at heart he hateth thee, as I could see well. So a little before thou didst leave the camp, we, the Queen and I, went privily into a place of the woods but a little way hence. There I disarrayed both my lady and myself so far as was needful for the playing out the play which was to have seemed to thee a real adventure.  Then came I to thee as if by chance hap, that I might bring thee to her; and if thou hadst come, we had a story for thee, whereby thou mightest not for very knighthood forbear to succour her and bring her whither she would, which in the long run had been Utterbol, but for the present time was to have been a certain strong-house appertaining to Utterbol, and nigh unto it. This is all the tale, and now if thou wilt, thou mayst pardon me; or if thou wilt, thou mayst draw out thy sword and smite off my head. And forsooth I deem that were the better deed."

She knelt down before him and put her palms together, and looked up at him beseechingly.  His face darkened as he beheld her thus, but it cleared at last, and he said: "Damsel, thou wouldst turn out but a sorry maker, and thy play is naught.  For seest thou not that I should have found out all the guile at Utterbol, and owed thy lady hatred rather than love thereafter."

"Yea," she said, "but my lady might have had enough of thy love by then, and would belike have let thee alone to fall into the hands of the Lord. Lo now!  I have delivered thee from this, so that thou art quit both of the Lord and the lady and me:  and again I say that thou couldst scarce have missed, both thou and thy damsel, of a miserable ending at Utterbol."

"Yea," said Ralph, softly, and as if speaking to himself, "yet am I lonely and unholpen."  Then he turned to Agatha and said: "The end of all this is that I pardon thee, and must depart forthwith; for when ye two come back to the camp, then presently will the hunt be up."

She rose from her knees, and stood before him humbly and said: "Nay, I shall requite thee thy pardon thus far, that I will fashion some tale for my lady which will keep us in the woods two days or three; for we have provided victual for our adventure."

Said Ralph:  "I may at least thank thee for that, and will trust in thee to do so much."  Quoth she:  "Then might I ask a reward of thee: since forsooth other reward awaiteth me at Utterbol."

"Thou shalt have it," said Ralph.  She said:  "The reward is that thou kiss me ere we part."

"It must needs be according to my word," said Ralph, "yet I must tell thee that my kiss will bear but little love with it."

She answered naught but laid her hands on his breast and put up her face to him, and he kissed her lips.  Then she said: "Knight, thou hast kissed a thrall and a guileful woman, yet one that shall smart for thee; therefore grudge not the kiss nor repent thee of thy kindness."

"How shalt thou suffer?" said he.  She looked on him steadfastly a moment, and said:  "Farewell! may all good go with thee." Therewith she turned away and walked off slowly through the wood, and somewhat he pitied her, and sighed as he got into his saddle; but he said to himself:  "How might I help her?  Yet true it is that she may well be in an evil case:  I may not help everyone." Then he shook his rein and rode his ways.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_02]

CHAPTER 2

Ralph Rides the Wood Under the Mountains

A long way now rode Ralph, and naught befell him but the fashion of the wood. And as he rode, the heart within him was lightened that he had escaped from all the confusion and the lying of those aliens, who knew him not, nor his kindred, and yet would all use him each for his own ends: and withal he was glad that he was riding all alone upon his quest, but free, unwounded, and well weaponed.

The wood was not very thick whereas he rode, so that he could see the whereabouts of the sun, and rode east as far as he could judge it. Some little victual he had with him, and he found woodland fruit ripening here and there, and eked out his bread therewith; neither did water fail him, for he rode a good way up along a woodland stream that cleft the thicket, coming down as he deemed from the mountains, and thereby he made the more way:  but at last he deemed that he must needs leave it, as it turned overmuch to the north. The light was failing when he came into a woodlawn amidst of which was a pool of water, and all that day he had had no adventure with beast or man, since he had sundered from Agatha. So he lay down and slept there with his naked sword by his side, and awoke not till the sun was high in the heavens next morning. Then he arose at once and went on his way after he had washed him, and eaten a morsel.

After a little the thick of the wood gave out, and the land was no longer flat, as it had been, but was of dales and of hills, not blinded by trees.  In this land he saw much deer, as hart and wild swine; and he happened also on a bear, who was about a honey tree, and had taken much comb from the wild bees. On him Ralph drew his sword and drave him exceeding loth from his purchase, so that the knight dined off the bear's thieving. Another time he came across a bent where on the south side grew vines well fruited, and the grapes a-ripening; and he ate well thereof before he went on his way.

Before nightfall he came on that same stream again, and it was now running straight from the east; so he slept that night on the bank thereof. On the morrow he rode up along it a great way, till again it seemed to be coming overmuch from the north; and then he left it, and made on east as near as he could guess it by the sun.

Now he passed through thickets at whiles not very great, and betwixt them rode hilly land grassed mostly with long coarse grass, and with whin and thorn-trees scattered about. Thence he saw again from time to time the huge wall of the mountains rising up into the air like a great black cloud that would swallow up the sky, and though the sight was terrible, yet it gladdened him, since he knew that he was on the right way. So far he rode, going on the whole up-hill, till at last there was a great pine-wood before him, so that he could see no ending to it either north or south.

It was now late in the afternoon, and Ralph pondered whether he should abide the night where he was and sleep the night there, or whether he should press on in hope of winning to some clear place before dark. So whereas he was in a place both rough and waterless, he deemed it better to go on, after he had rested his horse and let him bite the herbage a while. Then he rode his ways, and entered the wood and made the most of the way.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_03]

CHAPTER 3

Ralph Meeteth With Another Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountain

Soon the wood grew very thick of pine-trees, though there was no undergrowth, so that when the sun sank it grew dark very speedily; but he still rode on in the dusk, and there were but few wild things, and those mostly voiceless, in the wood, and it was without wind and very still. Now he thought he heard the sound of a horse going behind him or on one side, and he wondered whether the chace were up, and hastened what he might, till at last it grew black night, and he was constrained to abide.  So he got off his horse, and leaned his back against a tree, and had the beast's reins over his arm; and now he listened again carefully, and was quite sure that he could hear the footsteps of some hard-footed beast going nowise far from him.  He laughed inwardly, and said to himself: "If the chacer were to pass but three feet from my nose he should be none the wiser but if he hear me or my horse." And therewith he cast a lap of his cloak over the horse's head, lest he should whinny if he became aware of the other beast; and so there he stood abiding, and the noise grew greater till he could hear clearly the horse-hoofs drawing nigh, till they came very nigh, and then stopped.

Then came a man's voice that said:  "Is there a man anigh in the wood?"

Ralph held his peace till he should know more; and the voice spake again in a little while:  "If there be a man anigh let him be sure that I will do him no hurt; nay, I may do him good, for I have meat with me." Clear was the voice, and as sweet as the April blackbird sings. It spake again:  "Naught answereth, yet meseemeth I know surely that a man is anigh; and I am aweary of the waste, and long for fellowship."

Ralph hearkened, and called to mind tales of way-farers entrapped by wood-wives and evil things; but he thought: "At least this is no sending of the Lord of Utterbol, and, St. Nicholas to aid, I have little fear of wood-wights. Withal I shall be but a dastard if I answer not one man, for fear of I know not what."  So he spake in a loud and cheerful voice: "Yea, there is a man anigh, and I desire thy fellowship, if we might but meet.  But how shall we see each other in the blackness of the wildwood night?"

The other laughed, and the laugh sounded merry and sweet, and the voice said:  "Hast thou no flint and fire-steel?" "No," said Ralph.  "But I have," said the voice, "and I am fain to see thee, for thy voice soundeth pleasant to me. Abide till I grope about for a stick or two."

Ralph laughed in turn, as he heard the new-comer moving about; then he heard the click of the steel on the flint, and saw the sparks showering down, so that a little piece of the wood grew green again to his eyes.  Then a little clear flame sprang up, and therewith he saw the tree-stems clearly, and some twenty yards from him a horse, and a man stooping down over the fire, who sprang up now and cried out: "It is a knight-at-arms! Come hither, fellow of the waste; it is five days since I have spoken to a child of Adam; so come nigh and speak to me, and as a reward of thy speech thou shalt have both meat and firelight."

"That will be well paid," said Ralph laughing, and he stepped forward leading his horse, for now the wood was light all about, as the fire waxed and burned clear; so that Ralph could see that the new-comer was clad in quaintly-fashioned armour after the fashion of that land, with a bright steel sallet on the head, and a long green surcoat over the body armour. Slender of make was the new-comer, not big nor tall of stature.

Ralph went up to him hastily, and merrily put his hand on his shoulder, and kissed him, saying:  "The kiss of peace in the wilderness to thee!" And he found him smooth-faced and sweet-breathed.

But the new comer took his hand and led him to where the firelight was brightest and looked on him silently a while; and Ralph gave back the look. The strange-wrought sallet hid but little of the new comer's face, and as Ralph looked thereon a sudden joy came into his heart, and he cried out: "O, but I have kissed thy face before!  O, my friend, my friend!"

Then spake the new-comer and said:  "Yea, I am a woman, and I was thy friend for a little while at Bourton Abbas, and at the want-ways of the Wood Perilous."

Then Ralph cast his arms about her and kissed her again; but she withdrew her from him, and said:  "Help me, my friend, that we may gather sticks to feed our fire, lest it die and the dark come again so that we see not each other's faces, and think that we have but met in a dream."

Then she busied herself with gathering the kindling; but presently she looked up at him, and said:  "Let us make the wood shine wide about, for this is a feastful night."

So they gathered a heap of wood and made the fire great; and then Ralph did off his helm and hauberk and the damsel did the like, so that he could see the shapeliness of her uncovered head. Then they sat down before the fire, and the damsel drew meat and drink from her saddle-bags, and gave thereof to Ralph, who took it of her and her hand withal, and smiled on her and said:  "Shall we be friends together as we were at Bourton Abbas and the want-ways of the Wood Perilous?" She shook her head and said:  "If it might be! but it may not be. Not many days have worn since then; but they have brought about changed days."  He looked on her wistfully and said: "But thou wert dear to me then."

"Yea," she said, "and thou to me; but other things have befallen, and there is change betwixt."

"Nay, what change?" said Ralph.

Even by the firelight he saw that she reddened as she answered: "I was a free woman then; now am I but a runaway thrall." Then Ralph laughed merrily, and said, "Then are we brought the nigher together, for I also am a runaway thrall."

She smiled and looked down:  then she said:  "Wilt thou tell me how that befell?"

"Yea," said he, "but I will ask thee first a question or two." She nodded a yeasay, and looked on him soberly, as a child waiting to say its task.

Said Ralph:  "When we parted at the want-ways of the Wood Perilous thou saidst that thou wert minded for the Well at the World's End, and to try it for life or death. But thou hadst not then the necklace, which now I see thee bear, and which, seest thou! is like to that about my neck. Wilt thou tell me whence thou hadst it?"

She said:  "Yea; it was given unto me by a lady, mighty as I deem, and certainly most lovely, who delivered me from an evil plight, and a peril past words, but whereof I will tell thee afterwards. And she it was who told me of the way to the Well at the World's End, and many matters concerning them that seek it, whereof thou shalt wot soon."

Said Ralph:  "As to how thou wert made a thrall thou needest not to tell me; for I have learned that of those that had to do with taking thee to Utterbol.  But tell me; here are met we two in the pathless wilds, as if it were on the deep sea, and we two seeking the same thing. Didst thou deem that we should meet, or that I should seek thee?"

Now was the fire burning somewhat low, but he saw that she looked on him steadily; yet withal her sweet voice trembled a little as she answered: "Kind friend, I had a hope that thou wert seeking me and wouldst find me: for indeed that fairest of women who gave me the beads spake to me of thee, and said that thou also wouldst turn thee to the quest of the Well at the World's End; and already had I deemed thine eyes lucky as well as lovely. But tell me, my friend, what has befallen that lady that she is not with thee?  For in such wise she spake of thee, that I deemed that naught would sunder you save death."

"It is death that hath sundered us," said Ralph.

Then she hung her head, and sat silent a while, neither did he speak till she had risen up and cast more wood upon the fire; and she stood before it with her back towards him. Then he spake to her in a cheerful voice and said:  "Belike we shall be long together:  tell me thy name; is it not Dorothy?" She turned about to him with a smiling face, and said: "Nay lord, nay:  did I not tell thee my name before? They that held me at the font bid the priest call me Ursula, after the Friend of Maidens.  But what is thy name?"

"I am Ralph of Upmeads," quoth he; and sat a while silent, pondering his dream and how it had betrayed him as to her name, when it had told him much that he yet deemed true.

She came and sat down by him again, and said to him:  "Thy questions I have answered; but thou hast not yet told me the tale of thy captivity." Her voice sounded exceeding sweet to him, and he looked on her face and spake as kindly as he knew how, and said:  "A short tale it is to-night at least: I came from Whitwall with a Company of Chapmen, and it was thee I was seeking and the Well at the World's End.  All went well with me, till I came to Goldburg, and there I was betrayed by a felon, who had promised to lead me safe to Utterness, and tell me concerning the way unto the Well. But he sold me to the Lord of Utterbol, who would lead me to his house; which irked me not, at first, because I looked to find thee there. Thereafter, if for shame I may tell the tale, his lady and wife cast her love upon me, and I was entangled in the nets of guile: yet since I was told, and believed that it would be ill both for thee and for me if I met thee at Utterbol, I took occasion to flee away, I will tell thee how another while."

She had turned pale as she heard him, and now she said:  "It is indeed God's mercy that thou camest not to Utterbol nor foundest me there, for then had both we been undone amidst the lusts of those two; or that thou camest not there to find me fled, else hadst thou been undone. My heart is sick to think of it, even as I sit by thy side."

Said Ralph:  "Thy last word maketh me afraid and ashamed to ask thee a thing. But tell me first, is that Lord of Utterbol as evil as men's fear would make him? for no man is feared so much unless he is deemed evil."

She was silent a while, and then she said:  "He is so evil that it might be deemed that he has been brought up out of hell."

Then Ralph looked sore troubled, and he said:  "Dear friend, this is the thing hard for me to say.  In what wise did they use thee at Utterbol? Did they deal with thee shamefully?"  She answered him quietly: "Nay," she said, "fear not! no shame befell me, save that I was a thrall and not free to depart.  Forsooth," she said, smiling, "I fled away timely before the tormentors should be ready. Forsooth it is an evil house and a mere piece of hell. But now we are out of it and free in the wildwood, so let us forget it; for indeed it is a grief to remember it.  And now once more let us mend the fire, for thy face is growing dim to me, and that misliketh me. Afterwards before we lie down to sleep we will talk a little of the way, whitherward we shall turn our faces to-morrow."

So they cast on more wood, and pineapples, and sweet it was to Ralph to see her face come clear again from out the mirk of the wood. Then they sat down again together and she said:  "We two are seeking the Well at the World's End; now which of us knows more of the way? who is to lead, and who to follow?"  Said Ralph: "If thou know no more than I, it is little that thou knowest. Sooth it is that for many days past I have sought thee that thou mightest lead me."

She laughed sweetly, and said:  "Yea, knight, and was it for that cause that thou soughtest me, and not for my deliverance?" He said soberly:  "Yet in very deed I set myself to deliver thee." "Yea," she said, "then since I am delivered, I must needs deem of it as if it were through thy deed.  And as I suppose thou lookest for a reward therefor, so thy reward shall be, that I will lead thee to the Well at the World's End.  Is it enough?" "Nay," said Ralph.  They held their peace a minute, then she said: "Maybe when we have drunk of that Water and are coming back, it will be for thee to lead.  For true it is that I shall scarce know whither to wend; since amidst of my dreaming of the Well, and of...other matters, my home that was is gone like a dream."

He looked at her, but scarce as if he were heeding all her words. Then he spoke:  "Yea, thou shalt lead me.  I have been led by one or another ever since I have left Upmeads." Now she looked on him somewhat ruefully, and said: "Thou wert not hearkening e'en now; so I say it again, that the time shall come when thou shalt lead me."

In Ralph's mind had sprung up again that journey from the Water of the Oak-tree; so he strove with himself to put the thought from him, and sighed and said:  "Dost thou verily know much of the way?" She nodded yeasay.  "Knowest thou of the Rock of the Fighting Man?" "Yea," she said.  "And of the Sage that dwelleth in this same wood?" "Most surely," she said, "and to-morrow evening or the morrow after we shall find him; for I have been taught the way to his dwelling; and I wot that he is now called the Sage of Swevenham.  Yet I must tell thee that there is some peril in seeking to him; whereas his dwelling is known of the Utterbol riders, who may follow us thither. And yet again I deem that he will find some remedy thereto."

Said Ralph:  "Whence didst thou learn all this, my friend?" And his face grew troubled again; but she said simply: "She taught it to me who spake to me in the wood by Hampton under Scaur."

She made as if she noted not the trouble in his face, but said: "Put thy trust in this, that here and with me thou art even now nigher to the Well at the World's End than any other creature on the earth.  Yea, even if the Sage of Swevenham be dead or gone hence, yet have I tokens to find the Rock of the Fighting Man, and the way through the mountains, though I say not but that he may make it all clearer. But now I see thee drooping with the grief of days bygone; and I deem also that thou art weary with the toil of the way. So I rede thee lie down here in the wilderness and sleep, and forget grief till to-morrow is a new day."

"Would it were come," said he, "that I might see thy face the clearer; yet I am indeed weary."

So he went and fetched his saddle and lay down with his head thereon; and was presently asleep.  But she, who had again cast wood on the fire, sat by his head watching him with a drawn sword beside her, till the dawn of the woodland began to glimmer through the trees: then she also laid herself down and slept.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_04]

CHAPTER 4

They Ride the Wood Under the Mountains

When Ralph woke on the morrow it was broad day as far as the trees would have it so.  He rose at once, and looked about for his fellow, but saw her not, and for some moments of time he thought he had but dreamed of her; but he saw that the fire had been quickened from its embers, and close by lay the hauberk and strange-fashioned helm, and the sword of the damsel, and presently he saw her coming through the trees barefoot, with the green-sleeved silken surcoat hanging below the knees and her hair floating loose about her. She stepped lightly up to Ralph with a cheerful smiling countenance and a ruddy colour in her cheeks, but her eyes moist as if she could scarce keep back the tears for joy of the morning's meeting. He thought her fairer than erst, and made as if he would put his arms about her, but she held a little aloof from him, blushing yet more. Then she said in her sweet clear voice:  "Hail fellow-farer! now begins the day's work.  I have been down yonder, and have found a bright woodland pool, to wash the night off me, and if thou wilt do in likewise and come back to me, I will dight our breakfast meantime, and will we speedily to the road."  He did as she bade him, thinking of her all the while till he came back to her fresh and gay. Then he looked to their horses and gave them fodder gathered from the pool-side, and so turned to Ursula and found her with the meat ready dight; so they ate and were glad.

When they had broken their fast Ralph went to saddle the horses, and coming back found Ursula binding up her long hair, and she smiled on him and said: "Now we are for the road I must be an armed knight again:  forsooth I unbound my hair e'en now and let my surcoat hang loose about me in token that thou wottest my secret.  Soothly, my friend, it irks me that now we have met after a long while, I must needs be clad thus graceless. But need drave me to it, and withal the occasion that was given to me to steal this gay armour from a lad at Utterbol, the nephew of the lord; who like his eme was half my lover, half my tyrant.  Of all which I will tell thee hereafter, and what wise I must needs steer betwixt stripes and kisses these last days.  But now let us arm and to horse.  Yet first lo you, here are some tools that in thine hands shall keep us from sheer famine: as for me I am no archer; and forsooth no man-at-arms save in seeming."

Therewith she showed him a short Turk bow and a quiver of arrows, which he took well pleased.  So then they armed each the other, and as she handled Ralph's wargear she said:  "How well-wrought and trusty is this hauberk of thine, my friend; my coat is but a toy to it, with its gold and silver rings and its gemmed collar: and thy plates be thick and wide and well-wrought, whereas mine are little more than adornments to my arms and legs."

He looked on her lovingly and loved her shapely hands amidst the dark grey mail, and said:  "That is well, dear friend, for since my breast is a shield for thee it behoves it to be well covered." She looked at him, and her lips trembled, and she put out her hand as if to touch his cheek, but drew it back again and said: "Come now, let us to horse, dear fellow in arms."

So they mounted and went their ways through a close pine-wood, where the ground was covered with the pine-tree needles, and all was still and windless.  So as they rode said Ursula: "I seek tokens of the way to the Sage of Swevenham. Hast thou seen a water yesterday?"  "Yea," said Ralph, "I rode far along it, but left it because I deemed that it turned north overmuch."  "Thou wert right," she said, "besides that thy turning from it hath brought us together; for it would have brought thee to Utterbol at last.  But now have we to hit upon another that runneth straight down from the hills: not the Great Mountains, but the high ground whereon is the Sage's dwelling.  I know not whether the ride be long or short; but the stream is to lead us."

On they rode through the wood, wherein was little change for hours; and as they rested Ursula gave forth a deep breath, as one who has cast off a load of care.  And Ralph said:  "Why sighest thou, fellow-farer?" "O," she said, "it is for pleasure, and a thought that I had: for a while ago I was a thrall, living amongst fears that sickened the heart; and then a little while I was a lonely wanderer, and now...Therefore I was thinking that if ever I come back to mine own land and my home, the scent of a pine-wood shall make me happy."

Ralph looked on her eagerly, but said naught for a while; but at last he spoke:  "Tell me, friend," said he, "if we be met by strong-thieves on the way, what shall we do then?"

"It is not like to befall," she said, "for men fear the wood, therefore is there little prey for thieves therein:  but if we chance on them, the token of Utterbol on mine armour shall make them meek enough."  Then she fell silent a while, and spoke again: "True it is that we may be followed by the Utterbol riders; for though they also fear the wood, they fear it not so much as they fear their Lord.  Howbeit, we be well ahead, and it is little like that we shall be overtaken before we have met the Sage; and then belike he shall provide."

"Yea," said Ralph, "but what if the chase come up with us: shall we suffer us to be taken alive?"  She looked on him solemnly, laid her hand on the beads about her neck, and answered: "By this token we must live as long as we may, whatsoever may befall; for at the worst may some road of escape be opened to us. Yet O, how far easier it were to die than to be led back to Utterbol!"

A while they rode in silence, both of them:  but at last spake Ralph, but slowly and in a dull and stern voice:  "Maybe it were good that thou told me somewhat of the horrors and evil days of Utterbol?" "Maybe," she said, "but I will not tell thee of them. Forsooth there are some things which a man may not easily tell to a man, be he never so much his friend as thou art to me.  But bethink thee" (and she smiled somewhat) "that this gear belieth me, and that I am but a woman; and some things there be which a woman may not tell to a man, nay, not even when he hath held her long in his arms." And therewith she flushed exceedingly.  But he said in a kind voice: "I am sorry that I asked thee, and will ask thee no more thereof." She smiled on him friendly, and they spake of other matters as they rode on.

But after a while Ralph said:  "If it were no misease to thee to tell me how thou didst fall into the hands of the men of Utterbol, I were fain to hear the tale."

She laughed outright, and said:  "Why wilt thou be forever harping on the time of my captivity, friend?  And thou who knowest the story somewhat already? Howbeit, I may tell thee thereof without heart-burning, though it be a felon tale."

He said, somewhat shame-facedly: "Take it not ill that I am fain to hear of thee and thy life-days, since we are become fellow-farers."

"Well," she said, "this befell outside Utterbol, so I will tell thee.

"After I had stood in the thrall-market at Cheaping Knowe, and not been sold, the wild man led me away toward the mountains that are above Goldburg; and as we drew near to them on a day, he said to me that he was glad to the heart-root that none had cheapened me at the said market; and when I asked him wherefore, he fell a weeping as he rode beside me, and said: 'Yet would God that I had never taken thee.'  I asked what ailed him, though indeed I deemed that I knew.  He said: 'This aileth me, that though thou art not of the blood wherein I am bound to wed, I love thee sorely, and would have thee to wife; and now I deem that thou wilt not love me again.'  I said that he guessed aright, but that if he would do friendly with me, I would be no less than a friend to him.  'That availeth little,' quoth he; 'I would have thee be mine of thine own will.' I said that might not be, that I could love but one man alone. 'Is he alive?' said he.  'Goodsooth, I hope so,' said I, 'but if he be dead, then is desire of men dead within me.'

"So we spake, and he was downcast and heavy of mood; but thenceforward was he no worse to me than a brother. And he proffered it to lead me back, if I would, and put me safely on the way to Whitwall; but, as thou wottest, I had need to go forward, and no need to go back.

"Thus we entered into the mountains of Goldburg; but one morning, when he arose, he was heavier of mood than his wont, and was restless withal, and could be steadfast neither in staying nor going, nor aught else.  So I asked what ailed him, and he said: 'My end draweth nigh; I have seen my fetch, and am fey. My grave abideth me in these mountains.'  'Thou hast been dreaming ugly dreams,' said I, 'such things are of no import.' And I spoke lightly, and strove to comfort him.  He changed not his mood for all that; but said:  'This is ill for thee also; for thou wilt be worser without me than with me in these lands.' Even so I deemed, and withal I was sorry for him, for though he were uncouth and ungainly, he was no ill man. So against my will I tumbled into the samelike mood as his, and we both fared along drearily.  But about sunset, as we came round a corner of the cliffs of those mountains, or ever we were ware we happed upon a half-score of weaponed men, who were dighting a camp under a big rock thereby: but four there were with them who were still a-horseback; so that when Bull Nosy (for that was his name) strove to flee away with me, it was of no avail; for the said horsemen took us, and brought us before an evil-looking man, who, to speak shortly, was he whom thou hast seen, to wit, the Lord of Utterbol: he took no heed of Bull Nosy, but looked on me closely, and handled me as a man doth with a horse at a cheaping, so that I went nigh to smiting him, whereas I had a knife in my bosom, but the chaplet refrained me.  To make a short tale of it, he bade Bull sell me to him, which Bull utterly naysaid, standing stiff and stark before the Lord, and scowling on him. But the Lord laughed in his face and said:  'So be it, for I will take her without a price, and thank thee for sparing my gold.' Then said Bull:  'If thou take her as a thrall, thou wert best take me also; else shall I follow thee as a free man and slay thee when I may.  Many are the days of the year, and on some one of them will betide the occasion for the knife.'

"Thereat the Lord waxed very pale, and spake not, but looked at that man of his who stood by Bull with a great sword in his fist, and lifted up his hand twice, and let it fall twice, whereat that man stepped back one pace, and swung his sword, and smote Bull, and clave his skull.

"Then the colour came into the Lord's face again, and he said: 'Now, vassals, let us dine and be merry, for at least we have found something in the mountains.'  So they fell to and ate and drank, and victual was given to me also, but I had no will to eat, for my soul was sick and my heart was heavy, foreboding the uttermost evil. Withal I was sorry for Bull Nosy, for he was no ill man and had become my friend.

"So they abode there that night, leaving Bull lying like a dog unburied in the wilderness; and on the morrow they took the road to Utterbol, and went swiftly, having no baggage, and staying but for victual, and for rest every night. The Lord had me brought to him on that first evening of our journey, and he saw me privily and spake to me, bidding me do shameful things, and I would not; wherefore he threatened me grievously; and, I being alone with him, bade him beware lest I should slay him or myself. Thereat he turned pale, as he had done before Bull Nosy, yet sent for none to slay me, but only bade me back to my keepers. And so I came to Utterbol unscathed."

"And at Utterbol," said Ralph, "what befell thee there?" Ursula smiled on him, and held up her finger; yet she answered: "Utterbol is a very great house in a fair land, and there are sundry roofs and many fair chambers.  There was I brought to a goodly chamber amidst a garden; and women servants were given me who led me to the bath and clad me in dainty raiment, and gave me to eat and to drink, and all that I needed. That is all my tale for this time."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_05]

CHAPTER 5

They Come on the Sage of Swevenham

Night was at hand before they came to the stream that they sought. They found it cleaving the pine-wood, which held on till the very bank of it, and was thick again on the further side in a few yards' space.  The stream was high-banked and ran deep and strong.  Said Ursula as they came up to it: "We may not cross it, but it matters not; and it is to-morrow that we must ride up along it."

So they abode there, and made a fire by the waterside, and watched there, turn and turn about, till it was broad day. Naught befell to tell of, save that twice in the night Ralph deemed that he heard a lion roar.

They got to horse speedily when they were both awake, and rode up the stream, and began to go up hill, and by noon were come into a rough and shaggy upland, whence from time to time they could see the huge wall of the mountains, which yet seemed to Ralph scarce nigher, if at all, than when he had beheld it ere he had come to Vale Turris. The way was rough day-long, and now and again they found it hard to keep the stream in sight, as especially when it cleft a hill, and ran between sheer cliffs with no low shore on either side.

They made way but slowly, so that at last Ralph lost patience somewhat, and said that he had but little hope of falling in with the Sage that day or any day.  But Ursula was of good cheer, and mocked him merrily but sweetly, till his heart was lightened again. Withal she bade him seek some venison, since they were drawing out the time, and she knew not how long it would be ere they came to the Sage's dwelling.  Therefore he betook him to the Turk bow, and shot a leash of heath-fowl, and they supped on the meat merrily in the wilderness.

But if they were merry, they were soon weary; for they journeyed on after sunset that night, since the moon was up, and there was no thick wood to turn dusk into dark for them. Their resting-place was a smooth piece of greensward betwixt the water and a half circle of steep bent that well nigh locked it about.

There then they abode, and in the stillness of the night heard a thundering sound coming down the wind to them, which they deemed was the roaring of distant waters; and when they went to the lip of the river they saw flocks of foam floating by, wherefore they thought themselves to be near some great mountain-neck whereover the water was falling from some high place. But with no to-do they lay down upon the greensward this second night of their fellowship, and waked later than on the day before; for so weary had they been, that they had kept but ill watch in the dark night, and none at all after dawn began to glimmer.

Now Ralph sat up and saw Ursula still sleeping; then he rose to his feet and looked about him, and saw their two horses cropping the grass under the bent, and beside them a man, tall and white bearded, leaning on his staff. Ralph caught up his sword and went toward the man, and the sun gleamed from the blade just as the hoary-one turned to him; he lifted up his staff as if in greeting to Ralph, and came toward him, and even therewith Ursula awoke and arose, and saw the greybeard at once; and she cried out: "Take heed to thy sword, fellow-farer, for, praised be the saints, this is the Sage of Swevenham!"

So they stood there together till the Sage came up to them and kissed them both, and said:  "I am glad that ye are come at last; for I looked for you no later than this.  So now mount your horses and come with me straightway; because life is short to them who have not yet drunk of the Well at the World's End. Moreover if ye chance to come on the riders of Utterbol, it shall go hard with you unless I be at hand."

Ralph saw of him that though he was an old hoar man to look on, yet he was strong and sturdy, tall, and of goodly presence, with ruddy cheeks, and red lips and bright eyes, and that the skin of his face and hands was nowise wrinkled:  but about his neck was a pair of beads like unto his own gossip's gift.

So now they mounted at once, and with no more words he led them about the bent, and they came in a little while into the wood again, but this time it was of beech, with here and there an open place sprinkled about with hollies and thorns; and they rode down the wide slope of a long hill, and up again on the other side.

Thus they went for an hour, and the elder spake not again, though it might have been deemed by his eyes that he was eager and fain. They also held their peace; for the hope and fear of their hearts kept them from words.

They came to the hill-top, and found a plain land, though the close wood still held on a while; but soon they rode into a clearing of some twelve acres, where were fenced crofts with goats therein, and three garths of tillage, wherein the wheat-shocks were yet standing, and there were coleworts and other pot-herbs also. But at the further end, whereas the wood closed in again, was a little house builded of timber, strong and goodly, and thatched with wheat-straw; and beside it was a bubbling spring which ran in a brook athwart the said clearing; over the house-door was a carven rood, and a bow and short spear were leaned against the wall of the porch.

Ralph looked at all closely, and wondered whether this were perchance the cot wherein the Lady of Abundance had dwelt with the evil witch. But the elder looked on him, and said:  "I know thy thought, and it is not so; that house is far away hence; yet shalt thou come thereto. Now, children, welcome to the house of him who hath found what ye seek, but hath put aside the gifts which ye shall gain; and who belike shall remember what ye shall forget."

Therewith he brought them into the house, and into a chamber, the plenishing whereof was both scanty and rude. There he bade them sit, and brought them victual, to wit, cheese and goats' milk and bread, and they fell to speech concerning the woodland ways, and the seasons, and other unweighty matters. But as for the old man he spoke but few words, and as one unused to speech, albeit he was courteous and debonair. But when they had eaten and drunk he spake to them and said:

"Ye have sought to me because ye would find the Well at the World's End, and would have lore of me concerning the road thereto; but before I tell you what ye would, let me know what ye know thereof already."

Quoth Ralph:  "For me, little enough I know, save that I must come to the Rock of the Fighting Man, and that thou knowest the way thither."

"And thou, damsel," quoth the long-hoary, "what knowest thou? Must I tell thee of the way through the mountains and the Wall of the World, and the Winter Valley, and the Folk Innocent, and the Cot on the Way, and the Forest of Strange Things and the Dry Tree?"

"Nay," she said, "of all this I wot somewhat, but it may be not enough."

Said the Sage:  "Even so it was with me, when a many years ago I dwelt nigh to Swevenham, and folk sought to me for lore, and I told them what I knew; but maybe it was not enough, for they never came back; but died belike or ever they had seen the Well. And then I myself, when I was gotten very old, fared thither a-seeking it, and I found it; for I was one of those who bore the chaplet of the seekers.  And now I know all, and can teach all. But tell me, damsel, whence hadst thou this lore?"

Said Ursula:  "I had it of a very fair woman who, as it seemeth, was Lady and Queen of the Champions of Hampton under the Scaur, not far from mine own land."

"Yea," quoth the Sage, "and what hath befallen her?...Nay, nay," said he, "I need not ask; for I can see by your faces that she is dead. Therefore hath she been slain, or otherwise she had not been dead. So I ask you if ye were her friends?"

Quoth Ursula; "Surely she was my friend, since she befriended me; and this man I deem was altogether her friend."

Ralph hung his head, and the Sage gazed on him, but said naught. Then he took a hand of each of them in his hands, and held them a while silently, and Ralph was still downcast and sad, but Ursula looked on him fondly.

Then spake the Sage:  "So it is, Knight, that now I seem to understand what manner of man thou art, and I know what is between you two; whereof I will say naught, but will let the tree grow according to its seed. Moreover, I wot now that my friend of past years would have me make you both wise in the lore of the Well at the World's End; and when I have done this, I can do no more, but let your good hap prevail if so it may. Abide a little, therefore."

Then he went unto an ark, and took thence a book wrapped in a piece of precious web of silk and gold, and bound in cuir-bouilly wrought in strange devices.  Then said he: "This book was mine heritage at Swevenham or ever I became wise, and it came from my father's grandsire: and my father bade me look on it as the dearest of possessions; but I heeded it naught till my youth had waned, and my manhood was full of weariness and grief.  Then I turned to it, and read in it, and became wise, and the folk sought to me, and afterwards that befell which was foredoomed. Now herein amongst other matters is written of that which ye desire to know, and I will read the same to you and expound it. Yet were it not well to read in this book under a roof, nay, though it be as humble and innocent as this. Moreover, it is not meet that ye should hearken to this wisdom of old times clad as ye are; thou, knight, in the raiment of the manslayer, with the rod of wrath hanging at thy side; and thou, maiden, attired in the garments of the tyrant, which were won of him by lying and guile."

Then he went to another ark, and took from it two bundles, which he gave, the one to Ralph, the other to Ursula, and said: "Thou, maiden, go thou into the inner chamber here and doff thy worldly raiment, and don that which thou wilt find wrapped in this cloth; and thou, knight, take this other and get thee into the thicket which is behind the house, and there do the like, and abide there till we come to thee."

So Ralph took the bundle, and came out into the thicket and unarmed him, and did on the raiment which he found in the cloth, which was but a long gown of white linen, much like to an alb, broidered about the wrists and the hems and collar with apparels of gold and silk, girt with a red silk girdle. There he abode a little, wondering at all these things and all that had befallen him since he had left Upmeads.

Anon the two others came to him, and Ursula was clad in the same-like raiment and the elder had the book in his hand. He smiled on Ralph and nodded friendly to him.  As to Ursula, she flushed as red as a rose when she set eyes on him, for she said to herself that he was as one of the angels which she had seen painted in the choir of St. Mary's at Higham.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_06]

CHAPTER 6

Those Two Are Learned Lore by the Sage of Swevenham

Now the Sage led them through the wood till they came to a grassy lawn amidst of which was a table of stone, which it seemed to Ralph must be like to that whereon the witch-wife had offered up the goat to her devils as the Lady of Abundance had told him; and he changed countenance as the thought came into his mind. But the Sage looked on him and shook his head and spake softly: "In these wastes and wilds are many such-like places, where of old time the ancient folks did worship to the Gods of the Earth as they imagined them:  and whereas the lore in this book cometh of such folk, this is no ill place for the reading thereof. But if ye fear the book and its writers, who are dead long ago, there is yet time to go back and seek the Well without my helping; and I say not but that ye may find it even thus. But if ye fear not, then sit ye down on the grass, and I will lay the book on this most ancient table, and read in it, and do ye hearken heedfully."

So they sat down side by side, and Ralph would have taken Ursula's hand to caress it, but she drew it away from him; howbeit she found it hard to keep her eyes from off him.  The Elder looked on them soberly, but nowise in anger, and presently began reading in the book. What he read shall be seen hereafter in the process of this tale; for the more part thereof had but to do with the way to the Well at the World's End, all things concerning which were told out fully, both great and small.  Long was this a-reading, and when the Sage had done, he bade now one, now the other answer him questions as to what he had read; and if they answered amiss he read that part again, and yet again, as children are taught in the school. Until at last when he asked any question Ralph or the maiden answered it rightly at once; and by this time the sun was about to set. So he bade them home to his house that they might eat and sleep there.

"But to-morrow," said he, "I shall give you your last lesson from this book, and thereafter ye shall go your ways to the Rock of the Fighting Man, and I look not for it that ye shall come to any harm on the way; but whereas I seem to-day to have seen the foes of Utterbol seeking you, I will lead you forth a little."

So they went home to the house, and he made them the most cheer that he might, and spake to them in friendly and pleasant mood, so that they were merry.

When it was morning they went again to the ancient altar, and again they learned lore from the Elder, till they were waxen wise in the matters of the Well at the World's End, and long they sat and hearkened him till it was evening again, and once more they slept in the house of the Sage of Swevenham.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_07]

CHAPTER 7

An Adventure by the Way

When morrow dawned they arose betimes and did on their worldly raiment; and when they had eaten a morsel they made them ready for the road, and the elder gave them victual for the way in their saddle-bags, saying: "This shall suffice for the passing days, and when it is gone ye have learned what to do."

Therewithall they gat to horse; but Ralph would have the Elder ride his nag, while he went afoot by the side of Ursula. So the Sage took his bidding, but smiled therewith, and said: "Thou art a King's son and a friendly young man, else had I said nay to this; for it needeth not, whereas I am stronger than thou, so hath my draught of the Well dealt with me."

Thus then they went their ways; but Ralph noted of Ursula that she was silent and shy with him, and it irked him so much, that at last he said to her:  "My friend, doth aught ail me with thee?  Wilt thou not tell me, so that I may amend it? For thou are grown of few words with me and turnest thee from me, and seemest as if thou heedest me little.  Thou art as a fair spring morning gone cold and overcast in the afternoon. What is it then? we are going a long journey together, and belike shall find little help or comfort save in each other; and ill will it be if we fall asunder in heart, though we be nigh in body."

She laughed and reddened therewithal; and then her countenance fell and she looked piteously on him and said:  "If I seemed to thee as thou sayest, I am sorry; for I meant not to be thus with thee as thou deemest. But so it is that I was thinking of this long journey, and of thee and me together in it, and how we shall be with each other if we come back again alive, with all things done that we had to do."

She stayed her speech awhile, and seemed to find it hard to give forth the word that was in her; but at last she said: "Friend, thou must pardon me; but that which thou sawest in me, I also seemed to see in thee, that thou wert grown shy and cold with me; but now I know it is not so, since thou hast seen me wrongly; but that I have seen thee wrongly, as thou hast me."

Therewith she reached her hand to him, and he took it and kissed it and caressed it while she looked fondly at him, and they fared on sweetly and happily together.  But as this was a-saying and a-doing betwixt them, and a while after, they had heeded the Elder little or not at all, though he rode on the right hand of Ralph. And for his part the old man said naught to them and made as if he heard them not, when they spake thuswise together.

Now they rode the wood on somewhat level ground for a while; then the trees began to thin, and the ground grew broken; and at last it was very rugged, with high hills and deep valleys, and all the land populous of wild beasts, so that about sunset they heard thrice the roar of a lion. But ever the Sage led them by winding ways that he knew, round the feet of the hills, along stream-sides for the most part, and by passes over the mountain-necks when they needs must, which was twice in the day.

Dusk fell on them in a little valley, through which ran a stream bushed about its edges, and which for the rest was grassy and pleasant, with big sweet-chestnut trees scattered about it.

"Now," quoth the Elder; "two things we have to beware of in this valley, the lions first; which, though belike they will not fall upon weaponed men, may well make an onslaught on your horses, if they wind them; and the loss of the beasts were sore to you as now. But the second thing is the chase from Utterbol.  As to the lions, if ye build up a big fire, and keep somewhat aloof from the stream and its bushes, and tether you horses anigh the fire, ye will have no harm of them."

"Yea," said Ralph, "but if the riders of Utterbol are anigh us, shall we light a candle for them to show them the way?"  Said the Sage: "Were ye by yourselves, I would bid you journey night-long, and run all risk rather than the risk of falling into their hands. But whereas I am your guide, I bid you kindle your fire under yonder big tree, and leave me to deal with the men of Utterbol; only whatso I bid you, that do ye straightway."

"So be it," said Ralph, "I have been bewrayed so oft of late, that I must needs trust thee, or all help shall fail me. Let us to work."  So they fell to and built up a big bale and kindled it, and their horses they tethered to the tree; and by then they had done this, dark night had fallen upon them. So they cooked their victual at the fire (for Ralph had shot a hare by the way) and the Sage went down to the stream and fetched them water in a lethern budget:  "For," said he, "I know the beasts of the wood and they me, and there is peace betwixt us." There then they sat to meat unarmed, for the Sage had said to them: "Doff your armour; ye shall not come to handystrokes with the Utterbol Riders."

So they ate their meat in the wilderness, and were nowise ungleeful, for to those twain the world seemed fair, and they hoped for great things. But though they were glad, they were weary enough, for the way had been both rugged and long; so they lay them down to sleep while the night was yet young.  But or ever Ralph closed his eyes he saw the Sage standing up with his cloak wrapped about his head, and making strange signs with his right hand; so that he deemed that he would ward them by wizardry. So therewith he turned about on the grass and was asleep at once.

After a while he started and sat up, half awake at first; for he felt some one touch him; and his halfdreams went back to past days, and he cried out:  "Hah Roger! is it thou?  What is toward?" But therewith he woke up fully, and knew that it was the Sage that had touched him, and withal he saw hard by Ursula. sitting up also.

There was still a flickering flame playing about the red embers of their fire, for they had made it very big; and the moon had arisen and was shining bright in a cloudless sky.

The Sage spake softly but quickly:  "Lie down together, ye two, and I shall cast my cloak over you, and look to it that ye stir not from out of it, nor speak one word till I bid you, whate'er may befall: for the riders of Utterbol are upon us."

They did as he bade them, but Ralph got somewhat of an eye-shot out of a corner of the cloak, and he could see that the Sage went and stood up against the tree-trunk holding a horse by the bridle, one on each side of him. Even therewith Ralph heard the clatter of horse-hoofs over the stones about the stream, and a man's voice cried out: "They will have heard us; so spur over the grass to the fire and the big tree:  for then they cannot escape us." Then came the thump of horse-hoofs on the turf, and in half a minute they were amidst of a rout of men a-horseback, more than a score, whose armour and weapons gleamed in the moonlight: yet when these riders were gotten there, they were silent, till one said in a quavering voice as if afeard: "Otter, Otter! what is this?  A minute ago and we could see the fire, and the tree, and men and horses about them: and now, lo you! there is naught save two great grey stones lying on the grass, and a man's bare bones leaning up against the tree, and a ruckle of old horse-bones on either side of him. Where are we then?"

Then spake another; and Ralph knew the voice for Otter's: "I wot not, lord; naught else is changed save the fire and the horses and the men:  yonder are the hills, yonder overhead is the moon, with the little light cloud dogging her; even that is scarce changed. Belike the fire was an earth-fire, and for the rest we saw wrong in the moonlight."

Spake the first man again, and his voice quavered yet more: "Nay nay, Otter, it is not so.  Lo you the skeleton and the bones and the grey stones!  And the fire, here this minute, there the next. O Otter, this is an evil place of an evil deed!  Let us go seek elsewhere; let us depart, lest a worse thing befall us." And so with no more ado he turned his horse and smote his spurs into him and galloped off by the way he had come, and the others followed, nothing loth; only Otter tarried a little, and looked around him and laughed and said: "There goes my Lord's nephew; like my Lord he is not over bold, save in dealing with a shackled man.  Well, for my part if those others have sunk into the earth, or gone up into the air, they are welcome to their wizardry, and I am glad of it. For I know not how I should have done to have seen my mate that out-tilted me made a gelded wretch of; and it would have irked me to see that fair woman in the hands of the tormentors, though forsooth I have oft seen such sights.  Well, it is good; but better were it to ride with my mate than serve the Devil and his Nephew."

Therewith he turned rein and galloped off after the others, and in a little while the sound of them had died off utterly into the night, and they heard but the voices of the wild things, and the wimbrel laughing from the hill-sides. Then came the Sage and drew the cloak from those two, and laughed on them and said: "Now may ye sleep soundly, when I have mended our fire; for ye will see no more of Utterbol for this time, and it yet lacks three hours of dawn:  sleep ye then and dream of each other." Then they arose and thanked the Sage with whole hearts and praised his wisdom.  But while the old man mended the fire Ralph went up to Ursula and took her hand, and said: "Welcome to life, fellow-farer!" and he gazed earnestly into her eyes, as though he would have her fall into his arms: but whereas she rather shrank from him, though she looked on him lovingly, if somewhat shyly, he but kissed her hand, and laid him down again, when he had seen her lying in her place. And therewith they fell asleep and slept sweetly.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_08]

CHAPTER 8

They Come to the Sea of Molten Rocks

When they woke again the sun was high above their heads, and they saw the Sage dighting their breakfast.  So they arose and washed the night off them in the stream and ate hastily, and got to horse on a fair forenoon; then they rode the mountain neck east from that valley; and it was a long slope of stony and barren mountain nigh waterless.

And on the way Ursula told Ralph how the man who was scared by the wizardry last night was verily the nephew of the Lord from whom she had stolen her armour by wheedling and a seeming promise. "But," said she, "his love lay not so deep but that he would have avenged him for my guile on my very body had he taken us." Ralph reddened and scowled at her word, and the Sage led them into the other talk.

So long was that fell, that they were nigh benighted ere they gained the topmost, or came to any pass. When they had come to a place where there was a little pool in a hollow of the rocks they made stay there, and slept safe, but ill-lodged, and on the morrow were on their way betimes, and went toiling up the neck another four hours, and came to a long rocky ridge or crest that ran athwart it; and when they had come to the brow thereof, then were they face to face with the Great Mountains, which now looked so huge that they seemed to fill all the world save the ground whereon they stood. Cloudless was the day, and the air clean and sweet, and every nook and cranny was clear to behold from where they stood: there were great jutting nesses with straight-walled burgs at their top-most, and pyramids and pinnacles that no hand of man had fashioned, and awful clefts like long streets in the city of the giants who wrought the world, and high above all the undying snow that looked as if the sky had come down on to the mountains and they were upholding it as a roof.

But clear as was the fashion of the mountains, they were yet a long way off:  for betwixt them and the ridge whereon those fellows stood, stretched a vast plain, houseless and treeless, and, as they beheld it thence grey and ungrassed (though indeed it was not wholly so) like a huge river or firth of the sea it seemed, and such indeed it had been once, to wit a flood of molten rock in the old days when the earth was a-burning.

Now as they stood and beheld it, the Sage spake: "Lo ye, my children, the castle and its outwork, and its dyke that wardeth the land of the Well at the World's End. Now from to-morrow, when we enter into the great sea of the rock molten in the ancient earth-fires, there is no least peril of pursuit for you.  Yet amidst that sea should ye perish belike, were it not for the wisdom gathered by a few; and they are dead now save for the Book, and for me, who read it unto you. Now ye would not turn back were I to bid you, and I will not bid you. Yet since the journey shall be yet with grievous toil and much peril, and shall try the very hearts within you, were ye as wise as Solomon and as mighty as Alexander, I will say this much unto you; that if ye love not the earth and the world with all your souls, and will not strive all ye may to be frank and happy therein, your toil and peril aforesaid shall win you no blessing but a curse.  Therefore I bid you be no tyrants or builders of cities for merchants and usurers and warriors and thralls, like the fool who builded Goldburg to be for a tomb to him: or like the thrall-masters of the Burg of the Four Friths, who even now, it may be, are pierced by their own staff or overwhelmed by their own wall.  But rather I bid you to live in peace and patience without fear or hatred, and to succour the oppressed and love the lovely, and to be the friends of men, so that when ye are dead at last, men may say of you, they brought down Heaven to the Earth for a little while. What say ye, children?"

Then said Ralph:  "Father, I will say the sooth about mine intent, though ye may deem it little-minded. When I have accomplished this quest, I would get me home again to the little land of Upmeads, to see my father and my mother, and to guard its meadows from waste and its houses from fire-raising: to hold war aloof and walk in free fields, and see my children growing up about me, and lie at last beside my fathers in the choir of St. Laurence. The dead would I love and remember; the living would I love and cherish; and Earth shall be the well beloved house of my Fathers, and Heaven the highest hall thereof."

"It is well," said the Sage, "all this shalt thou do and be no little-heart, though thou do no more.  And thou, maiden?"

She looked on Ralph and said:  "I lost, and then I found, and then I lost again.  Maybe I shall find the lost once more. And for the rest, in all that this man will do, I will help, living or dead, for I know naught better to do."

"Again it is well," said the Sage, "and the lost which was verily thine shalt thou find again, and good days and their ending shall betide thee. Ye shall have no shame in your lives and no fear in your deaths. Wherefore now lieth the road free before you."

Then was he silent a while, neither spake the others aught, but stood gazing on the dark grey plain, and the blue wall that rose beyond it, till at last the Sage lifted up his hand and said: "Look yonder, children, to where I point, and ye shall see how there thrusteth out a ness from the mountain-wall, and the end of it stands like a bastion above the lava-sea, and on its sides and its head are streaks ruddy and tawny, where the earth-fires have burnt not so long ago:  see ye?"

Ralph looked and said:  "Yea, father, I see it, and its rifts and its ridges, and its crannies."

Quoth the Sage:  "Behind that ness shall ye come to the Rock of the Fighting Man, which is the very Gate of the Mountains; and I will not turn again nor bid you farewell till I have brought you thither.  And now time presses; for I would have you come timely to that cavern, whereof I have taught you, before ye fall on the first days of winter, or ye shall be hard bestead. So now we will eat a morsel, and then use diligence that we may reach the beginning of the rock-sea before nightfall."

So did they, and the Sage led them down by a slant-way from off the ridge, which was toilsome but nowise perilous. So about sunset they came down into the plain, and found a belt of greensward, and waters therein betwixt the foot of the ridge and the edge of the rock-sea. And as for the said sea, though from afar it looked plain and unbroken, now that they were close to, and on a level with it, they saw that it rose up into cliffs, broken down in some places, and in others arising high into the air, an hundred foot, it might be. Sometimes it thrust out into the green shore below the fell, and otherwhile drew back from it as it had cooled ages ago.

So they came to a place where there was a high wall of rock round three sides of a grassy place by a stream-side, and there they made their resting-place, and the night went calmly and sweetly with them.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_09]

CHAPTER 9

They Come Forth From the Rock-Sea

On the morrow the Sage led them straight into the rock-sea whereas it seemed to them at first that he was but bringing them into a blind alley; but at the end of the bight the rock-wall was broken down into a long scree of black stones.  There the Sage bade Ralph and Ursula dismount (as for him he had been going afoot ever since that first day) and they led the horses up the said scree, which was a hard business, as they were no mountain beasts.  And when they were atop of the scree it was harder yet to get them down, for on that side it was steeper; but at last they brought it about, and came down into a little grassy plain or isle in the rock sea, which narrowed toward the eastern end, and the rocks on either side were smooth and glossy, as if the heat had gone out of them suddenly, when the earth-fires had ceased in the mountains.

Now the Sage showed them on a certain rock a sign cut, whereof they had learned in the book aforesaid, to wit, a sword crossed by a three-leaved bough; and they knew by the book that they should press on through the rock-sea nowhere, either going or returning, save where they should see this token.

Now when they came to the narrow end of the plain they found still a wide way between the rock-walls, that whiles widened out, and whiles drew in again. Whiles withal were screes across the path, and little waters that ran out of the lava and into it again, and great blocks of fallen stone, sometimes as big as a husbandman's cot, that wind and weather had rent from the rocks; and all these things stayed them somewhat. But they went on merrily, albeit their road winded so much, that the Sage told them, when evening was, that for their diligence they had but come a few short miles as the crow flies.

Many wild things there were, both beast and fowl, in these islands and bridges of the rock-sea, hares and conies to wit, a many, and heathfowl, and here and there a red fox lurking about the crannies of the rock-wall. Ralph shot a brace of conies with his Turk bow, and whereas there were bushes growing in the chinks, and no lack of whin and ling, they had firing enough, and supped off this venison of the rocks.

So passed that day and two days more, and naught befell, save that on the midnight of the first day of their wending the rock-sea, Ralph awoke and saw the sky all ablaze with other light than that of the moon; so he arose and went hastily to the Sage, and took him by the shoulder, and bid him awake; "For meseems the sky is afire, and perchance the foe is upon us."

The Sage awoke and opened his eyes, and rose on his elbow and looked around sleepily; then he said laughing:  "It is naught, fair lord, thou mayst lie down and sleep out the remnant of the night, and thou also, maiden:  this is but an earth-fire breaking out on the flank of the mountains; it may be far away hence. Now ye see that he may not scale the rocks about us here without toil; but to-morrow night we may climb up somewhere and look on what is toward."

So Ralph lay down and Ursula also, but Ralph lay long awake watching the light above him, which grew fiercer and redder in the hours betwixt moonset and daybreak, when he fell asleep, and woke not again till the sun was high.

But on the next day as they went, the aspect of the rock-sea about them changed:  for the rocks were not so smooth and shining and orderly, but rose up in confused heaps all clotted together by the burning, like to clinkers out of some monstrous forge of the earth-giants, so that their way was naught so clear as it had been, but was rather a maze of jagged stone. But the Sage led through it all unfumbling, and moreover now and again they came on that carven token of the sword and the bough.  Night fell, and as it grew dark they saw the glaring of the earth-fires again; and when they were rested, and had done their meat, the Sage said: "Come now with me, for hard by is there a place as it were a stair that goeth to the top of a great rock, let us climb it and look about us."

So did they, and the head of the rock was higher than the main face of the rock-sea, so that they could see afar. Thence they looked north and beheld afar off a very pillar of fire rising up from a ness of the mountain wall, and seeming as if it bore up a black roof of smoke; and the huge wall gleamed grey, because of its light, and it cast a ray of light across the rock-sea as the moon doth over the waters of the deep: withal there was the noise as of thunder in the air, but afar off: which thunder indeed they had heard oft, as they rode through the afternoon and evening.

Spake the Sage:  "It is far away:  yet if the wind were not blowing from us, we had smelt the smoke, and the sky had been darkened by it. Now it is naught so far from Utterbol, and it will be for a token to them there.  For that ness is called the Candle of the Giants, and men deem that the kindling thereof forebodeth ill to the lord who sitteth on the throne in the red hall of Utterbol."

Ralph laid his hand on Ursula's shoulder and said: "May the Sage's saw be sooth!"

She put her hand upon the hand and said:  "Three months ago I lay on my bed at Bourton Abbas, and all the while here was this huge manless waste lying under the bare heavens and threatened by the storehouse of the fires of the earth: and I had not seen it, nor thee either, O friend; and now it hath become a part of me for ever."

Then was Ralph exceeding glad of her words, and the Sage laughed inwardly when he beheld them thus.

So they came adown from the rock and lay down presently under the fiery heavens:  and their souls were comforted by the sound of the horses cropping the grass so close to their ears, that it broke the voice of the earth-fires' thunder, that ever and anon rolled over the grey sea amidst which they lay.

On the morrow they still rode the lava like to clinkers, and it rose higher about them, till suddenly nigh sunset it ended at a turn of their winding road, and naught lay betwixt them and that mighty ness of the mountains, save a wide grassy plain, here and there swelling into low wide risings not to be called hills, and besprinkled with copses of bushes, and with trees neither great nor high.  Then spake the Sage: "Here now will we rest, and by my will to-morrow also, that your beasts may graze their fill of the sweet grass of these unwarded meadows. which feedeth many a herd unowned of man, albeit they pay a quit-rent to wild things that be mightier than they. And now, children, we have passed over the mighty river that once ran molten betwixt these mountains and the hills yonder to the west, which we trod the other day; yet once more, if your hearts fail you, there is yet time to turn back; and no harm shall befall you, but I will be your fellow all the way home to Swevenham if ye will. But if ye still crave the water of the Well at the World's End, I will lead you over this green plain, and then go back home to mine hermitage, and abide there till ye come to me, or I die."

Ralph smiled and said:  "Master, no such sorry story shall I bear back to Upmeads, that after many sorrows borne, and perils overcome, I came to the Gates of the Mountains, and turned back for fear of that which I had not proved."

So spake he; but Ursula laughed and said:  "Yea, then should I deem thy friendship light if thou leftest me alone and unholpen in the uttermost wilderness; and thy manhood light to turn back from that which did not make a woman afraid."

Then the Sage looked kindly on them and said:  "Yea, then is the last word spoken, and the world may yet grow merrier to me. Look you, some there be who may abuse the gifts of the Well for evil errands, and some who may use it for good deeds; but I am one who hath not dared to use it lest I should abuse it, I being alone amongst weaklings and fools: but now if ye come back, who knows but that I may fear no longer, but use my life, and grow to be a mighty man.  Come now, let us dight our supper, and kindle as big a fire as we lightly may; since there is many a prowling beast about, as bear and lynx and lion; for they haunt this edge of the rock-sea whereto the harts and the wild bulls and the goats resort for the sweet grass, and the water that floweth forth from the lava."

So they cut good store of firing, whereas there was a plenty of bushes growing in the clefts of the rocks, and they made a big fire and tethered their horses anigh it when they lay down to rest; and in the night they heard the roaring of wild things round about them, and more than once or twice, awakening before day, they saw the shape of some terrible creature by the light of the moon mingled with the glare of the earth-fires, but none of these meddled with them, and naught befell them save the coming of the new day.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_10]

CHAPTER 10

They Come to the Gate of the Mountains

That day they herded their horses thereabout, and from time to time the Sage tried those two if they were perfect in the lore of the road; and he found that they had missed nothing.

They lay down in the self-same place again that night, and arose betimes on the morrow and went their ways over the plain as the Sage led, till it was as if the mountains and their terror hung over their very heads, and the hugeness and blackness of them were worse than a wall of fire had been. It was still a long way to them, so that it was not till noon of the third day from the rock-sea that they came to the very feet of that fire-scorched ness, and wonderful indeed it seemed to them that anything save the eagles could have aught to tell of what lay beyond it.

There were no foothills or downs betwixt the plain and the mountains, naught save a tumble of rocks that had fallen from the cliffs, piled up strangely, and making a maze through which the Sage led them surely; and at last they were clear even of this, and were underneath the flank of that ness, which was so huge that there seemed that there could scarce be any more mountain than that. Little of its huge height could they see, now they were close to it, for it went up sheer at first and then beetled over them till they could see no more of its side; as they wound about its flank, and they were long about it, the Sage cried out to those two and stretched out his hand, and behold! the side of the black cliff plain and smooth and shining as if it had been done by the hand of men or giants, and on this smooth space was carven in the living rock the image of a warrior in mail and helm of ancient fashion, and holding a sword in his right hand.  From head to heel he seemed some sixty feet high, and the rock was so hard, that he was all clean and clear to see; and they deemed of him that his face was keen and stern of aspect.

So there they stood in an awful bight of the mountain, made by that ness, and the main wall from which it thrust out. But after they had gazed awhile and their hearts were in their mouths, the Sage turned on those twain and said: "Here then is the end of my journey with you; and ye wot all that I can tell you, and I can say no word more save to bid you cast all fear aside and thrive.  Ye have yet for this day's journey certain hours of such daylight as the mountain pass will give you, which at the best is little better than twilight; therefore redeem ye the time."

But Ralph got off his horse, and Ursula did in likewise, and they both kissed and embraced the old man, for their hearts were full and fain. But he drew himself away from them, and turned about with no word more, and went his ways, and presently was hidden from their eyes by the rocky maze which lay about the mountain's foot. Then the twain mounted their horses again and set forth silently on the road, as they had been bidden.

In a little while the rocks of the pass closed about them, leaving but a way so narrow that they could see a glimmer of the stars above them as they rode the twilight; no sight they had of the measureless stony desert, yet in their hearts they saw it. They seemed to be wending a straight-walled prison without an end, so that they were glad when the dark night came on them.

Ralph found some shelter in the cleft of a rock above a mound where was little grass for the horses.  He drew Ursula into it, and they sat down there on the stones together. So long they sat silent that a great gloom settled upon Ralph, and he scarce knew whether he were asleep or waking, alive or dead. But amidst of it fell a sweet voice on his ears, and familiar words asking him of what like were the fields of Upmeads, and the flowers; and of the fish of its water, and of the fashion of the building of his father's house; and of his brethren, and the mother that bore him. Then was it to him at first as if a sweet dream had come across the void of his gloom, and then at last the gloom and the dread and the deadness left him, and he knew that his friend and fellow was talking to him, and that he sat by her knee to knee, and the sweetness of her savoured in his nostrils as she leaned her face toward him, and he knew himself for what he was; and yet for memory of that past horror, and the sweetness of his friend and what not else, he fell a-weeping. But Ursula bestirred herself and brought out food from her wallet, and sat down beside him again, and he wiped the tears from his eyes and laughed, and chid himself for being as a child in the dark, and then they ate and drank together in that dusk nook of the wilderness. And now was he happy and his tongue was loosed, and he fell to telling her many things of Upmeads, and of the tale of his forefathers, and of his old loves and his friends, till life and death seemed to him as they had seemed of time past in the merry land of his birth. So there anon they fell asleep for weariness, and no dreams of terror beset their slumbers.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_11]

CHAPTER 11

They Come to the Vale of Sweet Chestnuts

When they went on their way next morning they found little change in the pass, and they rode the dread highway daylong, and it was still the same: so they rested a little before nightfall at a place where there was water running out of the rocks, but naught else for their avail. Ralph was merry and helpful and filled water from the runnel, and wrought what he might to make the lodging meet; and as they ate and rested he said to Ursula:  "Last night it was thou that beguiled me of my gloom, yet thereafter till we slept it was my voice for the more part, and not thine, that was heard in the wilderness. Now to-night it shall be otherwise, and I will but ask a question of thee, and hearken to the sweetness of thy voice."

She laughed a little and very sweetly, and she said: "Forsooth, dear friend, I spoke to thee that I might hear thy voice for the more part, and not mine, that was heard in the desert; but when I heard thee, I deemed that the world was yet alive for us to come back to."

He was silent awhile, for his heart was pierced with the sweetness of her speech, and he had fain have spoken back as sweetly as a man might; yet he could not because he feared her somewhat, lest she should turn cold to him; therefore himseemed that he spoke roughly, as he said: "Nevertheless, my friend, I beseech thee to tell me of thine old home, even as last night I told thee of mine."

"Yea," she said, "with a good will."  And straightway she fell to telling him of her ways when she was little, and of her father and mother, and of her sister that had died, and the brother whom Ralph had seen at Bourton Abbas: she told also of bachelors who had wooed her, and jested concerning them, yet kindly and without malice, and talked so sweetly and plainly, that the wilderness was become a familiar place to Ralph, and he took her hand in the dusk and said: "But, my friend, how was it with the man for whom thou wert weeping when I first fell in with thee at Bourton Abbas?"

She said:  "I will tell thee plainly, as a friend may to a friend. Three hours had not worn from thy departure ere tidings came to me concerning him, that neither death nor wounding had befallen him; and that his masterless horse and bloodstained saddle were but a device to throw dust into our eyes, so that there might be no chase after him by the men of the Abbot's bailiff, and that he might lightly do as he would, to wit, swear himself into the riders of the Burg of the Four Friths; for, in sooth, he was weary of me and mine. Yet further, I must needs tell thee that I know now, that when I wept before thee it was partly in despite, because I had found out in my heart (though I bade it not tell me so much) that I loved him but little."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and when didst thou come to that knowledge of thine heart?"

"Dear friend," she said, "mayhappen I may tell thee hereafter, but as now I will forbear."  He laughed for joy of her, and in a little that talk fell down between them.

Despite the terror of the desert and the lonely ways, when Ralph laid him down on his stony bed, happiness wrapped his heart about. Albeit all this while he durst not kiss or caress her, save very measurely, for he deemed that she would not suffer it; nor as yet would he ask her wherefore, though he had it in his mind that he would not always forbear to ask her.

Many days they rode that pass of the mountains, though it was not always so evil and dreadful as at the first beginning; for now again the pass opened out into little valleys, wherein was foison of grass and sweet waters withal, and a few trees. In such places must they needs rest them, to refresh their horses as well as themselves, and to gather food, of venison, and wild-fruit and nuts.  But abiding in such vales was very pleasant to them.

At last these said valleys came often and oftener, till it was so that all was pretty much one valley, whiles broken by a mountain neck, whiles straitened by a ness of the mountains that jutted into it, but never quite blind:  yet was the said valley very high up, and as it were a trench of the great mountain. So they were glad that they had escaped from that strait prison betwixt the rock-walls, and were well at ease: and they failed never to find the tokens that led them on the way, even as they had learned of the Sage, so that they were not beguiled into any straying.

And now they had worn away thirty days since they had parted from the Sage, and the days began to shorten and the nights to lengthen apace; when on the forenoon of a day, after they had ridden a very rugged mountain-neck, they came down and down into a much wider valley into which a great reef of rocks thrust out from the high mountain, so that the northern half of the said vale was nigh cleft atwain by it; well grassed was the vale, and a fair river ran through it, and there were on either side the water great groves of tall and great sweet-chestnuts and walnut trees, whereon the nuts were now ripe. They rejoiced as they rode into it; for they remembered how the Sage had told them thereof, that their travel and toil should be stayed there awhile, and that there they should winter, because of the bread which they could make them of the chestnuts, and the plenty of walnuts, and that withal there was foison of venison.

So they found a ford of the river and crossed it, and went straight to the head of the rocky ness, being shown thither by the lore of the Sage, and they found in the face of the rock the mouth of a cavern, and beside it the token of the sword and the branch.  Therefore they knew that they had come to their winter house, and they rejoiced thereat, and without more ado they got off their horses and went into the cavern. The entry thereof was low, so that they must needs creep into it, but within it was a rock-hall, high, clean and sweet-smelling.

There then they dight their dwelling, doing all they might to be done with their work before the winter was upon them. The day after they had come there they fell to on the in-gathering of their chestnut harvest, and they dried them, and made them into meal; and the walnuts they gathered also.  Withal they hunted the deer, both great and small; amongst which Ralph, not without some peril, slew two great bears, of which beasts, indeed, there was somewhat more than enough, as they came into the dale to feed upon the nuts and the berry-trees. So they soon had good store of peltries for their beds and their winter raiment, which Ursula fell to work on deftly, for she knew all the craft of needlework; and, shortly to tell it, they had enough and to spare of victual and raiment.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_12]

CHAPTER 12

Winter Amidst of the Mountains

In all this they had enough to be busy with, so that time hung not heavy on their hands, and the shadow of the Quest was nowise burdensome to them, since they wotted that they had to abide the wearing of the days till spring was come with fresh tidings. Their labour was nowise irksome to them, since Ralph was deft in all manner of sports and crafts, such as up-country folk follow, and though he were a king's son, he had made a doughty yeoman: and as for Ursula, she also was country-bred, of a lineage of field-folk, and knew all the manners of the fields.

Withal in whatsoever way it were, they loved each other dearly, and all kind of speech flowed freely betwixt them. Sooth to say, Ralph, taking heed of Ursula, deemed that she were fain to love him bodily, and he wotted well by now, that, whatever had befallen, he loved her, body and soul. Yet still was that fear of her naysay lurking in his heart, if he should kiss her, or caress her, as a man with a maid. Therefore he forbore, though desire of her tormented him grievously at whiles.

They wore their armour but little now, save when they were about some journey wherein was peril of wild beasts.  Ursula had dight her some due woman's raiment betwixt her knight's surcoat and doe-skins which they had gotten, so that it was not unseemly of fashion.  As for their horses, they but seldom backed them, but used them to draw stuff to their rock-house on sledges, which they made of tree-boughs; so that the beasts grew fat, feeding on the grass of the valley and the wild-oats withal, which grew at the upper end of the bight of the valley, toward the northern mountains, where the ground was sandy. No man they saw, nor any signs of man, nor had they seen any save the Sage, since those riders of Utterbol had vanished before them into the night.

So wore autumn into winter, and the frost came, and the snow, with prodigious winds from out of the mountains: yet was not the weather so hard but that they might go forth most days, and come to no hurt if they were wary of the drifts; and forsooth needs must they go abroad to take venison for their livelihood.

So the winter wore also amidst sweet speech and friendliness betwixt the two, and they lived still as dear friends, and not as lovers.

Seldom they spoke of the Quest, for it seemed to them now a matter over great for speech.  But now they were grown so familiar each to each that Ursula took heart to tell Ralph more of the tidings of Utterbol, for now the shame and grief of her bondage there was but as a story told of another, so far away seemed that time from this. But so grievous was her tale that Ralph grew grim thereover, and he said: "By St. Nicholas! it were a good deed, once we are past the mountains again, to ride to Utterbol and drag that swine and wittol from his hall and slay him, and give his folk a good day.  But then there is thou, my friend, and how shall I draw thee into deadly strife?"

"Nay," she said, "whereso thou ridest thither will I, and one fate shall lie on us both.  We will think thereof and ask the Sage of it when we return. Who knows what shall have befallen then?  Remember the lighting of the candle of Utterbol that we saw from the Rock-sea, and the boding thereof." So Ralph was appeased for that time.

Oft also they spake of the little lands whence they came, and on a time amidst of such talk Ursula said:  "But alas, friend, why do I speak of all this, when now save for my brother, who loveth me but after a fashion, to wit that I must in all wise do his bidding, lad as he is, I have no longer kith nor kin there, save again as all the folk of one stead are somewhat akin. I think, my dear, that I have no country, nor any house to welcome me."

Said Ralph:  "All lands, any land that thou mayst come to, shall welcome thee, and I shall look to it that so it shall be." And in his heart he thought of the welcome of Upmeads, and of Ursula sitting on the dais of the hall of the High-House.

So wore the days till Candlemass, when the frost broke and the snows began to melt, and the waters came down from the mountains, so that the river rose over its banks and its waters covered the plain parts of the valley, and those two could go dryshod but a little way out of their cavern; no further than the green mound or toft which lay at the mouth thereof: but the waters were thronged with fowl, as mallard and teal and coots, and of these they took what they would.  Whiles also they waded the shallows of the flood, and whiles poled a raft about it, and so had pleasure of the waters as before they had had of the snow. But when at last the very spring was come, and the grass began to grow after the showers had washed the plain of the waterborne mud, and the snowdrop had thrust up and blossomed, and the celandine had come, and then when the blackthorn bloomed and the Lent-lilies hid the grass betwixt the great chestnut-boles, when the sun shone betwixt the showers and the west wind blew, and the throstles and blackbirds ceased not their song betwixt dawn and dusk, then began Ralph to say to himself, that even if the Well at the World's End were not, and all that the Sage had told them was but a tale of Swevenham, yet were all better than well if Ursula were but to him a woman beloved rather than a friend. And whiles he was pensive and silent, even when she was by him, and she noted it and forbore somewhat the sweetness of her glances, and the caressing of her soft speech:  though oft when he looked on her fondly, the blood would rise to her cheeks, and her bosom would heave with the thought of his desire, which quickened hers so sorely, that it became a pain and grief to her.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_13]

CHAPTER 13

Of Ursula and the Bear

It befell on a fair sunny morning of spring, that Ralph sat alone on the toft by the rock-house, for Ursula had gone down the meadow to disport her and to bathe in the river.  Ralph was fitting the blade of a dagger to a long ashen shaft, to make him a strong spear; for with the waxing spring the bears were often in the meadows again; and the day before they had come across a family of the beasts in the sandy bight under the mountains; to wit a carle, and a quean with her cubs; the beasts had seen them but afar off, and whereas the men were two and the sun shone back from their weapons, they had forborne them; although they were fierce and proud in those wastes, and could not away with creatures that were not of their kind. So because of this Ralph had bidden Ursula not to fare abroad without her sword, which was sharp and strong, and she no weakling withal. He bethought him of this just as he had made an end of his spear-shaping, so therewith he looked aside and saw the said sword hanging to a bough of a little quicken-tree, which grew hard by the door. Fear came into his heart therewith, so he arose and strode down over the meadow hastily bearing his new spear, and girt with his sword. Now there was a grove of chestnuts betwixt him and the river, but on the other side of them naught but the green grass down to the water's edge.

Sure enough as he came under the trees he heard a shrill cry, and knew that it could be naught save Ursula; so he ran thitherward whence came the cry, shouting as he ran, and was scarce come out of the trees ere he saw Ursula indeed, mother-naked, held in chase by a huge bear as big as a bullock:  he shouted again and ran the faster; but even therewith, whether she heard and saw him, and hoped for timely help, or whether she felt her legs failing her, she turned on the bear, and Ralph saw that she had a little axe in her hand wherewith she smote hardily at the beast; but he, after the fashion of his kind, having risen to his hind legs, fenced with his great paws like a boxer, and smote the axe out of her hand, and she cried out bitterly and swerved from him and fell a running again; but the bear tarried not, and would have caught her in a few turns; but even therewith was Ralph come up, who thrust the beast into the side with his long-headed spear, and not waiting to pull it out again, drew sword in a twinkling, and smote a fore-paw off him and then drave the sword in over the shoulder so happily that it reached his heart, and he fell over dead with a mighty thump.

Then Ralph looked around for Ursula; but she had already run back to the river-side and was casting her raiment on her; so he awaited her beside the slain bear, but with drawn sword, lest the other bear should come upon them; for this was the he-bear. Howbeit he saw naught save presently Ursula all clad and coming towards him speedily; so he turned toward her, and when they met he cast himself upon her without a word, and kissed her greedily; and she forbore not at all, but kissed and caressed him as if she could never be satisfied.

So at last they drew apart a little, and walked quietly toward the rock-house hand in hand.  And on the way she told him that even as she came up on to the bank from the water she saw the bear coming down on her as fast as he could drive, and so she but caught up her axe, and ran for it:  "Yet I had little hope, dear friend," she said, "but that thou shouldst be left alone in the wilderness." And therewith she turned on him and cast her arms about him again, all weeping for joy of their two lives.

Thus slowly they came before the door of their rock-house and Ralph said: "Let us sit down here on the grass, and if thou art not over wearied with the flight and the battle, I will ask thee a question." She laid herself down on the grass with a sigh, yet it was as of one who sighs for pleasure and rest, and said, as he sat down beside her: "I am fain to rest my limbs and my body, but my heart is at rest; so ask on, dear friend."

The song of birds was all around them, and the scent of many blossoms went past on the wings of the west wind, and Ralph was silent a little as he looked at the loveliness of his friend; then he said:  "This is the question; of what kind are thy kisses this morning, are they the kisses of a friend or a lover? Wilt thou not called me beloved and not friend?  Shall not we two lie on the bridal bed this same night?"

She looked on him steadily, smiling, but for love and sweetness, not for shame and folly; then she said:  "O, dear friend and dearest lover, three questions are these and not one; but I will answer all three as my heart biddeth me. And first, I will tell thee that my kisses are as thine; and if thine are aught but the kisses of love, then am I befooled. And next, I say that if thou wilt be my friend indeed, I will not spare to call thee beloved, or to be all thy friend. But as to thy third question; tell me, is there not time enough for that?"

She faltered as she spake, but he said:  "Look, beloved, and see how fair the earth is to-day! What place and what season can be goodlier than this? And were it not well that we who love each other should have our full joy out of this sweet season, which as now is somewhat marred by our desire?"

"Ah, beloved!" she said, looking shyly at him, "is it so marred by that which marreth not us?"

"Hearken!" he said; "how much longer shall this fairness and peace, and our leisure and safety endure?  Here and now the earth rejoiceth about us, and there is none to say us nay; but to-morrow it may all be otherwise. Bethink thee, dear, if but an hour ago the monster had slain thee, and rent thee ere we had lain in each other's arms!"

"Alas!" she said, "and had I lain in thine arms an hundred times, or an hundred times an hundred, should not the world be barren to me, wert thou gone from it, and that could never more be? But thou friend, thou well-beloved, fain were I to do thy will that thou mightest be the happier...and I withal. And if thou command it, be it so!  Yet now should I tell thee all my thought, and it is on my mind, that for a many hundreds of years, yea, while our people were yet heathen, when a man should wed a maid all the folk knew of it, and were witnesses of the day and the hour thereof:  now thou knowest that the time draws nigh when we may look for those messengers of the Innocent Folk, who come every spring to this cave to see if there be any whom they may speed on the way to the Well at the World's End.  Therefore if thou wilt (and not otherwise) I would abide their coming if it be not over long delayed; so that there may be others to witness our wedding besides God, and those his creatures who dwell in the wilderness. Yet shall all be as thou wilt."

"How shall I not do after thy bidding?" said Ralph. "I will abide their coming:  yet would that they were here to-day! And one thing I will pray of thee, that because of them thou wilt not forbear, or cause me to forbear, such kissing and caressing as is meet betwixt troth-plight lovers."

She laughed and said:  "Nay, why should I torment thee...or me? We will not tarry for this."  And therewith she took her arm about his neck and kissed him oft.

Then they said naught awhile, but sat listening happily to the song of the pairing birds.  At last Ralph said: "What was it, beloved, that thou wert perchance to tell me concerning the thing that caused thine heart to see that thy betrothed, for whom thou wepst or seemedst to weep at the ale-house at Bourton Abbas, was of no avail to thee?"

She said:  "It was the sight of thee; and I thought also how I might never be thine.  For that I have sorrowed many a time since."

Said Ralph:  "I am young and unmighty, yet lo! I heal thy sorrow as if I were an exceeding mighty man. And now I tell thee that I am minded to go back with thee to Upmeads straightway; for love will prevail."

"Nay," she said, "that word is but from the teeth outwards; for thou knowest, as I do, that the perils of the homeward road shall overcome us, despite of love, if we have not drunk of the Well at the World's End."

Again they were silent awhile, but anon she arose to her feet and said: "Now must I needs dight victual for us twain; but first" (and she smiled on him withal), "how is it that thou hast not asked me if the beast did me any hurt?  Art thou grown careless of me, now the wedding is so nigh?"

He said:  "Nay, but could I not see thee that thou wert not hurt? There was no mark of blood upon thee, nor any stain at all." Then she reddened, and said:  "Ah, I forgot how keen-eyes thou art." And she stood silent a little while, as he looked on her and loved her sweetness.  Then he said:  "I am exceeding full of joy, but my body is uneasy; so I will now go and skin that troll who went so nigh to slay thee, and break up the carcase, if thou wilt promise to abide about the door of the house, and have thy sword and the spear ready to hand, and to don thine helm and hauberk to boot."

She laughed and said:  "That were but strange attire for a cook-maid, Ralph, my friend; yet shall I do thy will, my lord and my love."

Then went Ralph into the cave, and brought forth the armour and did it on her, and kissed her, and so went his ways to the carcase of the bear, which lay some two furlongs from their dwelling; and when he came to the quarry he fell to work, and was some time about it, so huge as the beast was. Then he hung the skin and the carcase on a tree of the grove, and went down to the river and washed him, and then went lightly homewards.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_14]

CHAPTER 14

Now Come the Messengers of the Innocent Folk

But when he had come forth from the chestnut-grove, and could see the face of their house-rock clearly, he beheld new tidings; for there were folk before the door of the dwelling, and Ursula was standing amidst of them, for he could see the gleam of her armour; and with the men he could see also certain beasts of burden, and anon that these were oxen.  So he hastened on to find what this might mean, and drew his sword as he went. But when he came up to the rock, he found there two young men and an elder, and they had with them five oxen, three for riding, and two sumpter beasts, laden:  and Ursula and these men were talking together friendly; so that Ralph deemed that the new-comers must be the messengers of the Innocent Folk. They were goodly men all three, somewhat brown of skin, but well fashioned, and of smiling cheerful countenance, well knit, and tall.  The elder had a long white beard, but his eye was bright, and his hand firm and smooth. They were all clad in white woollen raiment, and bore no armour, but each had an axe with a green stone blade, curiously tied to the heft, and each of the young men carried a strong bow and a quiver of arrows.

Ralph greeted the men, and bade them sit down on the toft and eat a morsel; they took his greeting kindly, and sat down, while Ursula went into the cave to fetch them matters for their victual, and there was already venison roasting at the fire on the toft, in the place where they were wont to cook their meat. So then came Ursula forth from the cave, and served the new-comers and Ralph of such things as she had, and they ate and drank together; and none said aught of their errand till they had done their meat, but they talked together pleasantly about the spring, and the blossoms of the plain and the mountain, and the wild things that dwelt thereabout.

But when the meal was over, the new-comers rose to their feet, and bowed before Ralph and Ursula, and the elder took up the word and said: "Ye fair people, have ye any errand in the wilderness, or are ye chance-comers who have strayed thus far, and know not how to return?"

"Father," said Ralph, "we have come a long way on an errand of life or death; for we seek the WELL at the WORLD'S END. And see ye the token thereof, the pair of beads which we bear, either of us, and the fashion whereof ye know."

Then the elder bowed to them again, and said:  "It is well; then is this our errand with you, to be your way-leaders as far as the House of the Sorceress, where ye shall have other help. Will ye set out on the journey to-day? In one hour shall we be ready."

"Nay," said Ralph, "we will not depart till tomorrow morn, if it may be so. Therewith I bid you sit down and rest you, while ye hearken a word which I have to say to you."

So they sat down again, and Ralph arose and took Ursula by the hand, and stood with her before the elder, and said: "This maiden, who is my fellow-farer in the Quest, I desire to wed this same night, and she also desireth me: therefore I would have you as witnesses hereto. But first ye shall tell us if our wedding and the knowing each other carnally shall be to our hurt in the Quest; for if that be so, then shall we bridle our desires and perform our Quest in their despite."

The old man smiled upon them kindly, and said:  "Nay, son, we hear not that it shall be the worse for you in any wise that ye shall become one flesh; and right joyful it is to us, not only that we have found folk who seek to the Well at the World's End, but also that there is such love as I perceive there is betwixt such goodly and holy folk as ye be. For hither we come year by year according to the behest that we made to the fairest woman of the world, when she came back to us from the Well at the World's End, and it is many and many a year ago since we found any seekers after the Well dwelling here.  Therefore have we the more joy in you. And we have brought hither matters good for you, as raiment, and meal, and wine, on our sumpter-beasts; therefore as ye have feasted us this morning, so shall we feast you this even. And if ye will, we shall build for you in the grove yonder such a bower as we build for our own folk on the night of the wedding."

Ralph yeasaid this, and thanked them.  So then the elder cried: "Up, my sons, and show your deftness to these dear friends!" Then the young men arose, naught loth, and when they had hoppled their oxen and taken the burdens from off them, they all went down the meadow together into the chestnut grove, and they fell to and cut willow boughs, and such-like wood, and drave stakes and wove the twigs together; and Ralph and Ursula worked with them as they bade, and they were all very merry together: because for those two wanderers it was a great delight to see the faces of the children of men once more after so many months, and to hold converse with them; while for their part the young men marvelled at Ursula's beauty, and the pith and goodliness of Ralph.

By then it was nigh evening they had made a very goodly wattled bower, and roofed it with the skins that were in the cave, and hung it about with garlands, and strewn flowers on the floor thereof. And when all was done they went back to the toft before the rock-chamber, where the elder had opened the loads, and had taken meal thence, and was making cakes at the fire. And there was wine there in well-hooped kegs, and wooden cups fairly carven, and raiment of fine white wool for those twain, broidered in strange but beauteous fashion with the feathers of bright-hued birds.

So then were those twain arrayed for the bridal; and the meat was dight and the cups filled, and they sat down on the grassy toft a little before sunset, and feasted till the night was come, and was grown all light with the moon; and then Ralph rose up, and took Ursula's hand, and they stood before the elder, and bade him and the young men bear witness that they were wedded: then those twain kissed the newcomers and departed to their bridal bower hand in hand through the freshness of the night.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_15]

CHAPTER 15

They Come to the Land of the Innocent Folk

When it was morning they speedily gat them ready for the road, whereas they had little to take with them; so they departed joyously, howbeit both Ralph and Ursula felt rather love than loathing for their winter abode.  The day was yet young when they went their ways. Their horses and all their gear were a great wonder to the young men, for they had seen no such beasts before:  but the elder said that once in his young days he had led a man to the Well who was riding a horse and was clad in knightly array.

So they went by ways which were nowise dreadful, though they were void of men-folk, and in three days' time they were come out of the mountains, and in three more the said mountains were to behold but a cloud behind them, and the land was grown goodly, with fair valleys and little hills, though still they saw no men, and forsooth they went leisurely, for oxen are but slow-going nags. But when they were gone eight days from the Valley of Sweet-chestnuts, they came across a flock of uncouth-looking sheep on a green hill-side, and four folk shepherding them, two carles to wit, and two queans, like to their way-leaders, but scarce so goodly, and ruder of raiment. These men greeted them kindly, and yet with more worship than fellowship, and they marvelled exceedingly at their horses and weapons. Thence they passed on, and the next day came into a wide valley, well-grassed and watered, and wooded here and there; moreover there were cots scattered about it.  There and thenceforth they met men a many, both carles and queans, and sheep and neat in plenty, and they passed by garths wherein the young corn was waxing, and vineyards on the hillsides, where the vines were beginning to grow green. The land seemed as goodly as might be, and all the folk they met were kind, if somewhat over reverent.

On the evening of that day they came into the town of that folk, which was but simple, wholly unfenced for war, and the houses but low, and not great.  Yet was there naught of filth or famine, nor any poverty or misery; and the people were merry-faced and well-liking, and clad goodly after their fashion in white woollen cloth or frieze. All the people of the town were come forth to meet them, for runners had gone before them, and they stood on either side of the way murmuring greetings, and with their heads bent low in reverence.

Thus rode Ralph and Ursula up to the door of the Temple, or Mote-house, or Guest-house, for it was all these, a house great, and as fair as they knew how to make it. Before the door thereof were standing the elders of the Folk; and when they drew rein, the eldest and most reverend of these came forth and spake in a cheerful voice, yet solemnly: "Welcome and thrice welcome to the Seekers after length of days and happy times, and the loving-kindness of the Folks of the Earth!"

Then all the elders gathered about them, and bade them light down and be at rest amongst them, and they made much of them and brought them into the Mote-house, where-in were both women and men fair and stately, and the men took Ralph by the hand and the women Ursula, and brought them into chambers where they bathed them and did off their wayfaring raiment, and clad them in white woollen gowns of web exceeding fine, and fragrant withal. Then they crowned them with flowers, and led them back into the hall, whereas now was much folk gathered, and they set them down on a dais as though they had been kings, or rather gods; and when they beheld them there so fair and lovely, they cried out for joy of them, and bade them hail oft and oft.

There then were they feasted by that kind folk, and when meat was done certain youths and maidens fell to singing songs very sweetly; and the words of the songs were simple and harmless, and concerning the fairness of the earth and the happy loves of the creatures that dwell therein.

Thereafter as the night aged, they were shown to a sleeping chamber, which albeit not richly decked, or plenished with precious things, was most dainty clean, and sweet smelling, and strewn with flowers, so that the night was sweet to them in a chamber of love.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_16]

CHAPTER 16

They Come to the House of the Sorceress

On the morrow the kind people delayed them little, though they sorrowed for their departure, and before noon were their old way-leaders ready for them; and the old man and his two grandsons (for such they were) were much honoured of the simple people for their way-leading of the Heavenly Folk; for so they called Ralph and Ursula. So they gat them to the way in suchlike guise as before, only they had with them five sumpter oxen instead of two; for the old man told them that not only was their way longer, but also they must needs pass through a terrible waste, wherein was naught for their avail, neither man, nor beast, nor herb. Even so they found it as he said; for after the first day's ride from the town they came to the edge of this same waste, and on the fourth day were deep in the heart of it: a desert it was, rather rocky and stony and sandy than mountainous, though they had hills to cross also: withal there was but little water there, and that foul and stinking. Long lasted this waste, and Ralph thought indeed that it had been hard to cross, had not their way-leaders been; therefore he made marks and signs by the wayside, and took note of the bearings of rocks and mounds against the day of return.

Twelve days they rode this waste, and on the thirteenth it began to mend somewhat, and there was a little grass, and sweet waters, and they saw ahead the swelling hills of a great woodland, albeit they had to struggle through marshland and low scrubby thicket for a day longer, or ever they got to the aforesaid trees, which at first were naught but pines; but these failed in a while, and they rode a grass waste nearly treeless, but somewhat well watered, where they gat them good store of venison. Thereafter they came on woods of oak and sweet-chestnut, with here and there a beech-wood.

Long and long they rode the woodland, but it was hard on May when they entered it, and it was pleasant therein, and what with one thing, what with another, they had abundant livelihood there. Yet was June at its full when at last they came within sight of the House of the Sorceress, on the hottest of a fair afternoon. And it was even as Ralph had seen it pictured in the arras of the hall of the Castle of Abundance; a little house built after the fashion of houses in his own land of the west; the thatch was trim, and the windows and doors were unbroken, and the garth was whole, and the goats feeding therein, and the wheat was tall and blossoming in the little closes, where as he had looked to see all broken down and wild, and as to the house, a mere grass-grown heap, or at the most a broken gable fast crumbling away.

Then waxed his heart sore with the memory of that passed time, and the sweetness of his short-lived love, though he refrained him all he might:  yet forsooth Ursula looked on him anxiously, so much his face was changed by the thoughts of his heart.

But the elder of the way-leaders saw that he was moved, and deemed that he was wondering at that house so trim and orderly amidst the wildwood, so he said:  "Here also do we after our behest to that marvellous and lovely Lady, that we suffer not this house to go to ruin: ever are some of our folk here, and every year about this season we send two or more to take the places of those who have dwelt in the House year-long: so ever is there someone to keep all things trim. But as to strangers, I have never in my life seen any Seeker of the Well herein, save once, and that was an old hoar man like to me, save that he was feebler in all wise than I be."

Now Ralph heard him talking, yet noted his words but little; for it was with him as if all the grief of heart which he had penned back for so long a while swelled up within him and burst its bounds; and he turned toward Ursula and their eyes met, and she looked shy and anxious on him and he might no longer refrain himself, but put his hands to his face (for they had now drawn rein at the garth-gate) and brake out a weeping, and wept long for the friend whose feet had worn that path so often, and whose heart, though she were dead, had brought them thither for their thriving; and for love and sorrow of him Ursula wept also.

But the old man and his grandsons turned their heads away from his weeping, and got off their horses, and went up to the house-door, whereby were now standing a carle and a quean of their people. But Ralph slowly gat off his horse and stood by Ursula who was on the ground already, but would not touch her, for he was ashamed. But she looked on him kindly and said:  "Dear friend, there is no need for shame; for though I be young, I know how grievous it is when the dead that we have loved come across our ways, and we may not speak to them, nor they to us.  So I will but bid thee be comforted and abide in thy love for the living and the dead." His tears brake out again at that word, for he was but young, and for a while there was a lull in the strife that had beset his days. But after a little he looked up, and dashed the tears from his eyes and smiled on Ursula and said:  "The tale she told me of this place, the sweetness of it came back upon me, and I might not forbear." She said:  "O friend, thou art kind, and I love thee."

So then they joined hands and went through the garth together, and up to the door, where stood the wardens, who, when they saw them turning thither, came speedily down the path to them, and would have knelt in worship to them; but they would not suffer it, but embraced and kissed them, and thanked them many times for their welcome.  The said wardens, both carle and quean, were goodly folk of middle age, stalwart, and kind of face.

So then they went into the house together, and entered into the self-same chamber, where of old the Lady of Abundance had sickened for fear of the Sorceress sitting naked at her spell-work.

Great joy they made together, and the wardens set meat and drink before the guests, and they ate and drank and were of good cheer. But the elder who had brought them from Chestnut-dale said: "Dear friends, I have told you that these two young men are my grand-children, and they are the sons of this man and woman whom ye see; for the man is my son.  And so it is, that amongst us the care of the Quest of the Well at the World's End hath for long been the heritage of our blood, going with us from father to son. Therefore is it naught wonderful, though I have been sundry times at this house, and have learned about the place all that may be learned.  For my father brought me hither when I was yet a boy; that time it was that I saw the last man of whom we know for sure that he drank of the Water of the Well, and he was that old hoar man like unto me, but, as I said, far weaker in all wise; but when he came back to us from the Well he was strong and stalwart, and a better man than I am now; and I heard him tell his name to my father, that he was called the Sage of Swevenham."

Ralph looked on Ursula and said:  "Yea, father, and it was through him that we had our lore concerning the way hither; and it was he that bade us abide your coming in the rock-house of the Vale of Sweet-chestnuts."

"Then he is alive still," said the elder.  Said Ralph: "Yea, and as fair and strong an old man as ye may lightly see." "Yea, yea," said the elder, "and yet fifty years ago his course seemed run."

Then said Ralph:  "Tell me, father, have none of your own folk sought to the Well at the World's End?"  "Nay, none," said the elder. Said Ralph:  "That is strange, whereas ye are so nigh thereto, and have such abundant lore concerning the way."

"Son," said the elder, "true it is that the water of that Well shall cause a man to thrive in all ways, and to live through many generations of men, maybe, in honour and good-liking; but it may not keep any man alive for ever; for so have the Gods given us the gift of death lest we weary of life. Now our folk live well and hale, and without the sickness and pestilence, such as I have heard oft befall folk in other lands: even as I heard the Sage of Swevenham say, and I wondered at his words.  Of strife and of war also we know naught: nor do we desire aught which we may not easily attain to. Therefore we live long, and we fear the Gods if we should strive to live longer, lest they should bring upon us war and sickness, and over-weening desire, and weariness of life. Moreover it is little that all of us should seek to the Well at the World's End; and those few that sought and drank should be stronger and wiser than the others, and should make themselves earthly gods, and, maybe, should torment the others of us and make their lives a very burden to be borne. Of such matters are there tales current amongst us that so it hath been of yore and in other lands; and ill it were if such times came back upon us."

Ralph hung his head and was silent; for the joy of the Quest seemed dying out as the old man's words dropped slowly from his mouth. But he smiled upon Ralph and went on:  "But for you, guests, it is otherwise, for ye of the World beyond the Mountains are stronger and more godlike than we, as all tales tell; and ye wear away your lives desiring that which ye may scarce get; and ye set your hearts on high things, desiring to be masters of the very Gods.  Therefore ye know sickness and sorrow, and oft ye die before your time, so that ye must depart and leave undone things which ye deem ye were born to do; which to all men is grievous.  And because of all this ye desire healing and thriving, whether good come of it, or ill. Therefore ye do but right to seek to the Well at the World's End, that ye may the better accomplish that which behoveth you, and that ye may serve your fellows and deliver them from the thralldom of those that be strong and unwise and unkind, of whom we have heard strange tales."

Ralph reddened as he spake, and Ursula looked on him anxiously, but that talk dropped for the present, and they fell to talking of lighter and more familiar matters.

Thereafter they wandered about the woods with the wardens and the way-leaders, and the elder brought them to the ancient altar in the wood whereon the Sorceress had offered up the goat; and the howe of the woman dight with the necklace of the Quest whom the Lady found dead in the snow; and the place nigh the house where the Sorceress used to torment her thrall that was afterwards the Lady of Abundance; yea, and they went further afield till they came to the Vale of Lore, and the Heath above it where they met, the King's Son and the Lady. All these and other places were now become as hallowed ground to the Innocent People, and to Ralph no less. In the house, moreover, was a fair ark wherein they kept matters which had belonged to the Lady, as her shoes and her smock, wrapped in goodly cloth amidst well-smelling herbs; and these things they worshipped as folk do with relics of the saints. In another ark also they showed the seekers a book wherein was written lore concerning the Well, and the way thereto. But of this book had the Sage forewarned Ralph and his mate, and had bidden them look to it that they should read in it, and no otherwhere than at that ancient altar in the wood, they two alone, and clad in such-like gear as they wore when they hearkened to his reading by his hermitage. And so it was that they found the due raiment in the ark along with the book.  Therefore day after day betimes in the morning they bore the said book to the altar and read therein, till they had learned much wisdom.

Thus they did for eight days, and on the ninth they rested and were merry with their hosts:  but on the tenth day they mounted their horses and said farewell, and departed by the ways they had learned of, they two alone. And they had with them bread and meal, as much as they might bear, and water-skins moreover, that they might fill them at the last sweet water before they came to the waterless desert.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_17]

CHAPTER 17

They Come Through the Woodland to the Thirsty Desert

So they ride their ways, and when they were come well into the wildwood past the house, and had spoken but few words to each other, Ralph put forth his hand, and stayed Ursula, and they gat off their horses under a great-limbed oak, and did off their armour, and sat down on the greensward there, and loved each other dearly, and wept for joy of their pain and travail and love.  And afterwards, as they sat side by side leaning up against the great oak-bole, Ralph spake and said: "Now are we two once again all alone in the uttermost parts of the earth, and belike we are not very far from the Well at the World's End; and now I have bethought me that if we gain that which we seek for, and bear back our lives to our own people, the day may come when we are grown old, for as young as we may seem, that we shall be as lonely then as we are this hour, and that the folk round about us shall be to us as much and no more than these trees and the wild things that dwell amongst them."

She looked on him and laughed as one over-happy, and said: "Thou runnest forward swiftly to meet trouble, beloved! But I say that well will it be in those days if I love the folk then as well as now I love these trees and the wild things whose house they are."

And she rose up therewith and threw her arms about the oak-bole and kissed its ruggedness, while Ralph as he lay kissed the sleekness of her feet. And there came a robin hopping over the leaves anigh them, for in that wood most of the creatures, knowing not man, were tame to him, and feared the horses of those twain more than their riders. And now as Ursula knelt to embrace Ralph with one hand, she held out the other to the said robin who perched on her wrist, and sat there as a hooded falcon had done, and fell to whistling his sweet notes, as if he were a-talking to those new-comers: then Ursula gave him a song-reward of their broken meat, and he flew up and perched on her shoulder, and nestled up against her cheek, and she laughed happily and said: "Lo you, sweet, have not the wild things understood my words, and sent this fair messenger to foretell us all good?"

"It is good," said Ralph laughing, "yet the oak-tree hath not spoken yet, despite of all thy kissing:  and lo there goes thy friend the robin, now thou hast no more meat to give him."

"He is flying towards the Well at the World's End," she said, "and biddeth us onward:  let us to horse and hasten: for if thou wilt have the whole truth concerning my heart, it is this, that some chance-hap may yet take thee from me ere thou hast drunk of the waters of the Well."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and in the innermost of my heart lieth the fear that mayhappen there is no Well, and no healing in it if we find it, and that death, and the backward way may yet sunder us. This is the worst of my heart, and evil is my coward fear."

But she cast her arms about him and kissed and caressed him, and cried out: "Yea, then fair have been the days of our journeying, and fair this hour of the green oak!  And bold and true thine heart that hath led thee thus far, and won thee thy desire of my love."

So then they armed them, and mounted their horses and set forward. They lived well while they were in the wood, but on the third day they came to where it thinned and at last died out into a stony waste like unto that which they had passed through before they came to the House of the Sorceress, save that this lay in ridges as the waves of a great sea; and these same ridges they were bidden to cross over at their highest, lest they should be bewildered in a maze of little hills and dales leading no whither.

So they entered on this desert, having filled their water-skins at a clear brook, whereat they rejoiced when they found that the face of the wilderness was covered with a salt scurf, and that naught grew there save a sprinkling of small sage bushes.

Now on the second day of their riding this ugly waste, as they came up over the brow of one of these stony ridges, Ralph the far-sighted cried out suddenly:  "Hold! for I see a man weaponed."

"Where is he?" quoth Ursula, "and what is he about?" Said Ralph:  "He is up yonder on the swell of the next ridge, and by seeming is asleep leaning against a rock."

Then he bent the Turk bow and set an arrow on the string and they went on warily.  When they were down at the foot of the ridge Ralph hailed the man with a lusty cry, but gat no answer of him; so they went on up the bent, till Ralph said:  "Now I can see his face under his helm, and it is dark and the eyes are hollow: I will off horse and go up to him afoot, but do thou, beloved, sit still in thy saddle."

But when he had come nigher, he turned and cried out to her: "The man is dead, come anigh."  So she went up to him and dismounted, and they both together stood over the man, who was lying up against a big stone like one at rest.  How long he had lain there none knows but God; for in the saltness of the dry desert the flesh had dried on his bones without corrupting, and was as hardened leather. He was in full armour of a strange and ancient fashion, and his sword was girt to his side, neither was there any sign of a wound about him. Under a crag anigh him they found his horse, dead and dry like to himself; and a little way over the brow of the ridge another horse in like case; and close by him a woman whose raiment had not utterly perished, nor her hair; there were gold rings on her arms, and her shoes were done with gold: she had a knife stuck in her breast, with her hand still clutching the handle thereof; so that it seemed that she had herself given herself death.

Ralph and Ursula buried these two with the heaping of stones and went their ways; but some two miles thence they came upon another dead man-at-arms, and near him an old man unweaponed, and they heaped stones on them.

Thereabout night overtook them, and it was dark, so they lay down in the waste, and comforted each other, and slept two or three hours, but arose with the first glimmer of dawn, and mounted and rode forth onward, that they might the sooner be out of that deadly desert, for fear clung to their hearts.

This day, forsooth, they found so many dead folk, that they might not stay to bury them, lest they themselves should come to lie there lacking burial. So they made all the way they might, and rode on some hours by starlight after the night was come, for it was clear and cold.  So that at last they were so utterly wearied that they lay down amongst those dead folk, and slept soundly.

On the morrow morn Ralph awoke and saw Ursula sleeping peacefully as he deemed, and he looked about on the dreary desert and its dead men and saw no end to it, though they lay on the top of one of those stony bents; and he said softly to himself:  "Will it end at all then? Surely all this people of the days gone by were Seekers of the Well as we be; and have they belike turned back from somewhere further on, and might not escape the desert despite of all?  Shall we turn now: shall we turn? surely we might get into the kindly wood from here."

So he spake; but Ursula sat up (for she was not asleep) and said: "The perils of the waste being abundant and exceeding hard to face, would not the Sage or his books have told us of the most deadly?" Said Ralph:  "Yet here are all these dead, and we were not told of them, nevertheless we have seen the token on the rocks oft-times yesterday, so we are yet in the road, unless all this hath been but a snare and a betrayal."

She shook her head, and was silent a little; then she said: "Ralph, my lad, didst thou see this token (and she set hand to the beads about her neck) on any of those dead folk yesterday?" "Nay," said Ralph, "though sooth to say I looked for it." "And I in likewise," she said; "for indeed I had misgivings as the day grew old; but now I say, let us on in the faith of that token and the kindness of the Sage, and the love of the Innocent People; yea, and thy luck, O lad of the green fields far away, that hath brought thee unscathed so far from Upmeads."

So they mounted and rode forth, and saw more and more of the dead folk; and ever and anon they looked to them to note if they wore the beads like to them but saw none so dight.  Then Ursula said: "Yea, why should the Sage and the books have told us aught of these dead bodies, that are but as the plenishing of the waste; like to the flowers that are cast down before the bier of a saint on a holy-day to be trodden under foot by the churls and the vicars of the close. Forsooth had they been alive now, with swords to smite withal, and hands to drag us into captivity, it had been another matter: but against these I feel bold."

Ralph sighed, and said:  "Yea, but even if we die not in the waste, yet this is piteous; so many lives passed away, so many hopes slain."

"Yea," she said; "but do not folk die there in the world behind us? I have seen sights far worser than this at Utterbol, little while as I was there.  Moreover I can note that this army of dead men has not come all in one day or one year, but in a long, long while, by one and two and three; for hast thou not noted that their raiment and wargear both, is of many fashions, and some much more perished than other, long as things last in this Dry Waste?  I say that men die as in the world beyond, but here we see them as they lie dead, and have lain for so long."

He said:  "I fear neither the Waste nor the dead men if thou fearest not, beloved:  but I lament for these poor souls."

"And I also," said she; "therefore let us on, that we may come to those whose grief we may heal."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_18]

CHAPTER 18

They Come to the Dry Tree

Presently as they rode they had before them one of the greatest of those land-waves, and they climbed it slowly, going afoot and leading their horses; but when they were but a little way from the brow they saw, over a gap thereof, something, as it were huge horns rising up into the air beyond the crest of the ridge. So they marvelled, and drew their swords, and held them still awhile, misdoubting if this were perchance some terrible monster of the waste; but whereas the thing moved not at all, they plucked up heart and fared on.

So came they to the brow and looked over it into a valley, about which on all sides went the ridge, save where it was broken down into a narrow pass on the further side, so that the said valley was like to one of those theatres of the ancient Roman Folk, whereof are some to be seen in certain lands. Neither did those desert benches lack their sitters; for all down the sides of the valley sat or lay children of men; some women, but most men-folk, of whom the more part were weaponed, and some with their drawn swords in their hands. Whatever semblance of moving was in them was when the eddying wind of the valley stirred the rags of their raiment, or the long hair of the women.  But a very midmost of this dreary theatre rose up a huge and monstrous tree, whose topmost branches were even the horns which they had seen from below the hill's brow.  Leafless was that tree and lacking of twigs, and its bole upheld but some fifty of great limbs, and as they looked on it, they doubted whether it were not made by men's hands rather than grown up out of the earth. All round about the roots of it was a pool of clear water, that cast back the image of the valley-side and the bright sky of the desert, as though it had been a mirror of burnished steel. The limbs of that tree were all behung with blazoned shields and knight's helms, and swords, and spears, and axes, and hawberks; and it rose up into the air some hundred feet above the flat of the valley.

For a while they looked down silently on to this marvel then from both their lips at once came the cry THE DRY TREE. Then Ralph thrust his sword back into his sheath and said: "Meseems I must needs go down amongst them; there is naught to do us harm here; for all these are dead like the others that we saw."

Ursula turned to him with burning cheeks and sparkling eyes, and said eagerly:  "Yea, yea, let us go down, else might we chance to miss something that we ought to wot of."

Therewith she also sheathed her sword, and they went both of them down together, and that easily; for as aforesaid the slope was as if it had been cut into steps for their feet. And as they passed by the dead folk, for whom they had often to turn aside, they noted that each of the dead leathery faces was drawn up in a grin as though they had died in pain, and yet beguiled, so that all those visages looked somewhat alike, as though they had come from the workshop of one craftsman.

At last Ralph and Ursula stood on the level ground underneath the Tree, and they looked up at the branches, and down to the water at their feet; and now it seemed to them as though the Tree had verily growth in it, for they beheld its roots, that they went out from the mound or islet of earth into the water, and spread abroad therein, and seemed to waver about. So they walked around the Tree, and looked up at the shields that hung on its branches, but saw no blazon that they knew, though they were many and diverse; and the armour also and weapons were very diverse of fashion.

Now when they were come back again to the place where they had first stayed, Ralph said:  "I thirst, and so belike dost thou; and here is water good and clear; let us drink then, and so spare our water-skins, for belike the dry desert is yet long."  And therewith he knelt down that he might take of the water in the hollow of his hand. But Ursula drew him back, and cried out in terror:  "O Ralph, do it not! Seest thou not this water, that although it be bright and clear, so that we may see all the pebbles at the bottom, yet nevertheless when the wind eddies about, and lifts the skirts of our raiment, it makes no ripple on the face of the pool, and doubtless it is heavy with venom; and moreover there is no sign of the way hereabout, as at other watering-steads; O forbear, Ralph!"

Then he rose up and drew back with her but slowly and unwillingly as she deemed; and they stood together a while gazing on these marvels. But lo amidst of this while, there came a crow wheeling over the valley of the dead, and he croaked over the Dry Tree, and let himself drop down to the edge of the pool, whereby he stalked about a little after the manner of his kind.  Then he thrust his neb into the water and drank, and thereafter took wing again; but ere he was many feet off the ground he gave a grievous croak, and turning over in the air fell down stark dead close to the feet of those twain; and Ralph cried out but spake no word with meaning therein; then said Ursula:  "Yea, thus are we saved from present death." Then she looked in Ralph's face, and turned pale and said hastily: "O my friend how is it with thee?"  But she waited not for an answer, but turned her face to the bent whereby they had come down, and cried out in a loud, shrill voice:  "O Ralph, Ralph! look up yonder to the ridge whereby we left our horses; look, look! there glitters a spear and stirreth! and lo a helm underneath the spear: tarry not, let us save our horses!"

Then Ralph let a cry out from his mouth, and set off running to the side of the slope, and fell to climbing it with great strides, not heeding Ursula; but she followed close after, and scrambled up with foot and hand and knee, till she stood beside him on the top, and he looked around wildly and cried out: "Where! where are they?"

"Nowhere," she said, "it was naught but my word to draw thee from death; but praise to the saints that thou are come alive out of the accursed valley."

He seemed not to hearken, but turned about once, and beat the air with his hands, and then fell down on his back and with a great wail she cast herself upon him, for she deemed at first that he was dead. But she took a little water from one of their skins, and cast it into his face, and took a flask of cordial from her pouch, and set it to his lips, and made him drink somewhat thereof. So in a while he came to himself and opened his eyes and smiled upon her, and she took his head in her hands and kissed his cheek, and he sat up and said feebly:  "Shall we not go down into the valley? there is naught there to harm us."

"We have been down there already," she said, "and well it is that we are not both lying there now."

Then he got to his feet, and stretched himself, and yawned like one just awakened from long sleep.  But she said: "Let us to horse and begone; it is early hours to slumber, for those that are seeking the Well at the World's End."

He smiled on her again and took her hand, and she led him to his horse, and helped him till he was in the saddle and lightly she gat a-horseback, and they rode away swiftly from that evil place; and after a while Ralph was himself again, and remembered all that had happened till he fell down on the brow of the ridge. Then he praised Ursula's wisdom and valiancy till she bade him forbear lest he weary her.  Albeit she drew up close to him and kissed his face sweetly.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_19]

CHAPTER 19

They Come Out of the Thirsty Desert

Past the Valley of the Dry Tree they saw but few dead men lying about, and soon they saw never another: and, though the land was still utterly barren, and all cast up into ridges as before, yet the salt slime grew less and less, and before nightfall of that day they had done with it: and the next day those stony waves were lower; and the next again the waste was but a swelling plain, and here and there they came on patches of dwarf willow, and other harsh and scanty herbage, whereof the horses might have a bait, which they sore needed, for now was their fodder done: but both men and horses were sore athirst; for, as carefully as they had hoarded their water, there was now but little left, which they durst not drink till they were driven perforce, lest they should yet die of drought.

They journeyed long that day, and whereas the moon was up at night-tide they lay not down till she was set; and their resting place was by some low bushes, whereabout was rough grass mingled with willow-herb, whereby Ralph judged that they drew nigh to water, so or ever they slept, they and the horses all but emptied the water-skins. They heard some sort of beasts roaring in the night, but they were too weary to watch, and might not make a fire.

When Ralph awoke in the morning he cried out that he could see the woodland; and Ursula arose at his cry and looked where he pointed, and sure enough there were trees on a rising ground some two miles ahead, and beyond them, not very far by seeming, they beheld the tops of great dark mountains. On either hand moreover, nigh on their right hand, far off on their left, ran a reef of rocks, so that their way seemed to be as between two walls. And these said reefs were nowise like those that they had seen of late, but black and, as to their matter, like to the great mountains by the rock of the Fighting Man:  but as the reefs ran eastward they seemed to grow higher.

Now they mounted their horses at once and rode on; and the beasts were as eager as they were, and belike smelt the water. So when they had ridden but three miles, they saw a fair little river before them winding about exceedingly, but flowing eastward on the whole.  So they spurred on with light hearts and presently were on the banks of the said river, and its waters were crystal-clear, though its sands were black: and the pink-blossomed willow-herb was growing abundantly on the sandy shores.  Close to the water was a black rock, as big as a man, whereon was graven the sign of the way, so they knew that there was no evil in the water, wherefore they drank their fill and watered their horses abundantly, and on the further bank was there abundance of good grass. So when they had drunk their fill, for the pleasure of the cool water they waded the ford barefoot, and it was scarce above Ursula's knee. Then they had great joy to lie on the soft grass and eat their meat, while the horses tore eagerly at the herbage close to them. So when they had eaten, they rested awhile, but before they went further they despoiled them, one after other, and bathed in a pool of the river to wash the foul wilderness off them. Then again they rested and let the horses yet bite the grass, and departed not from that pleasant place till it was two hours after noon.  As they were lying there Ralph said he could hear a great roar like the sound of many waters, but very far off: but to Ursula it seemed naught but the wind waxing in the boughs of the woodland anigh them.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_20]

CHAPTER 20

They Come to the Ocean Sea

Being come to the wood they went not very far into it that day, for they were minded to rest them after the weariness of the wilderness: they feasted on a hare which Ralph shot, and made a big fire to keep off evil beasts, but none came nigh them, though they heard the voices of certain beasts as the night grew still. To be short, they slept far into the morrow's morn, and then, being refreshed, and their horses also, they rode strongly all day, and found the wood to be not very great; for before sunset they were come to its outskirts, and the mountains lay before them. These were but little like to that huge wall they had passed through on their way to Chestnut-dale, being rather great hills than mountains, grass-grown, and at their feet somewhat wooded, and by seeming not over hard to pass over.

The next day they entered them by a pass marked with the token, which led them about by a winding way till they were on the side of the biggest fell of all; so there they rested that night in a fair little hollow or dell in the mountain-side. There in the stillness of the night both Ursula, as well as Ralph, heard that roaring of a great water, and they said to each other that it must be the voice of the Sea, and they rejoiced thereat, for they had learned by the Sage and his books that they must needs come to the verge of the Ocean-Sea, which girdles the earth about. So they arose betimes on the morrow, and set to work to climb the mountain, going mostly a-foot; and the way was long, but not craggy or exceeding steep, so that in five hours' time they were at the mountain-top, and coming over the brow beheld beneath them fair green slopes besprinkled with trees, and beyond them, some three or four miles away, the blue landless sea and on either hand of them was the sea also, so that they were nigh-hand at the ending of a great ness, and there was naught beyond it; and naught to do if they missed the Well, but to turn back by the way they had come.

Now when they saw this they were exceedingly moved and they looked on one another, and each saw that the other was pale, with glistening eyes, since they were to come to the very point of their doom, and that it should be seen whether there were no such thing as the Well in all the earth, but that they had been chasing a fair-hued cloud; or else their Quest should be achieved and they should have the world before them, and they happy and mighty, and of great worship amidst all men.

Little they tarried, but gat them down the steep of the mountain, and so lower and lower till they were come to ground nigh level; and then at last it was but thus, that without any great rock-wall or girdle of marvellous and strange land, there was an end of earth, with its grass and trees and streams, and a beginning of the ocean, which stretched away changeless, and it might be for ever. Where the land ended there was but a cliff of less than an hundred feet above the eddying of the sea; and on the very point of the ness was a low green toft with a square stone set atop of it, whereon as they drew nigh they saw the token graven, yea on each face thereof.

Then they went along the edge of the cliff a mile on each side of the said toft, and then finding naught else to note, naught save the grass and the sea, they came back to that place of the token, and sat down on the grass of the toft.

It was now evening, and the sun was setting beyond them, but they could behold a kind of stair cut in the side of the cliff, and on the first step whereof was the token done; wherefore they knew that they were bidden to go down by the said stair; but it seemed to lead no whither, save straight into the sea. And whiles it came into Ralph's mind that this was naught but a mock, as if to bid the hapless seekers cast themselves down from the earth, and be done with it for ever. But in any case they might not try the adventure of that stair by the failing light, and with the night long before them. So when they had hoppled their horses, and left them to graze at their will on the sweet grass of the meadow, they laid them down behind the green toft, and, being forwearied, it was no long time ere they twain slept fast at the uttermost end of the world.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_21]

CHAPTER 21

Now They Drink of the Well at the World's End

 Ralph awoke from some foolish morning dream of Upmeads, wondering where he was, or what familiar voice had cried out his name:  then he raised himself on his elbow, and saw Ursula standing before him with flushed face and sparkling eyes, and she was looking out seaward, while she called on his name. So he sprang up and strove with the slumber that still hung about him, and as his eyes cleared he looked down, and saw that the sea, which last night had washed the face of the cliff, had now ebbed far out, and left bare betwixt the billows and the cliff some half mile of black sand, with rocks of the like hue rising out of it here and there. But just below the place where they stood, right up against the cliff, was builded by man's hand of huge stones a garth of pound, the wall whereof was some seven feet high, and the pound within the wall of forty feet space endlong and overthwart; and the said pound was filled with the waters of a spring that came forth from the face of the cliff as they deemed, though from above they might not see the issue thereof; but the water ran seaward from the pound by some way unseen, and made a wide stream through the black sand of the foreshore: but ever the great basin filled somewhat faster than it voided, so that it ran over the lip on all sides, making a thin veil over the huge ashlar-stones of the garth. The day was bright and fair with no wind, save light airs playing about from the westward ort, and all things gleamed and glittered in the sun.

Ralph stood still a moment, and then stretched abroad his arms, and with a great sob cast them round about the body of his beloved, and strained her to his bosom as he murmured about her, THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END.  But she wept for joy as she fawned upon him, and let her hands beat upon his body.

But when they were somewhat calmed of their ecstasy of joy, they made ready to go down by that rocky stair.  And first they did off their armour and other gear, and when they were naked they did on the hallowed raiment which they had out of the ark in the House of the Sorceress; and so clad gat them down the rock-hewn stair, Ralph going first, lest there should be any broken place; but naught was amiss with those hard black stones, and they came safely to a level place of the rock, whence they could see the face of the cliff, and how the waters of the Well came gushing forth from a hollow therein in a great swelling wave as clear as glass; and the sun glistened in it and made a foam-bow about its edges. But above the issue of the waters the black rock had been smoothed by man's art, and thereon was graven the Sword and the Bough, and above it these words, to wit:

YE WHO HAVE COME A LONG WAY TO LOOK UPON ME, DRINK OF ME, IF YE DEEM THAT YE BE STRONG ENOUGH IN DESIRE TO BEAR LENGTH OF DAYS: OR ELSE DRINK NOT; BUT TELL YOUR FRIENDS AND THE KINDREDS OF THE EARTH HOW YE HAVE SEEN A GREAT MARVEL.

So they looked long and wondered; and Ursula said:  "Deemest thou, my friend, that any have come thus far and forborne to drink?"

Said Ralph:  "Surely not even the exceeding wise might remember the bitterness of his wisdom as he stood here."

Then he looked on her and his face grew bright beyond measure, and cried out: "O love, love! why tarry we?  For yet I fear lest we be come too late, and thou die before mine eyes ere yet thou hast drunken."

"Yea," she said, "and I also fear for thee, though thy face is ruddy and thine eyes sparkle, and thou art as lovely as the Captain of the Lord's hosts."

Then she laughed, and her laughter was as silver bells rung tunably, and she said:  "But where is the cup for the drinking?"

But Ralph looked on the face of the wall, and about the height of his hand saw square marks thereon, as though there were an ambrye; and amidst the square was a knop of latten, all green with the weather and the salt spray. So Ralph set his hand to the knop and drew strongly, and lo it was a door made of a squared stone hung on brazen hinges, and it opened easily to him, and within was a cup of goldsmith's work, with the sword and the bough done thereon; and round about the rim writ this posey: "THE STRONG OF HEART SHALL DRINK FROM ME."  So Ralph took it and held it aloft so that its pure metal flashed in the sun, and he said: "This is for thee, Sweetling."

"Yea, and for thee," she said.

Now that level place, or bench-table went up to the very gushing and green bow of the water, so Ralph took Ursula's hand and led her along, she going a little after him, till he was close to the Well, and stood amidst the spray-bow thereof, so that he looked verily like one of the painted angels on the choir wall of St. Laurence of Upmeads. Then he reached forth his hand and thrust the cup into the water, holding it stoutly because the gush of the stream was strong, so that the water of the Well splashed all over him, wetting Ursula's face and breast withal: and he felt that the water was sweet without any saltness of the sea. But he turned to Ursula and reached out the full cup to her, and said: "Sweetling, call a health over the cup!"

She took it and said:  "To thy life, beloved!" and drank withal, and her eyes looked out of the cup the while, like a child's when he drinketh.  Then she gave him the cup again and said: "Drink, and tarry not, lest thou die and I live."

Then Ralph plunged the cup into the waters again, and he held the cup aloft, and cried out:  "To the Earth, and the World of Manfolk!" and therewith he drank.

For a minute then they clung together within the spray-bow of the Well, and then she took his hand and led him back to the midst of the bench-table, and he put the cup into the ambrye, and shut it up again, and then they sat them down on the widest of the platform under the shadow of a jutting rock; for the sun was hot; and therewithal a sweet weariness began to steal over them, though there was speech betwixt them for a little, and Ralph said: "How is it with thee, beloved?"

"O well indeed," she said.

Quoth he:  "And how tasteth to thee the water of the Well?"

Slowly she spake and sleepily:  "It tasted good, and as if thy love were blended with it."

And she smiled in his face; but he said:  "One thing I wonder over: how shall we wot if we have drunk aright?  For whereas if we were sick or old and failing, or ill-liking, and were now presently healed of all this, and become strong and fair to look on, then should we know it for sure-- but now, though, as I look on thee, I behold thee the fairest of all women, and on thy face is no token of toil and travail, and the weariness of the way; and though the heart-ache of loneliness and captivity, and the shame of Utterbol has left no mark upon thee--yet hast thou not always been sweet to my eyes, and as sweet as might be?  And how then?"...But he broke off and looked on her and she smiled upon the love in his eyes, and his head fell back and he slept with a calm and smiling face. And she leaned over him to kiss his face but even therewith her own eyes closed and she laid her head upon his breast, and slept as peacefully as he.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_22]

CHAPTER 22

Now They Have Drunk and Are Glad

Long they slept till the shadows were falling from the west, and the sea was flowing fast again over the sands beneath them, though there was still a great space bare betwixt the cliff and the sea. Then spake Ursula as if Ralph had but just left speaking; and she said: "Yea, dear lord, and I also say, that, lovely as thou art now, never hast thou been aught else but lovely to me.  But tell me, hast thou had any scar of a hurt upon thy body?  For if now that were gone, surely it should be a token of the renewal of thy life. But if it be not gone, then there may yet be another token."

Then he stood upon his feet, and she cried out: "O but thou art fair and mighty, who now shall dare gainsay thee? Who shall not long for thee?"

Said Ralph:  "Look, love! how the sea comes over the sand like the creeping of a sly wood-snake! Shall we go hence and turn from the ocean-sea without wetting our bodies in its waters?"

"Let us go," she said.

So they went down on to the level sands, and along the edges of the sweet-water stream that flowed from the Well; and Ralph said: "Beloved, I will tell thee of that which thou hast asked me: when I was but a lad of sixteen winters there rode men a-lifting into Upmeads, and Nicholas Longshanks, who is a wise man of war, gathered force and went against them, and I must needs ride beside him. Now we came to our above, and put the thieves to the road; but in the hurly I got a claw from the war-beast, for the stroke of a sword sheared me off somewhat from my shoulder: belike thou hast seen the scar and loathed it."

"It is naught loathsome," she said, "for a lad to be a bold warrior, nor for a grown man to think lightly of the memory of death drawn near for the first time.  Yea, I have noted it but let me see now what has befallen with it."

As she spoke they were come to a salt pool in a rocky bight on their right hand, which the tide was filling speedily; and Ralph spake: "See now, this is the bath of the water of the ocean sea." So they were speedily naked and playing in the water: and Ursula took Ralph by the arm and looked to his shoulder and said: "O my lad of the pale edges, where is gone thy glory? There is no mark of the sword's pilgrimage on thy shoulder." "Nay, none?" quoth he.

"None, none!" she said, "Didst thou say the very sooth of thy hurt in the battle, O poor lad of mine?"  "Yea, the sooth," said he. Then she laughed sweetly and merrily like the chuckle of a flute over the rippling waters, that rose higher and higher about them, and she turned her eyes askance and looked adown to her own sleek side, and laid her hand on it and laughed again.  Then said Ralph: "What is toward, beloved?  For thy laugh is rather of joy that of mirth alone."

She said:  "O smooth-skinned warrior, O Lily and Rose of battle; here on my side yesterday was the token of the hart's tyne that gored me when I was a young maiden five years ago: look now and pity the maiden that lay on the grass of the forest, and the woodman a-passing by deemed her dead five years ago."

Ralph stooped down as the ripple washed away from her, then said: "In sooth here is no mark nor blemish, but the best handiwork of God, as when he first made a woman from the side of the Ancient Father of the field of Damask.  But lo you love, how swift the tide cometh up, and I long to see thy feet on the green grass, and I fear the sea, lest it stir the joy over strongly in our hearts and we be not able to escape from its waves."

So they went up from out of the water, and did on the hallowed raiment fragrant with strange herbs, and passed joyfully up the sand towards the cliff and its stair; and speedily withal, for so soon as they were clad again, the little ripple of the sea was nigh touching their feet. As they went, they noted that the waters of the Well flowed seaward from the black-walled pound by three arched openings in its outer face, and they beheld the mason's work, how goodly it was; for it was as if it had been cut out of the foot of a mountain, so well jointed were its stones, and its walls solid against any storm that might drive against it.

They climbed the stair, and sat them down on the green grass awhile watching the ocean coming in over the sand and the rocks, and Ralph said: "I will tell thee, sweetling, that I am grown eager for the road; though true it is that whiles I was down yonder amidst the ripple of the sea I longed for naught but thee, though thou wert beside me, and thy joyous words were as fire to the heart of my love. But now that I am on the green grass of the earth I called to mind a dream that came to me when we slept after the precious draught of the Well: for methought that I was standing before the porch of the Feast-hall of Upmeads and holding thine hand, and the ancient House spake to me with the voice of a man, greeting both thee and me, and praising thy goodliness and valiancy.  Surely then it is calling me to deeds, and if it were but morning, as it is now drawing towards sunset, we would mount and be gone straightway."

"Surely," she said, "thou hast drunk of the Well, and the fear of thee has already entered into the hearts of thy foemen far away, even as the love of thee constraineth me as I lie by thy side; but since it is evening and sunset, let it be evening, and let the morning see to its own matters.  So now let us be pilgrims again, and eat the meal of pilgrims, and see to our horses, and then wander about this lovely wilderness and its green meads, where no son of man heedeth the wild things, till the night come, bringing to us the rest and the sleep of them that have prevailed over many troubles."

Even so they did, and broke bread above the sea, and looked to their horses, and then went hand in hand about the goodly green bents betwixt the sea and the rough of the mountain; and it was the fairest and softest of summer evenings; and the deer of that place, both little and great, had no fear of man, but the hart and hind came to Ursula's hand; and the thrushes perched upon her shoulder, and the hares gambolled together close to the feet of the twain; so that it seemed to them that they had come into the very Garden of God; and they forgat all the many miles of the waste and the mountain that lay before them, and they had no thought for the strife of foemen and the thwarting of kindred, that belike awaited them in their own land, but they thought of the love and happiness of the hour that was passing. So sweetly they wore through the last minutes of the day, and when it was as dark as it would be in that fair season, they lay down by the green knoll at the ending of the land, and were lulled to sleep by the bubbling of the Well at the World's End.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_01]

BOOK FOUR

The Road Home

CHAPTER 1

Ralph and Ursula Come Back Again Through the Great Mountains

On the morrow morning they armed them and took to their horses and departed from that pleasant place and climbed the mountain without weariness, and made provision of meat and drink for the Dry Desert, and so entered it, and journeyed happily with naught evil befalling them till they came back to the House of the Sorceress; and of the Desert they made little, and the wood was pleasant to them after the drought of the Desert.

But at the said House they saw those kind people, and they saw in their eager eyes as in a glass how they had been bettered by their drinking of the Well, and the Elder said to them: "Dear friends, there is no need to ask you whether ye have achieved your quest; for ye, who before were lovely, are now become as the very Gods who rule the world. And now methinks we have to pray you but one thing, to wit that ye will not be overmuch of Gods, but will be kind and lowly with them that needs must worship you."

They laughed on him for kindness' sake, and kissed and embraced the old man, and they thanked them all for their helping, and they abode with them for a whole day in good-will and love, and thereafter the carle, who was the son of the Elder, with his wife, bade farewell to his kinsmen, and led Ralph and Ursula back through the wood and over the desert to the town of the Innocent Folk. The said Folk received them in all joy and triumph, and would have them abide there the winter over.  But they prayed leave to depart, because their hearts were sore for their own land and their kindred. So they abode there but two days, and on the third day were led away by a half score of men gaily apparelled after their manner, and having with them many sumpter-beasts with provision for the road. With this fellowship they came safely and with little pain unto Chestnut Vale, where they abode but one night, though to Ralph and Ursula the place was sweet for the memory of their loving sojourn there.

They would have taken leave of the Innocent Folk in the said vale, but those others must needs go with them a little further, and would not leave them till they were come to the jaws of the pass which led to the Rock of the Fighting Man. Further than that indeed they would not, or durst not go; and those huge mountains they called the Wall of Strife, even as they on the other side called them the Wall of the World.

So the twain took leave of their friends there, and howbeit that they had drunk of the Well at the World's End, yet were their hearts grieved at the parting.  The kind folk left with them abundant provision for the remnant of the road, and a sumpter-ox to bear it; so they were in no doubt of their livelihood.  Moreover, though the turn of autumn was come again and winter was at hand, yet the weather was fair and calm, and their journey through the dreary pass was as light as it might be to any men.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_02]

CHAPTER 2

They Hear New Tidings of Utterbol

It was on a fair evening of later autumn-tide that they won their way out of the Gates of the Mountains, and came under the rock of the Fighting Man. There they kissed and comforted each other in memory of the terror and loneliness wherewith they had entered the Mountains that other time; though, sooth to say, it was to them now like the reading of sorrow in a book.

But when they came out with joyful hearts into the green plain betwixt the mountains and the River of Lava, they looked westward, and beheld no great way off a little bower or cot, builded of boughs and rushes by a blackthorn copse; and as they rode toward it they saw a man come forth therefrom, and presently saw that he was hoary, a man with a long white beard.  Then Ralph gave a glad cry, and set spurs to his horse and galloped over the plain; for he deemed that it could be none other than the Sage of Swevenham; and Ursula came pricking after him laughing for joy. The old man abode their coming, and Ralph leapt off his horse at once, and kissed and embraced him; but the Sage said: "There is no need to ask thee of tidings; for thine eyes and thine whole body tell me that thou hast drunk of the Well at the World's End. And that shall be better for thee belike than it has been for me; though for me also the world has not gone ill after my fashion since I drank of that water."

Then was Ursula come up, and she also lighted down and made much of the Sage.  But he said:  "Hail, daughter!  It is sweet to see thee so, and to wot that thou art in the hands of a mighty man: for I know that Ralph thy man is minded for his Father's House, and the deeds that abide him there; and I think we may journey a little way together; for as for me, I would go back to Swevenham to end my days there, whether they be long or short."

But Ralph said:  "As for that, thou mayst go further than Swevenham, and as far as Upmeads, where there will be as many to love and cherish thee as at Swevenham."

The old man laughed a little, and reddened withal, but answered nothing.

Then they untrussed their sumpter-beast, and took meat and drink from his burden, and they ate and drank together, sitting on the green grass there; and the twain made great joy of the Sage, and told him the whole tale; and he told them that he had been abiding there since the spring-tide, lest they might have turned back without accomplishing their quest, and then may-happen he should have been at hand to comfort them, or the one of them left, if so it had befallen.  "But," quoth he, "since ye have verily drunk of the Well at the World's End, ye have come back no later than I looked for you."

That night they slept in the bower there, and on the morrow betimes, the Sage drove together three or four milch goats that he pastured there, and went their ways over the plain, and so in due time entered into the lava-sea. But the first night that they lay there, though it was moonless and somewhat cloudy, they saw no glare of the distant earth-fires which they had looked for; and when on the morrow they questioned the Sage thereof, he said: "The Earth-fires ceased about the end of last year, as I have heard tell. But sooth it is that the foreboding of the Giant's Candle was not for naught. For there hath verily been a change of masters at Utterbol."

"Yea," said Ralph, "for better or worse?"

Said the Sage:  "It could scarce have been for worse; but if rumour runneth right it is much for the better. Hearken how I learned thereof.  One fair even of late March, a little before I set off hither, as I was sitting before the door of my house, I saw the glint of steel through the wood, and presently rode up a sort of knights and men-at-arms, about a score; and at the head of them a man on a big red-roan horse, with his surcoat blazoned with a white bull on a green field: he was a man black-haired, but blue-eyed; not very big, but well knit and strong, and looked both doughty and knightly; and he wore a gold coronet about his basnet: so not knowing his blazonry, I wondered who it was that durst be so bold as to ride in the lands of the Lord of Utterbol. Now he rode up to me and craved a drink of milk, for he had seen my goats; so I milked two goats for him, and brought whey for the others, whereas I had no more goats in milk at that season.  So the bull-knight spake to me about the woodland, and wherefore I dwelt there apart from others; somewhat rough in his speech he was, yet rather jolly than fierce; and he thanked me for the bever kindly enough, and said: "I deem that it will not avail to give thee money; but I shall give thee what may be of avail to thee. Ho, Gervaise! give me one of those scrolls!"  So a squire hands him a parchment and he gave it me, and it was a safe-conduct to the bearer from the Lord of Utterbol; but whereas I saw that the seal bore not the Bear on the Castle-wall, but the Bull, and that the superscription was unknown to me, I held the said scroll in my hand and wondered; and the knight said to me: "Yea, look long at it; but so it is, though thou trow it not, that I am verily Lord of Utterbol, and that by conquest; so that belike I am mightier than he was, for that mighty runagate have I slain. And many there be who deem that no mishap, heathen though I be. Come thou to Utterbol and see for thyself if the days be not changed there; and thou shalt have a belly-full of meat and drink, and honour after thy deserving."  So they rested a while, and then went their ways.  To Utterbol I went not, but ere I departed to come hither two or three carles strayed my way, as whiles they will, who told me that this which the knight had said was naught but the sooth, and that great was the change of days at Utterbol, whereas all men there, both bond and free, were as merry as they deserved to be, or belike merrier."

Ralph pondered this tale, and was not so sure but that this new lord was not Bull Shockhead, his wartaken thrall; natheless he held his peace; but Ursula said:  "I marvel not much at the tale, for sure I am, that had Gandolf of the Bear been slain when I was at Utterbol, neither man nor woman had stirred a finger to avenge him. But all feared him, I scarce know why; and, moreover, there was none to be master if he were gone."

Thereafter she told more tales of the miseries of Utterbol than Ralph had yet heard, as though this tale of the end of that evil rule had set her free to utter them; and they fell to talking of others matters.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_03]

CHAPTER 3

They Winter With the Sage; and Thereafter Come Again to Vale Turris

Thus with no peril and little pain they came to the Sage's hermitage; and whereas the autumn was now wearing, and it was not to be looked for that they should cross even the mountains west of Goldburg, let alone those to the west of Cheaping Knowe, when winter had once set in, Ralph and Ursula took the Sage's bidding to abide the winter through with him, and set forth on their journey again when spring should be fairly come and the mountain ways be clear of snow.

So they dwelt there happily enough; for they helped the Sage in his husbandry, and he enforced him to make them cheer, and read in the ancient book to them, and learned them as much as it behoved them to hearken; and told them tales of past time.

Thereafter when May was at hand they set out on their road, and whereas the Sage knew the wood well, he made a long story short by bringing them to Vale Turris in four days' time.  But when they rode down into the dale, they saw the plain meads below the Tower all bright with tents and booths, and much folk moving about amidst them; here and there amidst the roofs of cloth withal was showing the half finished frame of a timber house a-building. But now as they looked and wondered what might be toward, a half score of weaponed men rode up to them and bade them, but courteously, to come with them to see their Lord.  The Sage drew forth his let-pass thereat; but the leader of the riders said, as he shook his head: "That is good for thee, father; but these two knights must needs give an account of themselves:  for my lord is minded to put down all lifting throughout his lands; therefore hath he made the meshes of his net small. But if these be thy friends it will be well.  Therefore thou art free to come with them and bear witness to their good life."

Here it must be said that since they were on the road again Ursula had donned her wargear once more, and as she rode was to all men's eyes naught but a young and slender knight.

So without more ado they followed those men-at-arms, and saw how the banner of the Bull was now hung out from the Tower; and the sergeants brought them into the midst of the vale, where, about those tents and those half-finished frame-houses (whereof they saw six) was a market toward and much concourse of folk. But the sergeants led through them and the lanes of the booths down to the side of the river, where on a green knoll, with some dozen of men-at-arms and captains about him, sat the new Lord of Utterbol.

Now as the others drew away from him to right and left, the Lord sat before Ralph with naught to hide him, and when their eyes met Ralph gave a cry as one astonished; and the Lord of Utterbol rose up to his feet and shouted, and then fell a laughing joyously, and then cried out:  "Welcome, King's Son, and look on me! for though the feathers be fine 'tis the same bird. I am Lord of Utterbol and therewithal Bull Shockhead, whose might was less than thine on the bent of the mountain valley."

Therewith he caught hold of Ralph's hand, and sat himself down and drew Ralph down, and made him sit beside him.

"Thou seest I am become great?" said he.  "Yea," said Ralph, "I give thee joy thereof!"  Said the new Lord: "Perchance thou wilt be deeming that since I was once thy war-taken thrall I should give myself up to thee: but I tell thee I will not:  for I have much to do here. Moreover I did not run away from thee, but thou rannest from me, lad."

Thereat in his turn Ralph fell a laughing, and when he might speak he said: "What needeth the lord of all these spears to beg off his service to the poor wandering knight?"

Then Bull put his arms about him, and said: "I am fain at the sight of thee, time was thou wert a kind lad and a good master; yet naught so merry as thou shouldest have been; but now I see that gladness plays all about thy face, and sparkles in thine eyes; and that is good. But these thy fellows?  I have seen the old carle before: he was dwelling in the wildwood because he was overwise to live with other folk.  But this young man, who may he be? Or else--yea, verily, it is a young woman.  Yea, and now I deem that it is the thrall of my brother Bull Nosy. Therefore by heritage she is now mine."

Ralph heard the words but saw not the smiling face, so wroth he was; therefore the bare sword was in his fist in a twinkling. But ere he could smite Bull caught hold of his wrist, and said: "Master, master, thou art but a sorry lawyer, or thou wouldst have said: 'Thou art my thrall, and how shall a thrall have heritage?' Dost thou not see that I cannot own her till I be free, and that thou wilt not give me my freedom save for hers?  There, now is all the matter of the service duly settled, and I am free and a Lord. And this damsel is free also, and--yea, is she not thy well-beloved, King's Son?"

Ralph was somewhat abashed, and said:  "I crave thy pardon, Lord, for misdoubting thee:  but think how feeble are we two lovers amongst the hosts of the aliens."

"It is well, it is well," said Bull, "and in very sooth I deem thee my friend; and this damsel was my brother's friend. Sit down, dear maiden, I bid thee; and thou also, O man overwise; and let us drink a cup, and then we will talk about what we may do for each other."

So they sat down all on the grass, and the Lord of Utterbol called for wine, and they drank together in the merry season of May; and the new Lord said:  "Here be we friends come together, and it were pity of our lives if we must needs sunder speedily: howbeit, it is thou must rule herein, King's Son; for in my eyes thou art still greater than I, O my master. For I can see in thine eyes and thy gait, and in thine also, maiden, that ye have drunk of the Well at the World's End. Therefore I pray you gently and heartily that ye come home with me to Utterbol."

Ralph shook his head, and answered:  "Lord of Utterbol, I bid thee all thanks for thy friendliness, but it may not be."

"But take note," said Bull, "that all is changed there, and it hath become a merry dwelling of men.  We have cast down the Red Pillar, and the White and the Black also; and it is no longer a place of torment and fear, and cozening and murder; but the very thralls are happy and free-spoken. Now come ye, if it were but for a moon's wearing: I shall be there in eight days' time.  Yea, Lord Ralph, thou would'st see old acquaintance there withal:  for when I slew the tyrant, who forsooth owed me no less than his life for the murder of my brother, I made atonement to his widow, and wedded her: a fair woman as thou wottest, lord, and of good kindred, and of no ill conditions, as is well seen now that she lives happy days. Though I have heard say that while she was under the tyrant she was somewhat rough with her women when she was sad.  Eh, fair sir! but is it not so that she cast sheep's eyes on thee, time was, in this same dale?"

Ralph reddened and answered naught; and Bull spake again, laughing: "Yea, so it is:  she told me that much herself, and afterwards I heard more from her damsel Agatha, who told me the merry tale of that device they made to catch thee, and how thou brakest through the net.  Forsooth, though this she told me not, I deem that she would have had the same gift of thee as her mistress would.  Well, lad, lucky are they with whom all women are in love. So now I prithee trust so much in thy luck as to come with me to Utterbol."

Quoth Ralph:  "Once again, Lord of Utterbol, we thank thee; but whereas thou hast said that thou hast much to do in this land; even so I have a land where deeds await me. For I stole myself away from my father and mother, and who knows what help they need of me against foemen, and evil days; and now I might give help to them were I once at home, and to the people of the land also, who are a stout-hearted and valiant and kindly folk."

The new Lord's face clouded somewhat, as he said:  "If thine heart draweth thee to thy kindred, there is no more to say. As for me, what I did was for kindred's sake, and then what followed after was the work of need.  Well, let it be! But since we must needs part hastily, this at least I bid you, that ye abide with me for to-night, and the banquet in the great pavilion.  Howsoever ye may be busied, gainsay me not this; and to-morrow I shall further you on your way, and give you a score of spears to follow thee to Goldburg. Then as for Goldburg and Cheaping Knowe, see ye to it yourselves: but beyond Cheaping Knowe and the plain country, thy name is known, and the likeness of thee told in words; and no man in those mountains shall hurt or hinder thee, but all thou meetest shall aid and further thee.  Moreover, at the feast to-night thou shalt see thy friend Otter, and he and I betwixt us shall tell thee how I came to Utterbol, and of the change of days, and how it betid. For he is now my right-hand man, as he was of the dead man. Forsooth, after the slaying I would have had him take the lordship of Utterbol, but he would not, so I must take it perforce or be slain, and let a new master reign there little better than the old. Well then, how sayest thou?  Or wilt thou run from me without leave-taking, as thou didst ere-while at Goldburg?"

Ralph laughed at his word, and said that he would not be so churlish this time, but would take his bidding with a good heart; and thereafter they fell to talking of many things. But Ralph took note of Bull, that now his hair and beard were trim and his raiment goodly, for all his rough speech and his laughter and heart-whole gibes and mocking, his aspect and bearing was noble and knightly.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_04]

CHAPTER 4

A Feast in the Red Pavilion

So in a while they went with him to the Tower, and there was woman's raiment of the best gotten for Ursula, and afterwards at nightfall they went to the feast in the Red Pavillion of Utterbol, which awhile ago the now-slain Lord of Utterbol had let make; and it was exceeding rich with broidery of pearl and gems: since forsooth gems and fair women were what the late lord had lusted for the most, and have them he would at the price of howsoever many tears and groans.  But that pavilion was yet in all wise as it was wont to be, saving that the Bull had supplanted the Bear upon the Castle-wall.

Now the wayfarers were treated with all honour and were set upon the high-seat, Ralph upon the right-hand of the Lord, and Ursula upon his left, and the Sage of Swevenham out from her. But on Ralph's right hand was at first a void place, whereto after a while came Otter, the old Captain of the Guard. He came in hastily, and as though he had but just taken his armour off: for his raiment was but such as the men-at-arm of that country were wont to wear under their war-gear, and was somewhat stained and worn; whereas the other knights and lords were arrayed grandly in silks and fine cloth embroidered and begemmed.

Otter was fain when he saw Ralph, and kissed and embraced him, and said: "Forsooth, I saw by thy face, lad, that the world would be soft before thee; and now that I behold thee I know already that thou hast won thy quest; and the Gods only know to what honour thou shalt attain."

Ralph laughed for joy of him, and yet said soberly:  "As to honour, meseems I covet little world's goods, save that it may be well with my folk at home." Nevertheless as the words were out of his mouth his thought went back to the tall man whom he had first met at the churchyard gate of Netherton, and it seemed to him that he wished his thriving, yea, and in a lesser way, he wished the same to Roger of the Rope-walk, whereas he deemed that both of these, each in his own way, had been true to the lady whom he had lost.

Then Otter fell a-talking to him of the change of days at Utterbol, and how that it was the Lord's intent that a cheaping town should grow up in the Dale of the Tower, and that the wilderness beyond it should be tilled and builded. "And," said he, "if this be done, and the new lord live to see it, as he may, being but young of years, he may become exceedingly mighty, and if he hold on in the way whereas he now is, he shall be well-beloved also."

So they spake of many things, and there was minstrelsy and diverse joyance, till at last the Lord of Utterbol stood up and said:  "Now bring in the Bull, that we may speak some words over him; for this is a great feast." Ralph wondered what bull this might be whereof he spake; but the harps and fiddlers, and all instruments of music struck up a gay and gallant tune, and presently there came into the hall four men richly attired, who held up on spears a canopy of bawdekin, under which went a man-at-arms helmed, and clad in bright armour, who held in his hands a great golden cup fashioned like to a bull, and he bore it forth unto the dais, and gave it into the hands of the Lord.  Then straightway all the noise ceased, and the glee and clatter of the hall, and there was dead silence. Then the Lord held the cup aloft and said in a loud voice:

"Hail, all ye folk!  I swear by the Bull, and they that made him, that in three years' time or less I will have purged all the lands of Utterbol of all strong-thieves and cruel tyrants, be they big or little, till all be peace betwixt the mountains and the mark of Goldburg; and the wilderness shall blossom like the rose. Or else shall I die in the pain."

Therewith he drank of the cup, and all men shouted.  Then he sat him down and bade hand the cup to Otter; and Otter took the cup and looked into the bowl and saw the wave of wine, and laughed and cried out: "As for me, what shall I swear but that I will follow the Bull through thick and thin, through peace and unpeace, through grief and joy. This is my oath-swearing."

And he drank mightily and sat down.

Then turned the Lord to Ralph and said:  "And thou who art my master, wilt thou not tell thy friends and the Gods what thou wilt do?"

"No great matter, belike," said Ralph; "but if ye will it, I will speak out my mind thereon."

"We will it," said the Lord.

Then Ralph arose and took the cup and lifted it and spake: "This I swear, that I will go home to my kindred, yet on the road will I not gainsay help to any that craveth it. So may all Hallows help me!"

Therewith he drank:  and Bull said:  "This is well said, O happy man! But now that men have drunk well, do ye three and Otter come with me into the Tower, whereas the chambers are dight for you, that I may make the most of this good day wherein I have met thee again."

So they went with him, and when they had sat down in the goodliest chamber of the Tower, and they had been served with wine and spices, the new Lord said to Ralph:  "And now, my master, wilt thou not ask somewhat concerning me?"  "Yea," said Ralph, "I will ask thee to tell the tale of how thou camest into thy Lordship." Said the Lord, "This shall ye hear of me with Otter to help me out.  Hearken!"

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_05]

CHAPTER 5

Bull Telleth of His Winning of the Lordship of Utterbol

"When thou rannest away from me, and left me alone at Goldburg, I was grieved; then Clement Chapman offered to take me back with him to his own country, which, he did me to wit, lieth hard by thine: but I would not go with him, since I had an inkling that I should find the slayer of my brother and be avenged on him. So the Chapmen departed from Goldburg after that Clement had dealt generously by me for thy sake; and when they were gone I bethought me what to do, and thou knowest I can some skill with the fiddle and song, so I betook myself to that craft, both to earn somewhat and that I might gather tidings and be little heeded, till within awhile folk got to know me well, and would often send for me to their merry-makings, where they gave me fiddler's wages, to wit, meat, drink, and money. So what with one thing what with another I was rich enough to leave Goldburg and fall to my journey unto Utterbol; since I misdoubted me from the first that the caytiff who had slain my brother was the Lord thereof.

"But one day when I went into the market-place I found a great stir and clutter there; some folk, both men and women screeching and fleeing, and some running to bows and other weapons. So I caught hold of one of the fleers, and asked him what was toward; and he cried out, 'Loose me! let me go! he is loose, he is loose!'

"'Who is loose, fool?' quoth I. 'The lion,' said he, and therewith in the extremity of his terror tore himself away from me and fled. By this time the others also had got some distance away from me, and I was left pretty much alone.  So I went forth on a little, looking about me, and sure enough under one of the pillars of the cloister beneath the market-house (the great green pillar, if thou mindest it), lay crouched a huge yellow lion, on the carcase of a goat, which he had knocked down, but would not fall to eating of amidst all that cry and hubbub.

"Now belike one thing of me thou wottest not, to wit, that I have a gift that wild things love and will do my bidding. The house-mice will run over me as I lie awake looking on them; the small birds will perch on my shoulders without fear; the squirrels and hares will gambol about quite close to me as if I were but a tree; and, withal, the fiercest hound or mastiff is tame before me.  Therefore I feared not this lion, and, moreover, I looked to it that if I might tame him thoroughly, he would both help me to live as a jongleur, and would be a sure ward to me.

"So I walked up towards him quietly, till he saw me and half rose up growling; but I went on still, and said to him in a peaceable voice: 'How now, yellow mane! what aileth thee? down with thee, and eat thy meat.' So he sat down to his quarry again, but growled still, and I went up close to him, and said to him:  'Eat in peace and safety, am I not here?' And therewith I held out my bare hand unclenched to him, and he smelt to it, and straightway began to be peaceable, and fell to tearing the goat, and devouring it, while I stood by speaking to him friendly.

"But presently I saw weapons glitter on the other side of the square place, and men with bended bows.  The yellow king saw them also, and rose up again and stood growling; then I strove to quiet him, and said, 'These shall not harm thee.'

"Therewith the men cried out to me to come away, for they would shoot: But I called out; 'Shoot not yet! but tell me, does any man own this beast?' 'Yea,' said one, 'I own him, and happy am I that he doth not own me.' Said I, 'Wilt thou sell him?'  'Yea' said he, 'if thou livest another hour to tell down the money.'  Said I, 'I am a tamer of wild beasts, and if thou wilt sell this one at such a price, I will rid thee of him.' The man yeasaid this, but kept well aloof with his fellows, who looked on, handling their weapons.

"Then I turned to my new-bought thrall and bade him come with me, and he followed me like a dog to his cage, which was hard by; and I shut him in there, and laid down the money to his owner; and folk came round about, and wondered, and praised me. But I said:  'My masters, have ye naught of gifts for the tamer of beasts, and the deliverer of men?'  Thereat they laughed: but they brought me money and other goods, till I had gotten far more than I had given for the lion.

"Howbeit the next day the officers of the Porte came and bade me avoid the town of Goldburg, but gave me more money withal. I was not loth thereto, but departed, riding a little horse that I had, and leading my lion by a chain, though when I was by he needed little chaining.

"So that without more ado I took the road to Utterbol, and wheresoever I came, I had what was to be had that I would; neither did any man fall on me, or on my lion.  For though they might have shot him or slain him with many spear-thrusts, yet besides that they feared him sorely, they feared me still more; deeming me some mighty sending from their Gods.

"Thus came I to Utterness, and found it poor and wretched, (as forsooth, it yet is, but shall not be so for long). But the House of Utterbol is exceeding fair and stately (as thou mightest have learned from others, my master,) and its gardens, and orchards, and acres, and meadows as goodly as may be. Yea, a very paradise; yet the dwellers therein as if it were hell, as I saw openly with mine own eyes.

"To be short, the fame of me and my beast had somehow gone before me, and when I came to the House, I was dealt with fairly, and had good entertainment: and this all the more, as the Lord was away for a while, and the life of folk not so hard by a great way as it had been if he had been there: but the Lady was there in the house, and on the morrow of my coming by her command, I brought my lion before her window and made him come and go, and fetch and carry at my bidding, and when I had done my play she bade me up into her bower, and bade me sit and had me served with wine, while she asked me many questions as to my country and friends, and whence and whither I was; and I answered her with the very sooth, so far as the sooth was handy; and there was with her but one of her women, even thy friend Agatha, fair sir.

"Methought both that this Queen was a fair woman, and that she looked kindly upon me, and at last she said, sighing, that she were well at ease if her baron were even such a man as I, whereas the said Lord was fierce and cruel, and yet a dastard withal.  But the said Agatha turned on her, and chided her, as one might with a child, and said: 'Hold thy peace of thy loves and thy hates before a very stranger! Or must I leave yet more of my blood on the pavement of the White Pillar, for the pleasure of thy loose tongue?  Come out now, mountain-carle!'

"And she took me by the hand and led me out, and when we had passed the door and it was shut, she turned to me and said: 'Thou, if I hear any word abroad of what my Lady has just spoken, I shall know that thou hast told it, and though I be but a thrall, yea, and of late a mishandled one, yet am I of might enough in Utterbol to compass thy destruction.'

"I laughed in her face and went my ways:  and thereafter I saw many folk and showed them my beast, and soon learned two things clearly.

"And first that the Lord and the Lady were now utterly at variance. For a little before he had come home, and found a lack in his household-- to wit, how a certain fair woman whom he had but just got hold of, and whom he lusted after sorely, was fled away.  And he laid the wyte thereof on his Lady, and threatened her with death: and when he considered that he durst not slay her, or torment her (for he was verily but a dastard), he made thy friend Agatha pay for her under pretence of wringing a true tale out of her.

"Now when I heard this story I said to myself that I should hear that other one of the slaying of my brother, and even so it befell. For I came across a man who told me when and how the Lord came by the said damsel (whom I knew at once could be none other than thou, Lady,) and how he had slain my brother to get her, even as doubtless thou knowest, Lord Ralph.

"But the second thing which I learned was that all folk at Utterbol, men and women, dreaded the home-coming of this tyrant; and that there was no man but would have deemed it a good deed to slay him.  But, dastard as he was, use and wont, and the fear that withholdeth rebels, and the doubt that draweth back slaves, saved him; and they dreaded him moreover as a devil rather than a man. Forsooth one of the men there, who looked upon me friendly, who had had tidings of this evil beast drawing near, spake to me a word of warning, and said:  'Friend lion-master, take heed to thyself! For I fear for thee when the Lord cometh home and findeth thee here; lest he let poison thy lion and slay thee miserably afterward.'

"Well, in three days from that word home cometh the Lord with a rout of his spearmen, and some dozen of captives, whom he had taken. And the morrow of his coming, he, having heard of me, sent and bade me showing the wonder of the Man and the Lion; therefore in the bright morning I played with the lion under his window as I had done by the Queen. And after I had played some while, and he looking out of the window, he called to me and said:  'Canst thou lull thy lion to sleep, so that thou mayst leave him for a little?  For I would fain have thee up here.'

"I yeasaid that, and chid the beast, and then sang to him till he lay down and slept like a hound weary with hunting. And then I went up into the Lord's chamber; and as it happed, all the while of my playing I had had my short-sword naked in my hand, and thus, I deem without noting it, yet as weird would, I came before the tyrant, where he sat with none anigh him save this Otter and another man-at-arms. But when I saw him, all the blood within me that was come of one mother with my brother's blood stirred within me, and I set my foot on the foot-pace of this murderer's chair, and hove up my short-sword, and clave his skull, in front and with mine own hand: not as he wrought, not as he wrought with my brother.

"Then I turned about to Otter (who had his sword in his fist when it was too late) till he should speak.  Hah Otter, what didst thou say?"

Otter laughed:  Quoth he, "I said:  thus endeth the worst man in the world. Well done, lion-tamer! thou art no ill guest, and hast paid on the nail for meat, drink and lodging.  But what shall we do now? Then thou saidst; 'Well, I suppose thou wilt be for slaying me.' 'Nay,' said I, 'We will not slay thee; at least not for this, nor now, nor without terms.'  Thou saidst:  'Perchance then thou wilt let me go free, since this man was ill-beloved: yea, and he owed me a life.' 'Nay, nay,' said I, 'not so fast, good beast-lord.' 'Why not?' saidst thou, 'I can see of thee that thou art a valiant man, and whereas thou hast been captain of the host, and the men-at-arms will lightly do thy bidding, why shouldest thou not sit in the place of this man, and be Lord of Utterbol?'

"'Nay nay,' said I, 'it will not do, hearken thou rather: For here I give thee the choice of two things, either that thou be Lord of Utterbol, or that we slay thee here and now. For we be two men all-armed.'

"Thou didst seem to ponder it a while, and then saidst at last: 'Well, I set not out on this journey with any such-like intent; yet will I not wrestle with weird.  Only I forewarn thee that I shall change the days of Utterbol.'

"'It will not be for the worst then,' quoth I. 'So now go wake up thy lion, and lead him away to his den:  and we will presently send him this carrion for a reward of his jonglery.' 'Gramercy, butcher,' saidst thou, 'I am not for thy flesh-meat to-day. I was forewarned that the poor beast should be poisoned at this man's home-coming, and so will he be if he eat of this dastard; he will not outlive such a dinner.' Thereat we all laughed heartily."

"Yea," said Bull, "So I went to lead away the lion when thou hadst bidden me return in an hours' wearing, when all should be ready for my Lordship. And thou wert not worse than thy word, for when I came into that court again, there were all the men-at-arms assembled, and the free carles, and the thralls; and the men-at-arms raised me on a shield, set a crowned helm on my head, and thrust a great sword into my hand, and hailed me by the name of the Bull of Utterbol, Lord of the Waste and the Wildwood, and the Mountain-side: and then thou, Otter, wert so simple as to kneel before me and name thyself my man, and take the girding on of sword at my hand. Then even as I was I went in to my Lady and told her the end of my tale, and in three minutes she lay in my arms, and in three days in my bed as my wedded wife.  As to Agatha, when I had a little jeered her, I gave her rich gifts and good lands, and freedom, to boot her for her many stripes. And lo there, King's Son and Sweet Lady, the end of all my tale."

"Yea," quoth Otter, "saving this, that even already thou has raised up Utterbol from Hell to Earth, and yet meseemeth thou hast good-will to raise it higher."

Bull reddened at his word, and said:  "Tush, man! praise the day when the sun has set."  Then he turned to Ralph, and said: "Yet couldst thou at whiles put in a good word for me here and there amongst the folks that thou shalt pass through on thy ways home, I were fain to know that I had a well-speaking friend abroad." "We shall do no less," said Ralph; and Ursula spake in like wise.

So they talked together merrily a while longer, till night began to grow old, and then went to their chambers in all content and good-liking.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_06]

CHAPTER 6

They Ride From Vale Turris.  Redhead Tells of Agatha

On the morrow when they arose, Ralph heard the sound of horses and the clashing of arms:  he went to the window, and looked out, and saw how the spears stood up thick together at the Tower's foot, and knew that these were the men who were to be his fellows by the way. Their captain he saw, a big man all-armed in steel, but himseemed that he knew his face under his sallet, and presently saw that it was Redhead. He was glad thereof, and clad himself hastily, and went out a-doors, and went up to him and hailed him, and Redhead leapt off his horse, and cast his arms about Ralph, and made much of him, and said: "It is good for sore eyes to see thee, lord; and I am glad at heart that all went well with thee that time.  Although, forsooth, there was guile behind it.  Yet whereas I wotted nothing thereof, which I will pray thee to believe, and whereas thou hast the gain of all, I deem thou mayst pardon me."

Said Ralph:  "Thou hast what pardon of me thou needest; so be content. For the rest, little need is there to ask if thou thrivest, for I behold thee glad and well honoured."

As they spoke came the Lord forth from the Tower, and said: "Come thou, Lord Ralph, and eat with us ere thou takest to the road; I mean with Otter and me.  As for thee, Redhead, if aught of ill befall this King's Son under thy way-leading, look to it that thou shalt lose my good word with Agatha; yea, or gain my naysay herein; whereby thou shalt miss both fee and fair dame."

Redhead looked sheepishly on Ralph at that word, yet winked at him also, as if it pleased him to be jeered concerning his wooing; so that Ralph saw how the land lay, and that the guileful handmaid was not ill content with that big man.  So he smiled kindly on him and nodded, and went back with Bull into the Tower. There they sat down all to meat together; and when they were done with their victual, Bull spake, and said to Ralph: "Fair King's Son, is this then the last sight of thee? wilt thou never come over the mountains again?"  Said Ralph:  "Who knoweth? I am young yet, and have drunk of the Water of the Well." Bull grew somewhat pensive and said:  "Yea, thou meanest that thou mayest come back and find me no longer here. Yet if thou findest but my grave-mound, yet mayhappen thou shalt come on something said or sung of me, which shall please thee. For I will tell thee, that thou hast changed my conditions; how, I wot not."

"Thy word is good," said Ralph, "yet I meant not that; never should I come to Utterbol if I looked not to find thee living there." Bull smiled on him as though he loved him, and said: "This is well spoken; I shall look to see thee before I die."

Then said Ursula:  "Lord of Utterbol, this also thou mayst think on, that it is no further from Utterbol to Upmeads than from Upmeads to Utterbol." The Lord laughed and said:  "Sooth is that; and were but my Bull here, as I behold you I should be of mind to swear by him to come and see you at Upmeads ere ten years have worn."

Then she put forth her hand and said:  "Swear by this!" So he took it and swore the oath; but the Sage of Swevenham said: "This oath thou shalt keep to the gain and not the loss both of thee and of thy friends of Upmeads."

Thus were they fain of each other, and Ralph saw how Bull's heart was grown big, and he rejoiced thereat.  But anon he arose and said: "Now, Lord, we ask leave to depart for the way is long, and mayhappen my kindred now lack a man's helping."  Then Bull stood up and called for his horse, and Otter also, and they all went forth and gat a-horseback and rode away from Vale Turris, and Redhead rode behind them humbly, till it was noon and they made stay for meat. Then after they had broken bread together and drunk a cup Bull and Otter kissed the wayfarers, and bade them farewell and so rode back to Vale Turris, and Ralph and Ursula and the Sage tarried not but rode on their ways.

But anon Ralph called to Redhead, and bade him ride beside them that they might talk together, and he came up with them, and Ursula greeted him kindly, and they were merry one with another. And Ralph said to Redhead:  "Friend captain, thou art exceeding in humility not to ride with the Lord or Captain Otter; save for chance-hap, I see not that thou art worser than they."

Redhead grinned, and said:  "Well, as to Otter, that is all true; but as for Lord Bull it is another matter; I wot not but his kindred may be as good or better than any in these east parts. In any case, he hath his kin and long descent full often in his mouth, while I am but a gangrel body.  Howbeit it is all one, whereas whatso he or Otter bid any man to do, he doeth it, but my bidding may be questioned at whiles. And look you, lord, times are not ill, so wherefore should I risk a change of days?  Sooth to say, both these great lords have done well by me."

Ralph laughed:  "And better will they do, as thou deemest; give thee Agatha, to wit?"  "Yea, fair sir," quoth Redhead. "No great gift, that seemeth to me, for thy valiancy," said Ralph; "she is guileful enough and loose enough for a worse man than thee."

"Lord," said Redhead, "even of her thou shalt say what pleaseth thee; but no other man shall say of her what pleaseth me not. For all that is come and gone she is true and valiant, and none may say that she is not fair and sweet enough for a better man than me; and my great good luck it is that, as I hope, she looketh no further for a better."

Ursula said:  "Is it so, perchance, that now she is free and hath naught to fear, she hath no need for guile?" "Hail to thee for thy word, lady," quoth Redhead; and then he was silent, glooming somewhat on Ralph.

But Ralph said:  "Nay, my friend, I meant no harm, but I was wondering what had befallen to bring you two so close together."

"It was fear and pain, and the helping of each other that wrought it," said Redhead.  Said Ursula:  "Good Captain, how was it that she escaped the uttermost of evil at the tyrant's hands? since from all that I have heard, it must needs be that he laid the blame on her (working for her mistress) of my flight from Utterbol."

"Even so it was, lady," said Redhead; "but, as thou wottest belike, she had got it spread abroad that she was cunning in sorcery, and that her spell would not end when her life ended; nay, that he to whom her ghost should bear ill-will, and more especially such an one as might compass her death, should have but an ill time of it while he lived, which should not be long. This tale, which, sooth to say, I myself helped to spread, the Lord of Utterbol trowed in wholly, so cunningly was it told; so that, to make a long story short, he feared her, and feared her more dead than living. So that when he came home, and found thee gone, lady, he did indeed deem that thy flight was of Agatha's contrivance.  And this the more because his nephew (he whom thou didst beguile; I partly guess how) told him a made-up tale how all was done by the spells of Agatha. For this youth was of all men, not even saving his uncle, most full of malice; and he hated Agatha, and would have had her suffer the uttermost of torments and he to be standing by the while; howbeit his malice overshot itself, since his tale made her even more of a witch than the lord deemed before."

"Yea," said Ursula, "and what hath befallen that evil young man, Captain?"  Said Redhead:  "It is not known to many, lady; but two days before the slaying of his uncle, I met him in a wood a little way from Utterbol, and, the mood being on me I tied him neck and heels and cast him, with a stone round his neck, into a deep woodland pool hight the Ram's Bane, which is in that same wood.  Well, as to my tale of Agatha. When the lord came home first, he sent for her, and his rage had so mastered his fear for a while that his best word was scourge and rack and faggot; but she was, outwardly, so calm and cold, smiling on him balefully, that he presently came to himself, a found that fear was in his belly, and that he might not do what he would with her; wherefore he looked to it that however she were used (which was ill enough, God wot!) she should keep the soul in her body. And at last the fear so mounted into his head that he made peace with her, and even craved forgiveness of her and gave her gifts.  She answered him sweetly indeed, yet so as he (and all others who were bystanding, of whom I was one,) might well see that she deemed she owed him a day in harvest. As for me, he heeded me naught, and I lay low all I might. And in any wise we wore the time till the great day of deliverance."

Therewith dropped the talk about Agatha, when they had bidden him all luck in his life.  Forsooth, they were fain of his words, and of his ways withal. For he was a valiant man, and brisk, and one who forgat no benefit, and was trusty as steel; merry-hearted withal, and kind and ready of speech despite his uplandish manners, which a life not a little rude had thrust on him.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_07]

CHAPTER 7

Of Their Riding the Waste, and of a Battle Thereon

They slept in no house that night nor for many nights after; for they were now fairly on the waste.  They bore with them a light tent for Ursula's lodging benights, and the rest of them slept on the field as they might; or should they come to a thicket or shaw, they would lodge them there softly. Victual and drink failed them not, for they bore what they needed on sumpter-horses, and shot some venison on the way withal. They saw but few folk; for the most part naught save a fowler of the waste, or a peat-cutter, who stood to look on the men-at-arms going by, and made obeisance to the token of Utterbol.

But on a time, the fifth day of their journey, they saw, in the morning, spears not a few standing up against a thicket-side in the offing. Redhead looked under the sharp of his hand, and laughed as though he were glad, and said:  "I know not clearly what these may be, but it looketh like war.  Now, knight, this is best to do: hold with thee three of our best men, so that ye may safe guard the Lady, and I with the others will prick on and look into this."

"Nay," said Ralph, "thou mayst yet be apaid of a man's aid; and if there be strokes on sale in the cheaping-stead yonder, I will deal along with thee.  Leave thy three men with the Lady, and let us on; we shall soon be back."

"Nay once more, dear lord," quoth Ursula, "I fear to be left alone of thee, and it is meet that thou free me from fear.  I will ride with you, but three horse-lengths behind, so as not to hinder you. I have been worse bestead than this shall be."

"It is good," quoth Redhead, "let her ride with us: for why should she suffer the pain of fear in the lonely waste? But let her do on a hauberk over her coats, and steel coif over her head, for shaft and bolt will ofttimes go astray."

Even so they did, and rode forward, and presently they saw the spearmen that they were somewhat more than their company, and that they were well mounted on black horses and clad in black armour. Then they drew rein for awhile and Redhead scanned them again and said: "Yea, these are the men of the brother of thy hot wooer, Lady Ursula, whom I cooled in the Ram's Bane, but a man well nigh as old as his uncle, though he hath not made men tremble so sore, albeit he be far the better man, a good warrior, a wise leader, a reiver and lifter well wrought at all points.  Well, 'tis not unlike that we shall have to speak to his men again, either out-going or home-coming: so we had best kill as many of these as we may now. Do on thy sallet, my lord; and thou, Michael-a-green shake out the Bull; and thou, our Noise, blow a point of war that they may be warned. God to aid! but they be ready and speedy!"

In sooth even as the pennon of the Bull ran down the wind and the Utterbol horn was winded, the Black men-at-arms came on at a trot, and presently with a great screeching yell cast their spears into the rest, and spurred on all they might, while a half score of bowmen who had come out of the thicket bent their bows and fell a-shooting. But now the men of Utterbol spurred to meet the foe, and as Redhead cast his spear into the rest, he said to Ralph: "Glad am I that thy Lady is anear to see me, for now I worship her."

Therewith the two bands met, and whereas on neither side was the armour very stout, some men of either band were hurt or slain at once with spearthrust; though, save for Ralph, they did not run straight on each other; but fenced and foined with their spears deftly enough. As for Ralph, he smote a tall man full on the breast and pierced him through and through, and then pulled out the Upmeads blade and smote on the right hand and the left, so that none came anigh him willingly.

Shortly to say it, in five minutes' time the Black Riders were fleeing all over the field with them of Utterbol at their heels, and the bowmen ran back again into the wood. But one of the foemen as he fled cast a javelin at a venture, and who should be before it save Ursula, so that she reeled in her saddle, and would have fallen downright but for one of the Utterbol fellows who stayed her, and got her gently off her horse. This Ralph saw not, for he followed far in the chase, and was coming back somewhat slowly along with Redhead, who was hurt, but not sorely.  So when he came up, and saw Ursula sitting on the grass with four or five men about her, he sickened for fear; but she rose up and came slowly and pale-faced to meet him, and said:  "Fear not, beloved, for steel kept out steel: I have no scratch or point or edge on me."  So therewith he kissed her, and embraced her, and was glad.

The Utterbol Riders had slain sixteen of their foemen; for they took none to mercy, and four of their band were slain outright, and six hurt, but not grievously. So they tarried awhile on the field of deed to rest them and tend their wounded men, and so rode on again heedfully.

But Redhead spake:  "It is good to see thee tilting, King's Son. I doubt me I shall never learn thy downright thrust. Dost thou remember how sorry a job I made of it, when we met in the lists at Vale Turris that other day?"

"Yea, yea," said Ralph.  "Thou were best let that flea stick on the wall. For to-day, at least, I have seen thee play at sharps deftly enough."

Quoth Redhead:  "Lord, it is naught, a five minutes' scramble. That which trieth a man, is to fight and overcome, and straight have to fight with fresh foemen, and yet again, till ye long for dark night to cover you--yea, or even death."

"Warrior-like and wisely thou speakest," said Ralph; "and whoever thou servest thou shalt serve well. And now once more I would it were me."

Redhead shook his head at that word, and said:  "I would it might be so; but it will not be so as now."

Forth on they rode, and slept in a wood that night, keeping good watch; but saw no more of the Black Riders for that time.

On a day thereafter when it was nigh evening, Ralph looked about, and saw a certain wood on the edge of a plain, and he stayed Ursula, and said: "Look round about, beloved; for this is the very field whereas I was betrayed into the hands of the men of Utterbol."  She smiled on him and said: "Let me light down then, that I may kiss the earth of that kind field, where thou wert not stayed over long, but even long enough that we might meet in the dark wood thereafter."

"Sweetling," said Ralph, "this mayst thou do and grieve no man, not even for a little.  For lo you! the captain is staying the sumpter-beasts, and it is his mind, belike, that we shall sleep in yonder wood to-night." Therewith he lighted down and she in likewise: then he took her by the hand and led her on a few yards, and said: "Lo, beloved, this quicken-tree; hereby it was that the tent was pitched wherein I lay the night when I was taken."

She looked on him shyly and said:  "Wilt thou not sleep here once more to-night?"

"Yea, well-beloved," said he, "I will bid them pitch thy tent on this same place, that I may smell the wild thyme again, as I did that other while."

So there on the field of his ancient grief they rested that night in all love and content.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_08]

CHAPTER 8

Of Goldburg Again, and the Queen Thereof

Next day they went forth through the country wherethrough Morfinn had led Ralph into captivity; and Redhead rode warily; for there were many passes which looked doubtful:  but whether the ill men feared to meddle with them, or however it were, none waylaid them, and they all came safely to the gate of Goldburg, the towers whereof were full of folk looking forth on them. So they displayed their pennon, and rode into the street, where folk pressed about them in friendly wise; for the new Lord of Utterbol had made firm and fast peace with Goldburg. So they rode to the hostel, and gat them victual, and rested in peace that night.  But Ralph wondered whether the Queen would send for him when she heard of his coming back again, and he hoped that she would let him be; for he was ashamed when he thought of her love for him, and how that he had clean forgotten her till he was close to Goldburg again.

But when morning was come Ralph spake to Redhead and asked him how he should do to wage men for the homeward journey on thence; and Redhead said:  "I have already seen the Clerk of the Porte, and he will be here in an hour with the license for thee to wage men to go with thee to Cheaping Knowe.  As for me, I must needs go see the King, and give him a letter sealed by my lord's hand; and when I come back from him, I will go round to the alehouses which be haunted of the men-at-arms to see after strong carles for thine avail. But to the King hast thou no need to go, save he send for thee, whereas thou art not come hither to chaffer, and he needeth not men of war."

Ralph stared at him and said:  "The King, sayst thou? is there no Queen of Goldburg?"  Said Redhead:  "There is the King's wedded wife, but her they call not Queen, but Lady." "But the Queen that was," said Ralph, "where is she then?" "Yea truly," said Redhead, "a Queen sat alone as ruler here a while ago; but whether she died, or what befell her, I know nothing. I had little to do with Goldburg till our lord conquered Utterbol. Lo here the host! he may tell thee the tale thereof."

Therewith he departed, and left Ralph with the host, whom Ralph questioned of the story, for his heart was wrung lest such a fair woman and so friendly should have come to harm.

So the host sat down by Ralph and said:  "My master, this is a tale which is grievous to us:  for though the saints forbid I should say a word against my lord that is now, nor is there any need to, yet we deemed us happy to be under so dear a lady and so good and fair as she was. Well, she is gone so that we wot not whether she be living or dead. For so it is that in the early spring, somewhat more than a year ago that is, one morning when folk arose, the Queen's place was empty. Riding and running there was about and about, but none the more was she found.  Forsooth as time wore, tales were told of what wise she left us, and why:  but she was gone.  Well, fair sir, many deemed that though her lineage was known by seeming, yet she was of the fairy, and needed neither steed nor chariot to go where she would. But her women and those that knew her best, deemed that whatso she were, she had slain herself, as they thought, for some unhappiness of love. For indeed she had long gone about sad and distraught, though she neither wept, nor would say one word of her sorrow, whatsoever it might be.

"But, fair sir, since thou art a stranger, and art presently departing from our city, I will tell thee a thing. To wit; one month or so after she had vanished away, I held talk with a certain old fisherman of our water, and he told me that on that same night of her vanishing, as he stood on the water-side handing the hawser of his barque, and the sail was all ready to be sheeted home, there came along the shore a woman going very swiftly, who, glancing about her, as if to see that there was none looking on or prying, came up to him, and prayed him in a sweet voice for instant passage down the water. Wrapped she was in a dark cloak and a cowl over her head, but as she put forth her hand to give him gold, he saw even by the light of his lantern that it was exceeding fair, and that great gems flashed from the finger-rings, and that there was a great gold ring most precious on her arm.

"He yeasaid her asking, partly because of her gold, partly (as he told me) that he feared her, deeming her to be of the fairy. Then she stepped over his gangway of one board on to his boat, and as he held the lantern low down to light her, lest she should make a false step and fall into the water, he noted (quoth he) that a golden shoe all begemmed came out from under gown-hem and that the said hem was broidered thickly with pearl and jewels.

"Small was his barque, and he alone with the woman, and there was a wind in the March night, and the stream is swift betwixt the quays of our city; so that by night and cloud they made much way down the water, and at sunrise were sailing through the great wood which lieth hence a twenty leagues seaward. So when the sun was risen she stood up in the fore part of the boat, and bade him turn the barque toward the shore, and even as the bows ran upon the sand, she leapt out and let the thicket cover her; nor have any of Goldburg seen her since, or the Queen.  But for my part I deem the woman to have been none other than the Queen.  Seest thou then! she is gone: but the King Rainald her cousin reigns in her stead, a wise man, and a mighty, and no tyrant or skinner of the people."

Ralph heard and pondered, and was exceeding sorry, and more had he been but for the joyousness which came of the Water of the Well. Howbeit he might not amend it:  for even were he to seek for the Queen and find her, it might well be worse than letting it be.  For he knew (when he thought of her) that she loved him, and how would it be if she might not outwear her love, or endure the days of Goldburg, and he far away? This he said to himself, which he might not have said to any other soul.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_09]

CHAPTER 9

They Come to Cheaping Knowe Once More.  Of the King Thereof

Toward evening comes Redhead, and tells Ralph how he hired him a dozen men-at-arms to follow him well-weaponed to Cheaping Knowe: withal he counselled him to take a good gift with him to that same town to buy the good will of the King there; who was a close-fist and a cruel lord.

Afterwards they sat together in the court of that fair house before good wine, Ralph and Ursula, and Redhead and the Sage of Swevenham, and spake of many things, and were merry and kind together. But on the morrow Redhead departed from Goldburg with his men, and he loth to depart, and they gave him farewell lovingly. Thereafter Ralph's new men came to him in the hostelry, and he feasted them and did well to them, so that they praised him much. Then he gat him victuals and sumpter-horses for the journey, and bought good store of bows and arrows withal.  Furthermore he took heed to Redhead's word and bought a goodly gift of silver vessel and fine cloth for the King of Cheaping Knowe.

The day after he and his company departed from Goldburg toward the mountains, which they passed unfought and unwaylaid: partly because they were a band of stout men, and partly because a little before there had been a great overthrow of the wild men of those mountains at the hands of the men of Goldburg and the Chapmen; so that now the mountain-men lay close, and troubled none that rode with any force.

On the way they failed not to pass by the place where they had erst found Bull Nosy slain:  there they saw his howe, heaped up exceeding high, covered in with earth, whereon the grass was now beginning to grow, and with a great standing stone on the top thereof, whereon was graven the image of a bull, with a sword thereunder; whereby the wayfarers wotted that this had been done in his memory by his brother, the new Lord of Utterbol.

So they came down out of the mountains to Whiteness, where they had good entertainment, but tarried not save for one night, riding their ways betimes to Cheaping Knowe: and they came before the gate thereof safe and sound on the third day; and slept in the hostelry of the chapmen. On the morrow Ralph went up to the King's Castle with but three men unweaponed bearing the gift which he had got for the King. Albeit he sent not away his men-at-arms till he should know how the King was minded towards him.

As he went he saw in the streets sad tokens of the lord's cruel justice, as handless men, fettered, dragging themselves about, and folk hung up before chapmen's booths, and whipping-cheer, and the pillar, and such like. But whereas he might not help he would not heed, but came right to the Castle-gate, and entered easily when he had told his errand, for gift-bearing men are not oftenest withstood.

He was brought straightway into the great hall, where sat the King on his throne amidst the chiefs of the Porte, and his captains and sergeants, who were, so to say, his barons, though they were not barons of lineage, but masterful men who were wise to do his bidding.

As he went up the hall he saw a sort of poor caytiffs, women as well as men, led away from the high-place in chains by bailiffs and tipstaves; and he doubted not that these were for torments or maiming and death; and thought it were well might he do them some good.

Being come to the King, he made his obeisance to him, and craved his good will and leave to wage men-at-arms to bring him through the mountains.

The King was a tall man, a proper man of war; long-legged, black bearded, and fierce-eyed. Some word he had heard of Ralph's gift, therefore he was gracious to him; he spake and said:  "Thou hast come across the mountains a long way, fair Sir; prithee on what errand?" Answered Ralph:  "For no errand, lord, save to fare home to mine own land." "Where is thine own land?" said the King, stretching out his legs and lying back in his chair.  "West-away, lord, many a mile," said Ralph. "Yea," quoth the King, "and how far didst thou go beyond the mountains? As far as Utterbol?"  Said Ralph:  "Yet further, but not to Utterbol." "Hah!" said the King, "who goeth beyond Utterbol must have a great errand; what was thine?"

Ralph thought for a moment, and deemed it best to say as little as he might concerning Ursula; so he answered, and his voice grew loud and bold: "I was minded to drink a draught of the WELL at the WORLD'S END, and even so I did."  As he spake, he drew himself up, and his brows were knit a little, but his eyes sparkled from under them, and his cheeks were bright and rosy. He half drew the sword from the scabbard, and sent it back rattling, so that the sound of it went about the hall; he upreared his head and looked around him on this and that one of the warriors of the aliens, and he sniffed the air into his nostrils as he stood alone amongst them, and set his foot down hard on the floor of the King's hall, and his armour rattled upon him.

But the King sat bolt upright in his chair and stared Ralph's face; and the warriors and lords and merchants fell back from Ralph and stood in an ordered rank on either side of him and bent their heads before him. None spoke till the King said in a hoarse voice, but lowly and wheedling: "Tell us, fair Sir, what is it that we can do to pleasure thee?"

"King," said Ralph, "I am not here to take gifts but to give them rather: yet since thou biddest me I will crave somewhat of thee, that thou mayst be the more content:  and moreover the giving shall cost thee nothing: I crave of thee to give me life and limb and freedom for the poor folk whom I saw led down the hall by thy tipstaves, even now. Give me that or nothing."  The King scowled, but he spake: "This is indeed a little gift of thee to take; yet to none else save thee had I given it."

Therewith he spake to a man beside him and said:  "Go thou, set them free, and if any hurt hath befallen them thy life shall answer for it.  Is it enough, fair Sir, and have we thy goodwill?" Ralph laughed for joy of his life and his might, and he answered: "King, this is the token of my goodwill; fear naught of me." And he turned to his men, and bade them bright forth the gift of Goldburg and open it before the King; and they did so. But when the King cast eyes on the wares his face was gladdened, for he was a greedy wolf, and whoso had been close to his mouth would have heard him mutter:  "So mighty! yet so wealthy!" But he thanked Ralph aloud and in smooth words.  And Ralph made obeisance to him again, and then turned and went his ways down the hall, and was glad at heart that he had become so mighty a man, for all fell back before him and looked on him with worship. Howbeit he had looked on the King closely and wisely, and deemed that he was both cruel and guileful, so that he rejoiced that he had spoken naught of Ursula, and he was minded to keep her within gates all the while they abode at Cheaping-Knowe.

When he came to the hostel he called his men-at-arms together and asked them how far they would follow him, and with one voice they said all that they would go with him whereso he would, so that it were not beyond reason. So they arrayed them for departure on the morrow, and were to ride out of gates about mid-morning. So wore the day to evening; but ere the night was old came a man asking for Ralph, as one who would have a special alms of him, a poor man by seeming, and evilly clad. But when Ralph was alone with him, the poor man did him to wit that for all his seeming wretchedness he was but disguised, and was in sooth a man of worship, and one of the Porte.  Quoth he: "I am of the King's Council, and I must needs tell thee a thing of the King: that though he was at the first overawed and cowed by the majesty of thee, a Friend of the Well, he presently came to himself, which was but ill; so that what for greed, what for fear even, he is minded to send men to waylay thee, some three leagues from the town, on your way to the mountains, but ye shall easily escape his gin now I have had speech of thee; for ye may take a by-road and fetch a compass of some twelve miles, and get aback of the waylayers.  Yet if ye escape this first ambush, unless ye are timely in riding early tomorrow it is not unlike that he shall send swift riders to catch up with you ere ye come to the mountains. Now I am come to warn thee hereof, partly because I would not have so fair a life spilt, which should yet do so well for the sons of Adam, and partly also because I would have a reward of thee for my warning and my wayleading, for I shall show thee the way and the road."

Said Ralph:  "Ask and fear not; for if I may trust thee I already owe thee a reward."  "My name is Michael-a-dale," said the man, "and from Swevenham I came hither, and fain would I go thither, and little hope I have thereof save I go privily in some such band as thine, whereas the tyrant holdeth me on pain, as well I know, of an evil death."

"I grant thine asking, friend," said Ralph; "and now thou wert best go to thine house and truss what stuff thou mayst have with thee and come back hither in the grey of the morning."

The man shook his head and said:  "Nay; here must I bide night-long, and go out of gates amongst thy men-at-arms, and clad like one of them with iron enough about me to hide the fashion of me; it were nowise safe for me to go back into the town; for this tyrant wages many a spy:  yea, forsooth, I fear me by certain tokens that it is not all so certain that I have not been spied upon already, and that it is known that I have come to thee. And I will tell thee that by hook or by crook the King already knoweth somewhat of thee and of the woman who is in thy company."

Ralph flushed red at that word, and felt his heart bound: but even therewith came into them the Sage; and straightway Ralph took him apart and told him on what errand the man was come, and ask him if he deemed him trusty.  Then the Sage went up to Michael and looked him hard in the face awhile, and then said: "Yea, honest he is unless the kindred of Michael of the Hatch of Swevenham have turned thieves in the third generation."

"Yea," said Michael, "and dost thou know the Hatch?"

"As I know mine own fingers," said the Sage; "and even so I knew it years and years before thou wert born."  Therewith he told the new-comer what he was, and the two men of Swevenham made joy of each other. And Ralph was fain of them, and went into the chamber wherein sat Ursula, and told her how all things were going, and she said that she would be naught but glad to leave that town, which seemed to her like to Utterbol over again.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_10]

CHAPTER 10

An Adventure on the Way to the Mountains

On the morrow Ralph got his men together betimes and rode out a-gates, and was little afraid that any should meddle with him within the town or anigh it, and even so it turned out. But Michael rode in the company new clad, and with his head and face all hidden in a wide sallet.  As for Ralph and Ursula, they were exceeding glad, and now that their heads were turned to the last great mountains, it seemed to them that they were verily going home, and they longed for the night, that they might be alone together, and talk of all these matters in each others' arms.

When they were out a-gates, they rode for two miles along the highway, heedlessly enough by seeming, and then, as Michael bade, turned suddenly into a deep and narrow lane, and forth on, as it led betwixt hazelled banks and coppices of small wood, skirting the side of the hills, so that it was late in the afternoon before they came into the Highway again, which was the only road leading into the passes of the mountains. Then said Michael that now by all likelihood they had beguiled the waylayers for that time; so they went on merrily till half the night was worn, when they shifted for lodging in a little oak-wood by the wayside. There they lay not long, but were afoot betimes in the morning, and rode swiftly daylong, and lay down at night on the wayside with the less dread because they were come so far without hurt.

But on the third day, somewhat after noon, when they were come up above the tilled upland and the land was rough and the ways steep, there lay before them a dark wood swallowing up the road. Thereabout Ralph deemed that he saw weapons glittering ahead, but was not sure, for as clear-sighted as he was. So he stayed his band, and had Ursula into the rearward, and bade all men look to their weapons, and then they went forward heedfully and in good order, and presently not only Ralph, but all of them could see men standing in the jaws of the pass with the wood on either side of them, and though at first they doubted if these were aught but mere strong-thieves, such as any wayfarers might come on, they had gone but a little further when Michael knew them for the riders of Cheaping Knowe. "Yea," said the Sage of Swevenham, "it is clear how it has been: when they found that we came not that first morning, they had an inkling of what had befallen, and went forward toward the mountains, and not back to Cheaping Knowe, and thus outwent us while we were fetching that compass to give them the go-by: wherefore I deem that some great man is with them, else had they gone back to town for new orders."

"Well," said Ralph, "then will they be too many for us; so now will I ride ahead and see if we may have peace." Said the Sage, "Yea, but be wary, for thou hast to do with the guileful."

Then Ralph rode on alone till he was come within hail of those waylayers. Then he thrust his sword into the sheath, and cried out: "Will any of the warriors in the wood speak with me; for I am the captain of the wayfarers?"

Then rode out from those men a very tall man, and two with him, one on either side, and he threw back the sallet from his face, and said: "Wayfarer, all we have weapons in our hands, and we so many that thou and thine will be in regard of us as the pips to the apple. Wherefore, yield ye!"  Quoth Ralph:  "Unto whom then shall I yield me?" Said the other:  "To the men of the King of Cheaping Knowe." Then spake Ralph:  "What will ye do with us when we are yolden? Shall we not pay ransom and go our ways?"  "Yea," said the tall man, "and this is the ransom:  that ye give up into my hands my dastard who hath bewrayed me, and the woman who wendeth in your company."

Ralph laughed; for by this time he knew the voice of the King, yea, and the face of him under his sallet. So he cried back in answer, and in such wise as if the words came rather from his luck than from his youth:  "Ho, Sir King! beware beware! lest thou tremble when thou seest the bare blade of the Friend of the Well more than thou trembledst erst, when the blade was hidden in the sheath before the throne of thine hall."

But the King cried out in a loud harsh voice. "Thou, young man, beware thou! and try not thy luck overmuch. We are as many as these trees, and thou canst not prevail over us. Go thy ways free, and leave me what thou canst not help leaving."

"Yea, fool," cried Ralph, "and what wilt thou do with these two?"

Said the King:  "The traitor I will flay, and the woman I will bed."

Scarce were the words out of his mouth ere Ralph gave forth a great cry and drew his sword, set spurs to his horse, and gallopped on up the road with all his band at his back for they had drawn anigh amidst this talk. But or ever they came on the foemen, they heard a great confused cry of onset mingled with affright, and lo! the King threw up his arms, and fell forward on his horse's neck with a great arrow through his throat.

Ralph drave on sword in hand, crying out, "Home, home to Upmeads!" and anon was amidst of the foe smiting on either hand. His men followed, shouting:  "Ho, for the Friend of the Well!" And amongst the foemen, who were indeed very many, was huge dismay, so that they made but a sorry defence before the band of the wayfarers, who knew not what to make of it, till they noted that arrows and casting-spears were coming out of the wood on either side, which smote none of them, but many of the foemen. Short was the tale, for in a few minutes there were no men of the foe together save those that were fleeing down the road to Cheaping Knowe.

Ralph would not suffer his men to follow the chase, for he wotted not with whom he might have to deal besides the King's men. He drew his men together and looked round for Ursula, and saw that the Sage had brought her up anigh him, and there she sat a-horseback, pale and panting with the fear of death and joy of deliverance.

Now Ralph cried out from his saddle in a loud voice, and said: "Ho ye of the arrows of the wood! ye have saved me from my foemen; where be ye, and what be ye?"  Came a loud voice from out of the wood on the right hand:  "Children, tell the warrior whose sons ye be!" Straightway brake out a huge bellowing on either side of the road, as though the wood were all full of great neat.

Then cried out Ralph:  "If ye be of the kindred of the Bull, ye will belike be my friends rather than my foes.  Or have ye heard tell of Ralph of Upmeads? Now let your captain come forth and speak with me."

Scarce were the words out of his mouth ere a man came leaping forth from out the wood, and stood before Ralph in the twilight of the boughs, and Ralph noted of him that he was clad pretty much like to Bull Shockhead of past time, save that he had a great bull's head for a helm (which afterwards Ralph found out was of iron and leather) and a great gold ring on his arm.

Then Ralph thrust his sword back into the sheath, and his folk handled their weapons peaceably, while Ralph hailed the new-comer as Lord or Duke of the Bulls.

"Belike," quoth the said chieftain, "thou wouldst wish to show me some token, whereby we may wot that thou art that Friend of the Well and of our kinsman concerning whom he sent us a message."

Then Ralph bethought him of the pouch with the knot of grass therein which Bull Shockhead had given him at Goldburg; so he drew it out, and gave it into the hand of the chieftain, who no sooner caught a glimpse thereof than he said: "Verily our brother's hand hath met thine when he gave thee this. Yet forsooth, now that I look on thee, I may say that scarce did I need token to tell me that thou wert the very man. For I can see thee, that thou art of great honour and worship, and thou didst ride boldly against the foemen when thou knewest not that we had waylaid thy waylayers. Now I wot that there is no need to ask thee whether thou wouldst get thee out of our mountains by the shortest road, yet wilt thou make it little longer, and somewhat safer, if ye will suffer us to lead thee by way of our dwelling." So Ralph yeasaid his bidding without more words.

As they spake thus together the road both above and below was become black with weaponed men, and some of Ralph's band looked on one another, as though they doubted their new friends somewhat. But the Sage of Swevenham spoke to them and bade them fear nought. "For," said he, "so far as we go, who are now their friends, there is no guile in these men."  The Bull captain heard him and said: "Thou sayest sooth, old man; and I shall tell thee that scarce had a band like thine come safe through the mountains, save by great good luck, without the leave of us; for the fool with the crown that lieth there dead had of late days so stirred up the Folks of the Fells through his grimness and cruelty that we have been minded to stop everything bigger than a cur-dog that might seek to pass by us, for at least so long as yonder rascal should live. But ye be welcome; so now let us to the road, for the day weareth."

So the tribesmen gat them into order, and their Duke went on the left side of Ralph, while Ursula rode on his right hand.  The Duke and all his men were afoot, but they went easily and swiftly, as wolves trot. As for the slain of the waylayers, of whom there were some threescore, the Bull captain would do nought but let them lie on the road. "For," said he, "there be wolves and lynxes enough in the wood, and the ravens of the uplands, and the kites shall soon scent the carrion. They shall have burial soon enough.  Neither will we meddle with it; nay, not so much as to hang the felon King's head at thy saddle-bow, lord."

By sunset they were out of the wood and on the side of a rough fell, so they went no further, but lighted fires at the edge of the thicket, and made merry round about them, singing their songs concerning the deeds of their folk, and jesting withal, but not foully; and they roasted venison of hart and hind at the fires, and they had with them wine, the more part whereof they had found in the slain King's carriages, and they made great feast to the wayfarers, and were exceeding fain of them; after their fashion, whereas if a man were their friend he could scarce be enough their friend, and if he were their foe, they could never be fierce enough with him.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_11]

CHAPTER 11

They Come Through the Mountains Into the Plain

On the morrow early they all fared on together, and thereafter they went for two days more till they came into a valley amidst of the mountains which was fair and lovely, and therein was the dwelling or town of this Folk of the Fells. It was indeed no stronghold, save that it was not easy to find, and that the way thither was well defensible were foemen to try it.  The houses thereof were artless, the chiefest of them like to the great barn of an abbey in our land, the others low and small; but the people, both men and women, haunted mostly the big house.  As for the folk, they were for the more part like those whom they had met afore: strong men, but not high of stature, black-haired, with blue or grey eyes, cheerful of countenance, and of many words. Their women were mostly somewhat more than comely, smiling, kind of speech, but not suffering the caresses of aliens. They saw no thralls amongst them; and when Ralph asked hereof, how that might be, since they were men-catchers, they told him that when they took men and women, as oft they did, they always sold them for what they would bring to the plain-dwellers; or else slew them, or held them to ransom, but never brought them home to their stead.  Howbeit, when they took children, as whiles befell, they sometimes brought them home, and made them very children of their Folk with many uncouth prayers and worship of their Gods, who were indeed, as they deemed, but forefathers of the Folk.

Now Ralph, he and his, being known for friends, these wild men could not make enough of them, and as it were, compelled them to abide there three days, feasting them, and making them all the cheer they might. And they showed the wayfarers their manner of hunting, both of the hart and the boar, and of wild bulls also.  At first Ralph somewhat loathed all this (though he kept a pleasant countenance toward his host), for sorely he desired the fields of Upmeads and his father's house. But at last when the hunt was up in the mountains, and especially of the wild bulls, the heart and the might in him so arose that he enforced himself to do well, and the wild men wondered at his prowess, whereas he was untried in this manner of sports, and they deemed him one of the Gods, and said that their kinsman had done well to get him so good a friend. Both Ursula and the Sage withheld them from this hunting, and Ursula abode with the women, who told her much of their ways of life, and stories of old time; frank and free they were, and loved her much, and she was fain of such manly-minded women after the sleight and lies of the poor thralls of Utterbol.

On the fourth day the wayfarers made them ready and departed; and the chief of the Folk went with them with a chosen band of weaponed men, partly for the love of his guests, and partly that he might see the Goldburg men-at-arms safe back to the road unto the plain and the Midhouse of the Mountains, for they went now by other ways, which missed the said House. On this journey naught befell to tell of, and they all came down safe into the plain.

There the Goldburg men took their wage, and bidding farewell, turned back with the wild men, praising Ralph much for his frankness and open hand. As for the wild men, they exceeded in their sorrow for the parting, and many of them wept and howled as though they had seen him die before their faces. But all that came to an end, and presently their cheer was amended, and their merry speech and laughter came down from the pass unto the wayfarers' ears as each band rode its way.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_12]

CHAPTER 12

The Roads Sunder Again

Ralph and Ursula, with the Sage and Michael-a-dale went their ways, and all was smooth with them, and they saw but few folk, and those mild and lowly. At last, of an afternoon, they saw before them afar off the towers and pinnacles of Whitwall, and Ralph's heart rose within him, so that he scarce knew how to contain himself; but Ursula was shy and silent, and her colour came and went, as though some fear had hold of her. Now they two were riding on somewhat ahead of the others, so Ralph turned to Ursula, and asked what ailed her.  She smiled on him and said: "A simple sickness.  I am drawing nigh to thy home, and I am ashamed. Beyond the mountains, who knew what and whence I was?  I was fair, and for a woman not unvaliant, and that was enough.  But now when I am coming amongst the baronages and the lineages, what shall I do to hold up my head before the fools and the dastards of these high kindreds? And that all the more, my knight, because thou art changed since yester-year, and since we met on the want-way of the Wood Perilous, when I bade thee remember that thou wert a King's son and I a yeoman's daughter; for then thou wert but a lad, high-born and beautiful, but simple maybe, and untried; whereas now thou art meet to sit in the Kaiser's throne and rule the world from the Holy City."

He laughed gaily and said:  "What! is it all so soon forgotten, our deeds beyond the Mountains?  Belike because we had no minstrel to rhyme it for us.  Or is it all but a dream? and has the last pass of the mountains changed all that for us?  What then! hast thou never become my beloved, nor lain in one bed with me? Thou whom I looked to deliver from the shame and the torment of Utterbol, never didst thou free thyself without my helping, and meet me in the dark wood, and lead me to the Sage who rideth yonder behind us!  No, nor didst thou ride fearless with me, leaving the world behind; nor didst thou comfort me when my heart went nigh to breaking in the wilderness!  Nor thee did I deliver as I saw thee running naked from the jaws of death. Nor were we wedded in the wilderness far from our own folk. Nor didst thou deliver me from the venom of the Dry Tree. Yea verily, nor did we drink together of the Water of the Well! It is all but tales of Swevenham, a blue vapour hanging on the mountains yonder!  So be it then!  And here we ride together, deedless, a man and a maid of whom no tale may be told. What next then, and who shall sunder us?"

Therewith he drew his sword from the sheath, and tossed it into the air, and caught it by the hilts as it came down, and he cried out: "Hearken, Ursula!  By my sword I swear it, that when I come home to the little land, if my father and my mother and all my kindred fall not down before thee and worship thee, then will I be a man without kindred, and I will turn my back on the land I love, and the House wherein I was born, and will win for thee and me a new kindred that all the world shall tell of. So help me Saint Nicholas, and all Hallows, and the Mother of God!"

She looked on him with exceeding love, and said:  "Ah, beloved, how fair thou art!  Is it not as I said, yea, and more, that now lieth the world at thy feet, if thou wilt stoop to pick it up? Believe me, sweet, all folk shall see this as I see it, and shall judge betwixt thee and me, and deem me naught."

"Beloved," he said, "thou dost not wholly know thyself; and I deem that the mirrors of steel serve thee but ill; and now must thou have somewhat else for a mirror, to wit, the uprising and increase of trouble concerning thee and thy fairness, and the strife of them that love thee overmuch, who shall strive to take thee from me; and then the blade that hath seen the Well at the World's End shall come out of his sheath and take me and thee from the hubbub, and into the quiet fields of my father's home, and then shalt thou be learned of thyself, when thou seest that thou art the desire of all hearts."

"Ah, the wisdom of thee," she said, "and thy valiancy, and I am become feeble and foolish before thee! What shall I do then?"

He said:  "Many a time shall it be shown what thou shalt do; but here and now is the highway dry and long, and the plain meads and acres on either hand, and a glimmer of Whitwall afar off, and the little cloud of dust about us two in the late spring weather; and the Sage and Michael riding behind us, and smiting dust from the hard road. And now if this also be a dream, let it speedily begone, and let us wake up in the ancient House at Upmeads, which thou hast never seen-- and thou and I in each other's arms."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_13]

CHAPTER 13

They Come to Whitwall Again

Herewith they were come to a little thorp where the way sundered, for the highway went on to Whitwall, and a byway turned off to Swevenham.  Thereby was a poor hostel, where they stayed and rested for the night, because evening was at hand. So when those four had eaten and drunk there together, Ralph spoke and said:  "Michael-a-dale, thou art for Swevenham to-morrow?" "Yea, lord," said Michael, "belike I shall yet find kindred there; and I call to thy mind that I craved of thee to lead me to Swevenham as payment for all if I had done aught for thy service."

"Sooth is that," said Ralph, "thou shalt go with my good-will; and, as I deem, thou shalt not lack company betwixt here and Swevenham, whereas our dear friend here, the friend of thy father's father, is going the same road."

Then the Sage of Swevenham leaned across the board, and said: "What word hath come out of thy mouth, my son?"  Said Ralph, smiling on him:  "It is the last word which we have heard from thee of this matter, though verily it was spoken a while ago. What wilt thou add to it as now?"  "This," quoth the Sage, "that I will leave thee no more till thou biddest me go from thee. Was this word needful?"

Ralph reached his hand to him and said:  "It is well and more; but the road hence to Upmeads may yet be a rough one." "Yea," said the Sage, "yet shall we come thither all living, unless my sight now faileth."

Then Ursula rose up and came to the old man, and cast her arms about him and said:  "Yea, father, come with us, and let thy wisdom bless our roof-tree. Wilt thou not teach our children wisdom; yea, maybe our children's children, since thou art a friend of the Well?"

"I know not of the teaching of wisdom," said the Sage; "but as to my going with thee, it shall be as I said e'en-now; and forsooth I looked for this bidding of thee to make naught of the word which I spoke ere yet I had learned wisdom of thee."

Therewith were they merry, and fain of each other, and the evening wore amidst great content.

But when morning was come they gat to horse, and Ralph spake to Michael and said:  "Well, friend, now must thou ride alone to thy kindred, and may fair days befall thee in Swevenham. But if thou deem at any time that matters go not so well with thee as thou wouldst, then turn thine head to Upmeads, and try it there, and we shall further thee all we may."

Then came the Sage to Michael as he sat upon his horse, a stalwarth man of some forty winters, and said:  "Michael-a-dale, reach me thine hand." So did he, and the Sage looked into the palm thereof, and said: "This man shall make old bones, and it is more like than not, King's son, that he shall seek to thee at Upmeads ere he die." Said Ralph:  "His coming shall be a joy to us, how pleasant soever our life may be otherwise.  Farewell, Michael! all good go with thee for thine wholesome redes."

So then Michael gave them farewell, and rode his ways to Swevenham, going hastily, as one who should hurry away from a grief.

But the three held on their way to Whitwall, and it was barely noon when they came to the gate thereof on a Saturday of latter May, It was a market-day, and the streets were thronged, and they looked on the folk and were fain of them, since they seemed to them to be something more than aliens. The folk also looked on them curiously, and deemed them goodly, both the old man and the two knights, for they thought no otherwise of Ursula than that she was a carle.

But now as they rode, slowly because of the crowd, up Petergate, they heard a cry of one beside them, as of a man astonished but joyful; so Ralph drew rein, and turned thither whence the cry came, and Ursula saw a man wide-shouldered, grey-haired, blue-eyed, and ruddy of countenance--a man warrior-like to look on, and girt with a long sword.  Ralph lighted down from his horse, and met the man, who was coming toward him, cast his arms about his neck, and kissed him, and lo, it was Richard the Red. The people round about, when they saw it, clapped their hands, and crowded about the two crying out:  "Hail to the friends long parted, and now united!"  But Richard, whom most knew, cried out:  "Make way, my masters! will ye sunder us again?" Then he said to Ralph:  "Get into thy saddle, lad; for surely thou hast a tale to tell overlong for the open street."

Ralph did as he was bidden, and without more ado they went on all toward that hostelry where Ralph had erst borne the burden of grief. Richard walked by Ralph's side, and as he went he said: "Moreover, lad, I can see that thy tale is no ill one; therefore my heart is not wrung for thee or me, though I wait for it a while." Then again he said:  "Thou doest well to hide her loveliness in war-weed even in this town of peace."

Ursula reddened, and Richard laughed and said: "Well, it is a fair rose which thou hast brought from east-away. There will be never another couple in these parts like you. Now I see the words on thy lips; so I tell thee that Blaise thy brother is alive and well and happy; which last word means that his coffer is both deep and full.  Forsooth, he would make a poor bargain in buying any kingship that I wot of, so rich he is, yea, and mighty withal."

Said Ralph:  "And how went the war with Walter the Black?"

Even as he spake his face changed, for he bethought him over closely of the past days, and his dream of the Lady of Abundance and of Dorothea, who rode by him now as Ursula.  But Richard spake:  "Short is the tale to tell. I slew him in shock of battle, and his men craved peace of the good town. Many were glad of his death, and few sorrowed for it; for, fair as his young body was, he was a cruel tyrant."

Therewith were they come to the hostel of the Lamb which was the very same house wherein Ralph had abided aforetime; and as he entered it, it is not to be said but that inwardly his heart bled for the old sorrow. Ursula looked on him lovingly and blithely; and when they were within doors Richard turned to the Sage and said:  "Hail to thee, reverend man! wert thou forty years older to behold, outworn and forgotten of death, I should have said that thou wert like to the Sage that dwelt alone amidst the mountains nigh to Swevenham when I was a little lad, and fearsome was the sight of thee unto me."

The Sage laughed and said:  "Yea, somewhat like am I yet to myself of forty years ago.  Good is thy memory, greybeard."

Then Richard shook his head, and spake under his breath: "Yea, then it was no dream or coloured cloud, and he hath drank of the waters, and so then hath my dear lord." Then he looked up bright-faced, and called on the serving-men, and bade one lead them into a fair chamber, and another go forth and provide a banquet to be brought in thither. So they went up into a goodly chamber high aloft; and Ursula went forth from it awhile, and came back presently clad in very fair woman's raiment, which Ralph had bought for her at Goldburg. Richard looked on her and nothing else for a while; then he walked about the chamber uneasily, now speaking with the Sage, now with Ursula, but never with Ralph. At last he spake to Ursula, and said:  "Grant me a grace, lady, and be not wroth if I take thy man into the window yonder that I may talk with him privily while ye hold converse together, thou and the Sage of Swevenham."

She laughed merrily and said:  "Sir nurse, take thy bantling and cosset him in whatso corner thou wilt, and I will turn away mine eyes from thy caresses."

So Richard took Ralph into a window, and sat down beside him and said: "Mayhappen I shall sadden thee by my question, but I mind me what our last talking together was about, and therefore I must needs ask thee this, was that other one fairer than this one is?"

Ralph knit his brows:  "I wot not," quoth he, "since she is gone, that other one."

"Yea," said Richard, "but this I say, that she is without a blemish. Did ye drink of the Well together?"

"Yea, surely," said Ralph.  Said Richard:  "And is this woman of a good heart?  Is she valiant?"  "Yea, yea," said Ralph, flushing red.

"As valiant as was that other?" said Richard.  Said Ralph: "How may I tell, unless they were tried in one way?" Yet Richard spake:  "Are ye wedded?"  "Even so," said Ralph.

"Dost thou deem her true?" said Richard.  "Truer than myself," said Ralph, in a voice which was somewhat angry.

Quoth Richard:  "Then is it better than well, and better than well; for now hast thou wedded into the World of living men, and not to a dream of the Land of Fairy."

Ralph sat silent a little, and as if he were swallowing somewhat; at last he said:  "Old friend, I were well content if thou wert to speak such words no more; for it irks me, and woundeth my heart."

Said Richard:  "Well, I will say no more thereof; be content therefore, for now I have said it, and thou needest not fear me, what I have to say thereon any more, and thou mayst well wot that I must needs have said somewhat of this."

Ralph nodded to him friendly, and even therewith came in the banquet, which was richly served, as for a King's son, and wine was poured forth of the best, and they feasted and were merry.  And then Ralph told all the tale of his wanderings how it had betid, bringing in all that Ursula had told him of Utterbol; while as for her she put in no word of it. So that at last Ralph, being wishful to hear her tell somewhat, made more of some things than was really in them, so that she might set him right; but no word more she said for all that, but only smiled on him now and again, and sat blushing like a rose over her golden-flowered gown, while Richard looked on her and praised her in his heart exceedingly.

But when Ralph had done the story (which was long, so that by then it was over it had been dark night some while), Richard said: "Well, fosterling, thou hast seen much, and done much, and many would say that thou art a lucky man, and that more and much more lieth ready to thine hand.  Whither now wilt thou wend, or what wilt thou do?"

Ralph's face reddened, as its wont had been when it was two years younger, at contention drawing nigh, and he answered: "Where then should I go save to the House of my Fathers, and the fields that fed them?  What should I do but live amongst my people, warding them from evil, and loving them and giving them good counsel? For wherefore should I love them less than heretofore? Have they become dastards, and the fools of mankind?"

Quoth Richard:  "They are no more fools than they were belike, nor less valiant.  But thou art grown wiser and mightier by far; so that thou art another manner man than thou wert, and the Master of Masters maybe.  To Upmeads wilt thou go; but wilt thou abide there? Upmeads is a fair land, but a narrow; one day is like another there, save when sorrow and harm is blent with it.  The world is wide, and now I deem that thou holdest the glory thereof in the hollow of thine hand."

Then spake the Sage, and said:  "Yea, Richard of Swevenham, and how knowest thou but that this sorrow and trouble have not now fallen upon Upmeads? And if that be so, upon whom should they call to their helping rather than him who can help them most, and is their very lord?"  Said Richard: "It may be so, wise man, though as yet we have heard no tidings thereof. But if my lord goeth to their help, yet, when the trouble shall be over, will he not betake him thither where fresh deeds await him?"

"Nay, Richard," said the Sage, "art thou so little a friend of thy fosterling as not to know that when he hath brought back peace to the land, it will be so that both he shall need the people, and they him, so that if he go away for awhile, yet shall he soon come back?  Yea, and so shall the little land, it may be, grow great."

Now had Ralph sat quiet while this talk was going on, and as if he heeded not, and his eyes were set as if he were beholding something far away. Then Richard spoke again after there had been silence awhile: "Wise man, thou sayest sooth; yea, and so it is, that though we here have heard no tale concerning war in Upmeads, yet, as it were, we have been feeling some stirring of the air about us; even as though matters were changing, great might undone, and weakness grown to strength. Who can say but our lord may find deeds to hand or ever he come to Upmeads?"

Ralph turned his head as one awaking from a dream, and he said: "When shall to-morrow be, that we may get us gone from Whitwall, we three, and turn our faces toward Upmeads?"

Said Richard:  "Wilt thou not tarry a day or two, and talk with thine own mother's son and tell him of thine haps?" "Yea," said Ralph, "and so would I, were it not that my father's trouble and my mother's grief draw me away."

"O tarry not," said Ursula; "nay, not for the passing of the night; but make this hour the sunrise, and begone by the clear of the moon. For lo! how he shineth through the window!"

Then she turned to Richard, and said:  "O fosterer of my love, knowest thou not that as now he speaketh as a Friend of the Well, and wotteth more of far-off tidings than even this wise man of many years?"

Said Ralph:  "She sayeth sooth, O Richard.  Or how were it if the torch were even now drawing nigh to the High House of Upmeads:  yea, or if the very House were shining as a dreary candle of the meadows, and reddening the waters of the ford! What do we here?"

Therewith he thrust the board from him, and arose and went to his harness, and fell to arming him, and he spake to Richard: "Now shall thine authority open to us the gates of the good town, though the night be growing old; we shall go our ways, dear friend, and mayhappen we shall meet again, and mayhappen not:  and thou shalt tell my brother Blaise who wotteth not of my coming hither, how things have gone with me, and how need hath drawn me hence. And bid him come see me at Upmeads, and to ride with a good band of proper men, for eschewing the dangers of the road."

Then spake Richard:  "I shall tell Lord Blaise neither more nor less than thou mayst tell him thyself:  for think it not that thou shalt go without me.  As for Blaise, he may well spare me; for he is become a chief and Lord of the Porte; and the Porte hath now right good men-at-arms, and captains withal younger and defter than I be. But now suffer me to send a swain for my horse and arms, and another to the captain of the watch at West-gate Bar that he be ready to open to me and three of my friends, and to send me a let-pass for the occasion. So shall we go forth ere it be known that the brother of the Lord of the Porte is abiding at the Lamb.  For verily I see that the Lady hath spoken truth; and it is like that she is forseeing, even as thou hast grown to be. And now I bethink me I might lightly get me a score of men to ride with us, whereas we may meet men worse than ourselves on the way."

Said Ralph:  "All good go with thy words, Richard; yet gather not force: there may stout men be culled on the road; and if thou runnest or ridest about the town, we may yet be stayed by Blaise and his men. Wherefore now send for thine horse and arms, and bid the host here open his gates with little noise when we be ready; and we will presently ride out by the clear of the moon. But thou, beloved, shalt don thine armour no more, but shalt ride henceforth in thy woman's raiment, for the wild and the waste is well nigh over, and the way is but short after all these months of wandering; and I say that now shall all friends drift toward us, and they that shall rejoice to strike a stroke for my father's son, and the peaceful years of the Friend of the Well."

To those others, and chiefly to Ursula, it seemed that now he spoke strongly and joyously, like to a king and a captain of men. Richard did his bidding, and was swift in dealing with the messengers. But the Sage said:  "Ralph, my son, since ye have lost one man-at-arms, and have gotten but this golden angel in his stead, I may better that. I prithee bid thy man Richard find me armour and weapons that I may amend the shard in thy company.  Thou shalt find me no feeble man when we come to push of staves."

Ralph laughed, and bade Richard see to it; so he dealt with the host, and bought good war-gear of him, and a trenchant sword, and an axe withal; and when the Sage was armed he looked as doughty a warrior as need be. By this time was Richard's horse and war-gear come, and he armed him speedily and gave money to the host, and they rode therewith all four out of the hostel, and found the street empty and still, for the night was wearing. So rode they without tarrying into Westgate and came to the Bar, and speedily was the gate opened to them; and anon were they on the moonlit road outside of Whitwall.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_14]

CHAPTER 14

They Ride Away From Whitwall

But when they were well on the way, and riding a good pace by the clear of the moon, Richard spake to Ralph, and said: "Wither ride we now?" said Ralph:  "Wither, save to Upmeads?" "Yea, yea," said Richard, "but by what road? shall we ride down to the ford of the Swelling Flood, and ride the beaten way, or take to the downland and the forest, and so again by the forest and downland and the forest once more, till we come to the Burg of the Four Friths?"

"Which way is the shorter?" said Ralph.  "Forsooth," said Richard, "by the wildwood ye may ride shorter, if ye know it as I do." Quoth the Sage:  "Yea, or as I do.  Hear a wonder! that two men of Swevenham know the wilds more than twenty miles from their own thorp."

Said Ralph:  "Well, wend we the shorter road; why make more words over it? Or what lion lieth on the path?  Is it that we may find it hard to give the go-by to the Burg of the Four Friths?"

Said Richard:  "Though the Burg be not very far from Whitwall, we hear but little tidings thence; our chapmen but seldom go there, and none cometh to us thence save such of our men as have strayed thither. Yet, as I said e'en now in the hostel, there is an air of tidings abroad, and one rumour sayeth, and none denieth it, that the old fierceness and stout headstrong mood of the Burg is broken down, and that men dwell there in peace and quiet."

Said the Sage:  "In any case we have amongst us lore enough to hoodwink them if they be foes; so that we shall pass easily. Naught of this need we fear."

But Richard put his mouth close to Ralph's ear, and spake to him softly: "Shall we indeed go by that shorter road, whatever in days gone by may have befallen in places thereon, to which we must go a-nigh tomorrow?" Ralph answered softly in turn:  "Yea, forsooth:  for I were fain to try my heart, how strong it may be."

So they rode on, and turned off from the road that led down to the ford of the Swelling Flood, anigh which Ralph had fallen in with Blaise and Richard on the day after the woeful slaying, which had made an end of his joy for that time. But when they were amidst of the bushes and riding a deep ghyll of the waste, Richard said:  "It is well that we are here: for now if Blaise send riders to bring us back courteously, they shall not follow us at once, but shall ride straight down to the ford, and even cross it in search of us." "Yea," said Ralph, "it is well in all wise."

So then they rode thence awhile till the moon grew low, and great, and red, and sank down away from them; and by then were they come to a shepherd's cot, empty of men, with naught therein save an old dog, and some victual, as bread and white cheese, and a well for drinking. So there they abode and rested that night.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_15]

CHAPTER 15

A Strange Meeting in the Wilderness

On the morrow betimes they got to the road again; the country at first, though it was scanty of tillage, was not unfurnished of sheep, being for the most part of swelling hills and downs well grassed, with here and there a deep cleft in them. They saw but few houses, and those small and poor. A few shepherds they fell in with, who were short of speech, after the manner of such men, but deemed a greeting not wholly thrown away on such goodly folk as those wayfarers.

So they rode till it was noon, and Richard talked more than his wont was, though his daily use it was to be of many words: nor did the Sage spare speech; but Ursula spoke little, nor heeded much what the others said, and Ralph deemed that she was paler than of wont, and her brows were knitted as if she were somewhat anxious.  As for him, he was grave and calm, but of few words; and whiles when Richard was wordiest he looked on him steadily for a moment whereat Richard changed countenance, and for a while stinted his speech, but not for long; while Ralph looked about him, inwardly striving to gather together the ends of unhappy thoughts that floated about him, and to note the land he was passing through, if indeed he had verily seen it aforetime, elsewhere than in some evil dream.

At last when they stopped to bait by some scrubby bushes at the foot of a wide hill-side, he took Richard apart, and said to him:  "Old friend, and whither go we?"  Said Richard: "As thou wottest, to the Burg of the Four Friths." "Yea," said Ralph, "but by what road?"  Said Richard: "Youngling is not thine heart, then, as strong as thou deemedst last night?"  Ralph was silent a while, and then he said: "I know what thou wouldst say; we are going by the shortest road to the Castle of Abundance."

He spake this out loud, but Richard nodded his head to him, as if he would say:  "Yea, so it is; but hold thy peace."  But Ralph knew that Ursula had come up behind him, and, still looking at Richard, he put his open hand aback toward her, and her hand fell into it. Then he turned about to her, and saw that her face was verily pale; so he put his hands on her shoulders and kissed her kindly; and she let her head fall on to his bosom and fell a-weeping, and the two elders turned away to the horses, and feigned to be busy with them.

Thus then they bided some minutes of time, and then all gat to horse again, and Ursula's face was cleared of the grief of fear, and the colour had come back to her cheeks and lips. But Ralph's face was stern and sorrowful to behold; howbeit, as they rode away he spake in a loud and seeming cheerful voice: "Still ever shorteneth more and more the way unto my Fathers' House: and withal I am wishful to see if it be indeed true that the men of the Burg have become mild and peaceful; and to know what hath befallen those doughty champions of the Dry Tree; and if perchance they have any will to hold us a tilting in courteous fashion."

Richard smiled on him, and said:  "Thou holdest more then by the Dry Tree than by the Burg; though while agone we deemed the Champions worse men to meet in the wood than the Burgers."

"So it is," said Ralph; "but men are oft mis-said by them that know them not thoroughly:  and now, if it were a good wish, O Sage of Swevenham, I were fain to fall in with the best of all those champions, a tall man and a proper, who, meseems, had good-will toward me, I know not why."

Quoth the Sage:  "If thou canst not see the end of this wish fulfilled, no more can I. And yet, meseems something may follow it which is akin to grief:  be content with things so done, my son."

Now Ralph holds his peace, and they speed on their way, Ursula riding close by Ralph's side, and caressing him with looks, and by touch also when she might; and after a while he fell to talking again, and ever in the same loud, cheerful voice. Till at last, in about another hour, they came in sight of the stream which ran down toward the Swelling Flood from that pool wherein erst the Lady of Abundance had bathed her before the murder. Hard looked Ralph on the stream, but howsoever his heart might ache with the memory of that passed grief, like as the body aches with the bruise of yesterday's blow, yet he changed countenance but little, and in his voice was the same cheery sound. But Ursula noted him, and how his eyes wandered, and how little he heeded the words of the others, and she knew what ailed him, for long ago he had told her all that tale, and so now her heart was troubled, and she looked on him and was silent.

Thus, then, a little before sunset, they came on that steep cliff with the cave therein, and the little green plain thereunder, and the rocky bank going down sheer into the water of the stream. Forsooth they came on it somewhat suddenly from out of the bushes of the valley; and there indeed not only the Sage and Richard, but Ursula also, were stayed by the sight as folk compelled; for all three knew what had befallen there.  But Ralph, though he looked over his shoulder at it all, yet rode on steadily, and when he saw that the others lingered, he waved his hand and cried out as he rode: "On, friends, on! for the road shortens towards my Fathers' House." Then were they ashamed, and shook their reins to hasten after him.

But in that very nick of time there came forth one from amidst the bushes that edged the pool of the stream and strode dripping on to the shallow; a man brown and hairy, and naked, save for a green wreath about his middle. Tall he was above the stature of most men; awful of aspect, and his eyes glittered from his dark brown face amidst of his shockhead of the colour of rain-spoilt hay.  He stood and looked while one might count five, and then without a word or cry rushed up from the water, straight on Ursula, who was riding first of the three lingerers, and in the twinkling of an eye tore her from off her horse; and she was in his grasp as the cushat in the claws of the kite. Then he cast her to earth, and stood over her, shaking a great club, but or ever he brought it down he turned his head over his shoulder toward the cliff and the cave therein, and in that same moment first one blade and then another flashed about him, and he fell crashing down upon his back, smitten in the breast and the side by Richard and Ralph; and the wounds were deep and deadly.

Ralph heeded him no more, but drew Ursula away from him, and raised her up and laid her head upon his knee; and she had not quite swooned away, and forsooth had taken but little hurt; only she was dizzy with terror and the heaving up and casting down.

She looked up into Ralph's face, and smiled on him and said: "What hath been done to me, and why did he do it?"

His eyes were still wild with fear and wrath, as he answered:  "O Beloved, Death and the foeman of old came forth from the cavern of the cliff. What did they there, Lord God? and he caught thee to slay thee; but him have I slain.  Nevertheless, it is a terrible and evil place: let us go hence."

"Yea," she said, "let us go speedily!"  Then she stood up, weak and tottering still, and Ralph arose and put his left arm about her to stay her; and lo, there before them was Richard kneeling over the wild-man, and the Sage was coming back from the river with his headpiece full of water; so Ralph cried out:  "To horse, Richard, to horse! Hast thou not done slaying the woodman?"

But therewith came a weak and hoarse voice from the earth, and the wild-man spake.  "Child of Upmeads, drive not on so hard: it will not be long.  For thou and Richard the Red are naught lighthanded."

Ralph marvelled that the wild-man knew him and Richard, but the wild-man spake again:  "Hearken, thou lover, thou young man!"

But therewith was the Sage come to him and kneeling beside him with the water, and he drank thereof, while Ralph said to him: "What is this woodman? and canst thou speak my Latin? What art thou?"

Then the wild-man when he had drunk raised him up a little, and said: "Young man, thou and Richard are deft leeches; ye have let me blood to a purpose, and have brought back to me my wits, which were wandering wide. Yet am I indeed where my fool's brains told me I was."

Then he lay back again, and turned his head as well as he could toward the cavern in the cliff.  But Ralph deemed he had heard his voice before, and his heart was softened toward him, he knew not why; but he said: "Yea, but wherefore didst thou fall upon the Lady?"  The wild-man strove with his weakness, and said angrily:  "What did another woman there?" Then he said in a calmer but weaker voice:  "Nay, my wits shall wander no more from me; we will make the journey together, I and my wits.  But O, young man, this I will say if I can.  Thou fleddest from her and forgattest her. I came to her and forgat all but her; yea, my very life I forgat."

Again he spoke, and his voice was weaker yet:  "Kneel down by me, or I may not tell thee what I would; my voice dieth before me."

Then Ralph knelt down by him, for he began to have a deeming of what he was, and he put his face close to the dying man's, and said to him; "I am here, what wouldst thou?"

Said the wild-man very feebly:  "I did not much for thee time was; how might I, when I loved her so sorely?  But I did a little. Believe it, and do so much for me that I may lie by her side when I am dead, who never lay by her living.  For into the cave I durst go never."

Then Ralph knew him, that he was the tall champion whom he had met first at the churchyard gate of Netherton; so he said: "I know thee now, and I will promise to do thy will herein. I am sorry that I have slain thee; forgive it me."

A mocking smile came into the dying man's eyes, and he spake whispering: "Richard it was; not thou."

The smile spread over his face, he strove to turn more toward Ralph, and said in a very faint whisper:  "The last time!"

No more he said, but gave up the ghost presently.  The Sage rose up from his side and said:  "Ye may now bury this man as he craved of thee, for he is dead.  Thus hath thy wish been accomplished; for this was the great champion and duke of the men of the Dry Tree. Indeed it is a pity of him that he is dead, for as terrible as he was to his foes, he was no ill man."

Spake Richard:  "Now is the riddle areded of the wild-man and the mighty giant that haunted these passes.  We have played together or now, in days long past, he and I; and ever he came to his above. He was a wise man and a prudent that he should have become a wild-man. It is great pity of him."

But Ralph took his knight's cloak of red scarlet, and they lapped the wild-man therein, who had once been a champion beworshipped. But first Ursula sheared his hair and his beard, till the face of him came back again, grave, and somewhat mocking, as Ralph remembered it, time was.  Then they bore him in the four corners across the stream, and up on to the lawn before the cliff; and Richard and the Sage bore him into the cave, and laid him down there beside the howe which Ralph had erewhile heaped over the Lady; and now over him also they heaped stones.

Meanwhile Ursula knelt at the mouth of the cave and wept; but Ralph turned him about and stood on the edge of the bank, and looked over the ripple of the stream on to the valley, where the moon was now beginning to cast shadows, till those two came out of the cave for the last time. Then Ralph turned to Ursula and raised her up and kissed her, and they went down all of them from that place of death and ill-hap, and gat to horse on the other side of the stream, and rode three miles further on by the glimmer of the moon, and lay down to rest amongst the bushes of the waste, with few words spoken between them.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_16]

CHAPTER 16

They Come to the Castle of Abundance Once More

When they rode on next morning Ralph was few-spoken, and seemed to heed little so long as they made good speed on the way: most of the talk was betwixt Richard and the Sage, Ralph but putting in a word when it would have seemed churlish to forbear.

So they went their ways through the wood till by then the sun was well westering they came out at the Water of the Oak, and Richard drew rein there, and spake:  "Here is a fair place for a summer night's lodging, and I would warrant both good knight and fair lady have lain here aforetime, and wished the dark longer: shall we not rest here?"

Ralph stared at him astonished, and then anger grew in his face for a little, because, forsooth, as Richard and the Sage both wotted of the place of the slaying of the Lady, and he himself had every yard of the way in his mind as they went, it seemed but due that they should have known of this place also, what betid there: but it was not so, and the place was to Richard like any other lawn of the woodland.

But thought came back to Ralph in a moment, and he smiled at his own folly, howbeit he could not do to lie another night on that lawn with other folk than erst.  So he said quietly: "Nay, friend, were we not better to make the most of this daylight? Seest thou it wants yet an hour of sunset?"

Richard nodded a yeasay, and the Sage said no word more; but Ursula cast her anxious look on Ralph as though she understood what was moving in him; and therewith those others rode away lightly, but Ralph turned slowly from the oak-tree, and might not forbear looking on to the short sward round about, as if he hoped to see some token left behind. Then he lifted up his face as one awaking, shook his rein, and rode after the others down the long water.

So they turned from the water anon, and rode the woodland ways, and lay that night by a stream that ran west.

They arose betimes on the morrow, and whereas the Sage knew the woodland ways well, they made but a short journey of it to the Castle of Abundance, and came into the little plain but two hours after noon, where saving that the scythe had not yet wended the tall mowing grass in the crofts which the beasts and sheep were not pasturing, all was as on that other tide. The folk were at work in their gardens, or herding their cattle in the meads, and as aforetime they were merry of countenance and well-clad, fair and gentle to look on.

There were their pleasant cots, and the little white church, and the fair walls of the castle on its low mound, and the day bright and sunny, all as aforetime, and Ralph looked on it all, and made no countenance of being moved beyond his wont.

So they came out of the wood, and rode to the ford of the river, and the carles and queans came streaming from their garths and meads to meet them, and stood round wondering at them; but an old carle came from out the throng and went up to Ralph, and hailed him, and said: "Oh, Knight! and hast thou come back to us? and has thou brought us tidings of our Lady?  Who is this fair woman that rideth with thee? Is it she?"

Spake Ralph:  "Nay; go look on her closely, and tell me thy deeming of her."

So the carle went up to Ursula, and peered closely into her face, and took her hand and looked on it, and knelt down and took her foot out of the stirrup, and kissed it, and then came back to Ralph, and said:  "Fair Sir, I wot not but it may be her sister; for yonder old wise man I have seen here erst with our heavenly Lady. But though this fair woman may be her sister, it is not she. So tell me what is become of her, for it is long since we have seen her; and what thou tellest us, that same shall we trow, even as if thou wert her angel.  For I spake with thee, it is nigh two years agone, when thou wert abiding the coming of our Lady in the castle yonder But now I see of thee that thou art brighter-faced, and mightier of aspect than aforetime, and it is in my mind that the Lady of Abundance must have loved thee and holpen thee, and blessed thee with some great blessing."

Said Ralph:  "Old man, canst thou feel sorrow, and canst thou bear it?" The carle shook his head.  "I wot not," said he, "I fear thy words." Said Ralph:  "It were naught to say less than the truth; and this is the very truth, that thou shalt never see thy Lady any more. I was the last living man that ever saw her alive."

Then he spake in a loud voice and said:  "Lament, ye people! for the Lady of Abundance is dead; yet sure I am that she sendeth this message to you, Live in peace, and love ye the works of the earth."

But when they heard him, the old man covered up his face with the folds of his gown, and all that folk brake forth into weeping, and crying out: "Woe for us! the Lady of Abundance is dead!" and some of the younger men cast themselves down on to the earth, and wallowed, weeping and wailing: and there was no man there that seemed as if he knew which way to turn, or what to do; and their faces were foolish with sorrow.  Yet forsooth it was rather the carles than the queans who made all this lamentation.

At last the old man spake:  "Fair sir, ye have brought us heavy tidings, and we know not how to ask you to tell us more of the tale. Yet if thou might'st but tell us how the Lady died? Woe's me for the word!"

Said Ralph:  "She was slain with the sword."

The old man drew himself up stiff and stark, the eyes of him glittered under his white hair, and wrath changed his face, and the other men-folk thronged them to hearken what more should be said.

But the elder spake again:  "Tell me who it was that slew her, for surely shall I slay him, or die in the pain else."

Said Ralph:  "Be content, thou mayst not slay him; he was a great and mighty man, a baron who bore a golden sun on a blue field. Thou mayst not slay him."  "Yea," said the old man, "but I will, or he me."

"Live in peace," said Ralph, "for I slew him then and there."

The old man held his peace a while, and then he said: "I know the man, for he hath been here aforetime, and not so long ago. But if he be dead, he hath a brother yet, an exceeding mighty man: he will be coming here to vex us and minish us."

Said Ralph:  "He will not stir from where he lies till Earth's bones be broken, for my sword lay in his body yesterday."

The old man stood silent again, and the other carles thronged him; but the woman stood aloof staring on Ralph. Then the elder came up to Ralph and knelt before him and kissed his feet; then he turned and called to him three of the others who were of the stoutest and most stalwarth, and he spake with them awhile, and then he came to Ralph again, and again knelt before him and said:  "Lord, ye have come to us, and found us void of comfort, since we have lost our Lady. But we see in thee, that she hath loved thee and blessed thee, and thou hast slain her slayer and his kindred. And we see of thee also that thou art a good lord. O the comfort to us, therefore, if thou wouldest be our Lord! We will serve thee truly so far as we may:  yea, even if thou be beset by foes, we will take bow and bill from the wall, and stand round about thee and fight for thee. Only thou must not ask us to go hence from this place: for we know naught but the Plain of Abundance, and the edges of the wood, and the Brethren of the House of the Thorn, who are not far hence.  Now we pray thee by thy fathers not to naysay us, so sore as thou hast made our hearts. Also we see about thy neck the same-like pair of beads which our Lady was wont to bear, and we deem that ye were in one tale together."

Then was Ralph silent awhile, but the Sage spake to the elder: "Old man, how great is the loss of the Lady to you?" "Heavy loss, wise old man," said the carle, "as thou thyself mayst know, having known her."

"And what did she for you?" said the Sage.  Said the elder: "We know that she was gracious to us; never did she lay tax or tale on us, and whiles she would give us of her store, and that often, and abundantly.  We deem also that every time when she came to us our increase became more plenteous, which is well seen by this, that since she hath ceased to come, the seasons have been niggard unto us."

The Sage smiled somewhat, and the old man went on: "But chiefly the blessing was to see her when she came to us: for verily it seemed that where she set her feet the grass grew greener, and that the flowers blossomed fairer where the shadow of her body fell." And therewith the old man fell a-weeping again.

The Sage held his peace, and Ralph still kept silence; and now of these men all the younger ones had their eyes upon Ursula.

After a while Ralph spake and said:  "O elder, and ye folk of the People of Abundance, true it is that your Lady who is dead loved me, and it is through her that I am become a Friend of the Well. Now meseemeth though ye have lost your Lady, whom ye so loved and worshipped, God wot not without cause, yet I wot not why ye now cry out for a master, since ye dwell here in peace and quiet and all wealth, and the Fathers of the Thorn are here to do good to you.  Yet, if ye will it in sooth, I will be called your Lord, in memory of your Lady whom ye shall not see again.  And as time wears I will come and look on you and hearken to your needs: and if ye come to fear that any should fall upon you with the strong hand, then send ye a message to me, Ralph of Upmeads, down by the water, and I will come to you with such following as need be. And as for service, this only I lay upon you, that ye look to the Castle and keep it in good order, and ward it against thieves and runagates, and give guesting therein to any wandering knight or pilgrim, or honest goodman, who shall come to you. Now is all said, my masters, and I pray you let us depart in peace; for time presses."

Then all they (and this time women as well as men) cried out joyfully: "Hail to our lord! and long life to our helper."  And the women withal drew nearer to him, and some came close up to him, as if they would touch him or kiss his hand, but by seeming durst not, but stood blushing before him, and he looked on them, smiling kindly.

But the old man laid his hand on his knee and said: "Lord, wouldst thou not light down and enter thy Castle; for none hath more right there now than thou. The Prior of the Thorn hath told us that there is no lineage of the Lady left to claim it; and none other might ever have claimed it save the Baron of Sunway, whom thou hast slain. And else would we have slain him, since he slew our Lady."

Ralph shook his head and said:  "Nay, old friend, and new vassal, this we may not do:  we must on speedily, for belike there is work for us to do nearer home."

"Yea, Lord," said the carle, "but at least light down and sit for a while under this fair oak-tree in the heat of the day, and eat a morsel with us, and drink a cup, that thy luck may abide with us when thou art gone."

Ralph would not naysay him; so he and all of them got off their horses, and sat down on the green grass under the oak: and that people gathered about and sat down by them, save that a many of the women went to their houses to fetch out the victual. Meanwhile the carles fell to speech freely with the wayfarers, and told them much concerning their little land, were it hearsay, or stark sooth:  such as tales of the wights that dwelt in the wood, wodehouses, and elf-women, and dwarfs, and such like, and how fearful it were to deal with such creatures. Amongst other matters they told how a hermit, a holy man, had come to dwell in the wood, in a clearing but a little way thence toward the north-west. But when Ralph asked if he dwelt on the way to the ford of the Swelling Flood, they knew not what he meant; for the wood was to them as a wall.

Hereon the Sage held one of the younger men in talk, and taught him what he might of the way to the Burg of the Four Friths, so that they might verily send a messenger to Upmeads if need were. But the country youth said there was no need to think thereof, as no man of theirs would dare the journey through the wood, and that if they had need of a messenger, one of the Fathers of the Thorn would do their errand, whereas they were holy men, and knew the face of the world full well.

Now in this while the folk seemed to have gotten their courage again, and to be cheery, and to have lost their grief for the Lady: and of the maidens left about the oak were more than two or three very fair, who stood gazing at Ralph as if they were exceeding fain of him.

But amidst these things came back the women with the victual; to wit bread in baskets, and cheeses both fresh and old, and honey, and wood-strawberries, and eggs cooked diversely, and skewers of white wood with gobbets of roasted lamb's flesh, and salad good plenty.  All these they bore first to Ralph and Ursula, and their two fellows, and then dealt them to their own folk: and they feasted and were merry in despite of that tale of evil tidings. They brought also bowls and pitchers of wine that was good and strong, and cider of their orchards, and called many a health to the new Lord and his kindred.

Thus then they abode a-feasting till the sun was westering and the shadows waxed about them, and then at last Ralph rose up and called to horse, and the other wayfarers arose also, and the horses were led up to them.  Then the maidens, made bold by the joy of the feast, and being stirred to the heart by much beholding of this beloved Lord, cast off their shamefacedness and crowded about him, and kissed his raiment and his hands: some even, though trembling, and more for love than fear, prayed him for kisses, and he, nothing loath, laughed merrily and laid his hands on their shoulders or took them by the chins, and set his lips to the sweetness of their cheeks and their lips, of those that asked and those that refrained; so that their hearts failed them for love of him, and when he was gone, they knew not how to go back to their houses, or the places that were familiar to them. Therewith he and his got into their saddles and rode away slowly, because of the thronging about them of that folk, who followed them to the edge of the wood, and even entered a little thereinto; and then stood gazing on Ralph and his fellows after they had spurred on and were riding down a glade of the woodland.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_17]

CHAPTER 17

They Fall in With That Hermit

So much had they tarried over this greeting and feasting, that though they had hoped to have come to the hermit's house that night, he of whom that folk had told them, it fell not so, whereas the day had aged so much ere they left the Plain of Abundance that it began to dusk before they had gone far, and they must needs stay and await the dawn there; so they dight their lodging as well as they might, and lay down and slept under the thick boughs.

Ralph woke about sunrise, and looking up saw a man standing over him, and deemed at first that it would be Richard or the Sage; but as his vision cleared, he saw that it was neither of them, but a new comer; a stout carle clad in russet, with a great staff in his hand and a short-sword girt to his side.  Ralph sprang up, still not utterly awake, and cried out, "Who art thou, carle?"  The man laughed, and said: "Yea, thou art still the same brisk lad, only filled out to something more warrior-like than of old.  But it is unmeet to forget old friends. Why dost thou not hail me?"

"Because I know thee not, good fellow," said Ralph. But even as he spoke, he looked into the man's face again, and cried out:  "By St. Nicholas! but it is Roger of the Ropewalk. But look you, fellow, if I have somewhat filled out, thou, who wast always black-muzzled, art now become as hairy as a wodehouse. What dost thou in the wilds?"  Said Roger:  "Did they not tell thee of a hermit new come to these shaws?"  "Yea," said Ralph. "I am that holy man," quoth Roger, grinning; "not that I am so much of that, either.  I have not come hither to pray or fast overmuch, but to rest my soul and be out of the way of men. For all things have changed since my Lady passed away."

He looked about, and saw Ursula just rising up from the ground and the Sage stirring, while Richard yet hugged his bracken bed, snoring. So he said:  "And who be these, and why hast thou taken to the wildwood? Yea lad, I see of thee, that thou hast gotten another Lady; and if mine eyes do not fail me she is fair enough.  But there be others as fair; while the like to our Lady that was, there is none such."

He fell silent a while, and Ralph turned about to the others, for by this time Richard also was awake, and said: "This man is the hermit of whom we were told."

Roger said:  "Yea, I am the hermit and the holy man; and withal I have a thing to hear and a thing to tell. Ye were best to come with me, all of you, to my house in the woods; a poor one, forsooth, but there is somewhat of victual here, and we can tell and hearken therein well sheltered and at peace. So to horse, fair folk."

They would not be bidden twice, but mounted and went along with him, who led them by a thicket path about a mile, till they came to a lawn where-through ran a stream; and there was a little house in it, simple enough, of one hall, built with rough tree-limbs and reed thatch. He brought them in, and bade them sit on such stools or bundles of stuff as were there.  But withal he brought out victual nowise ill, though it were but simple also, of venison of the wildwood, with some little deal of cakes baked on the hearth, and he poured for them also both milk and wine.

They were well content with the banquet, and when they were full, Roger said: "Now, my Lord, like as oft befalleth minstrels, ye have had your wages before your work.  Fall to, then, and pay me the scot by telling me all that hath befallen you since (woe worth the while!) my Lady died,--I must needs say, for thy sake."

"'All' is a big word," said Ralph, "but I will tell thee somewhat. Yet I bid thee take note that I and this ancient wise one, and my Lady withal, deem that I am drawn by my kindred to come to their help, and that time presses."

Roger scowled somewhat on Ursula; but he said:  "Lord and master, let not that fly trouble thy lip.  For so I deem of it, that whatsoever time ye may lose by falling in with me, ye may gain twice as much again by hearkening my tale and the rede that shall go with it. And I do thee to wit that the telling of thy tale shall unfreeze mine; so tarry not, if ye be in haste to be gone, but let thy tongue wag."

Ralph smiled, and without more ado told him all that had befallen him; and of Swevenham and Utterbol, and of his captivity and flight; and of the meeting in the wood, and of the Sage (who there was), and of the journey to the Well, and what betid there and since, and of the death of the Champion of the Dry Tree.

But when he had made an end, Roger said:  "There it is, then, as I said when she first spake to me of thee and bade me bring about that meeting with her, drawing thee first to the Burg and after to the Castle of Abundance, I have forgotten mostly by what lies; but I said to her that she had set her heart on a man over lucky, and that thou wouldst take her luck from her and make it thine. But now I will let all that pass, and will bid thee ask what thou wilt; and I promise thee that I will help thee to come thy ways to thy kindred, that thou mayst put forth thy luck in their behalf."

Said Ralph:  "First of all, tell me what shall I do to pass unhindered through the Burg of the Four Friths?"  Said Roger: "Thou shalt go in at one gate and out at the other, and none shall hinder thee."

Said Ralph:  "And shall I have any hindrance from them of the Dry Tree?"

Roger made as if he were swallowing down something, and answered: "Nay, none."

"And the folk of Higham by the Way, and the Brethren and their Abbot?" said Ralph.

"I know but little of them," quoth Roger, "but I deem that they will make a push to have thee for captain; because they have had war on their hands of late. But this shall be at thine own will to say yea or nay to them. But for the rest on this side of the shepherds' country ye will pass by peaceful folk."

"Yea," said Ralph, "what then hath become of the pride and cruelty of the Burg of the Four Friths, and the eagerness and fierceness of the Dry Tree?"

Quoth Roger:  "This is the tale of it:  After the champions of the Dry Tree had lost their queen and beloved, the Lady of Abundance, they were both restless and fierce, for the days of sorrow hung heavy on their hands.  So on a time a great company of them had ado with the Burgers somewhat recklessly and came to the worse; wherefore some drew back into their fastness of the Scaur and the others still rode on, and further west than their wont had been; but warily when they had the Wood Perilous behind them, for they had learned wisdom again.  Thus riding they had tidings of an host of the Burg of the Four Friths who were resting in a valley hard by with a great train of captives and beasts and other spoil: for they had been raising the fray against the Wheat-wearers, and had slain many carles there, and were bringing home to the Burg many young women and women-children, after their custom. So they of the Dry Tree advised them of these tidings, and deemed that it would ease the sorrow of their hearts for their Lady if they could deal with these sons of whores and make a mark upon the Burg: so they lay hid while the daylight lasted, and by night and cloud fell upon these faineants of the Burg, and won them good cheap, as was like to be, though the Burg-dwellers were many the more. Whereof a many were slain, but many escaped and gat home to the Burg, even as will lightly happen even in the worst of overthrows, that not all, or even the more part be slain.

"Well, there were the champions and their prey, which was very great, and especially of women, of whom the more part were young and fair: for the women of the Wheat-wearers be goodly, and these had been picked out by the rutters of the Burg for their youth and strength and beauty. And whereas the men of the Dry Tree were scant of women at home, and sore-hearted because of our Lady, they forbore not these women, but fell to talking with them and loving them; howbeit in courteous and manly fashion, so that the women deemed themselves in heaven and were ready to do anything to please their lovers. So the end of it was that the Champions sent messengers to Hampton and the Castle of the Scaur to tell what had betid, and they themselves took the road to the land of the Wheat-wearers, having those women with them not as captives but as free damsels.

"Now the road to the Wheat-wearing country was long, and on the way the damsels told their new men many things of their land and their unhappy wars with them of the Burg and the griefs and torments which they endured of them. And this amongst other things, that wherever they came, they slew all the males even to the sucking babe, but spared the women, even when they bore them not into captivity.

"'Whereof,' said these poor damsels, 'it cometh that our land is ill-furnished of carles, so that we women, high and low, go afield and do many things, as crafts and the like, which in other lands are done by carles.' In sooth it seemed of them that they were both of stouter fashion, and defter than women are wont to be.  So the champions, part in jest, part in earnest, bade them do on the armour of the slain Burgers, and take their weapons, and fell to teaching them how to handle staff and sword and bow; and the women took heart from the valiant countenance of their new lovers, and deemed it all bitter earnest enough, and learned their part speedily; and yet none too soon. For when the fleers of the Burg came home the Porte lost no time, but sent out another host to follow after the Champions and their spoil; for they had learned that those men had not turned about to Hampton after their victory, but had gone on to the Wheat-wearers.

"So it befell that the host of the Burg came up with the Champions on the eve of a summer day when there were yet three hours of daylight. But whereas they had looked to have an easy bargain of their foemen, since they knew the Champions to be but a few, lo! there was the hillside covered with a goodly array of spears and glaives and shining helms. They marvelled; but now for very shame, and because they scarce could help it, they fell on, and before sunset were scattered to the winds again, and the fleers had to bear back the tale that the more part of their foes were women of the Wheat-wearers; but this time few were those that came back alive to the Burg of the Four Friths; for the freed captives were hot and eager in the chase, casting aside their shields and hauberks that they might speed the better, and valuing their lives at naught if they might but slay a man or two of the tyrants before they died.

"Thus was the Burg wounded with its own sword:  but the matter stopped not there:  for when that victorious host of men and women came into the land of the Wheat-wearers, all men fled away in terror at first, thinking that it was a new onset of the men of the Burg; and that all the more, as so many of them bore their weapons and armour. But when they found out how matters had gone, then, as ye may deem, was the greatest joy and exultation, and carles and queans both ran to arms and bade their deliverers learn them all that belonged to war, and said that one thing should not be lacking, to wit, the gift of their bodies, that should either lie dead in the fields, or bear about henceforth the souls of free men. Nothing lothe, the Champions became their doctors and teachers of battle, and a great host was drawn together; and meanwhile the Champions had sent messengers again to Hampton telling them what was befallen, and asking for more men if they might be had. But the Burg-abiders were not like to sit down under their foil. Another host they sent against the Wheat-wearers, not so huge, as well arrayed and wise in war.  The Champions espied its goings, and knew well that they had to deal with the best men of the Burg, and they met them in like wise; for they chose the very best of the men and the women, and pitched on a place whence they might ward them well, and abode the foemen there; who failed not to come upon them, stout and stern and cold, and well-learned in all feats of war.

"Long and bitter was the battle, and the Burgers were fierce without head-strong folly, and the Wheat-wearers deemed that if they blenched now, they had something worse than death to look to. But in the end when both sides were grown weary and worn out, and yet neither would flee, on a sudden came into the field the help from the Dry Tree, a valiant company of riders to whom battle was but game and play.  Then indeed the men of the Burg gave back and drew out of the battle as best they might: yet were they little chased, save by the new-comers of the Dry Tree, for the others were over weary, and moreover the leaders had no mind to let the new-made warriors leave their vantage-ground lest the old and tried men-at-arms of the Burg should turn upon them and put them to the worse.

"Men looked for battle again the next day; but it fell not out so; for the host of the Burg saw that there was more to lose than to gain, so they drew back towards their own place. Neither did they waste the land much; for the riders of the Dry Tree followed hard at heel, and cut off all who tarried, or strayed from the main battle.

"When they were gone, then at last did the Wheat-wearers give themselves up to the joy of their deliverance and the pleasure of their new lives: and one of their old men that I have spoken with told me this; that before when they were little better than the thralls of the Burg, and durst scarce raise a hand against the foemen, the carles were but slow to love, and the queans, for all their fairness, cold and but little kind. However, now in the fields of the wheat-wearers themselves all this was changed, and men and maids took to arraying themselves gaily as occasion served, and there was singing and dancing on every green, and straying of couples amongst the greenery of the summer night; and in short the god of love was busy in the land, and made the eyes seem bright, and the lips sweet, and the bosom fair, and the arms sleek and the feet trim:  so that every hour was full of allurement; and ever the nigher that war and peril was, the more delight had man and maid of each other's bodies.

"Well, within a while the Wheat-wearers were grown so full of hope that they bade the men of the Dry Tree lead them against the Burg of the Four Friths, and the Champions were ready thereto; because they wotted well, that, Hampton being disgarnished of men, the men of the Burg might fall on it; and even if they took it not, they would beset all ways and make riding a hard matter for their fellowship. So they fell to, wisely and deliberately, and led an host of the best of the carles with them, and bade the women keep their land surely, so that their host was not a great many. But so wisely they led them that they came before the Burg well-nigh unawares; and though it seemed little likely that they should take so strong a place, yet nought less befell. For the Burg-dwellers beset with cruelty and bitter anger cried out that now at last they would make an end of this cursed people, and the whoreson strong-thieves their friends: so they went out a-gates a great multitude, but in worser order than their wont was; and there befell that marvel which sometimes befalleth even to very valiant men, that now at the pinch all their valour flowed from them, and they fled before the spears had met, and in such evil order that the gates could not be shut, and their foemen entered with them slaying and slaying even as they would. So that in an hour's space the pride and the estate of the Burg of the Four Friths was utterly fallen.  Huge was the slaughter; for the Wheat-wearers deemed they had many a grief whereof to avenge them; nor were the men of the Dry Tree either sluggards or saints to be careless of their foemen, or to be merciful in the battle:  but at last the murder was stayed: and then the men of the Wheat-wearers went from house to house in the town to find the women of their folk who had been made thralls by the Burgers.  There then was many a joyful meeting betwixt those poor women and the men of their kindred: all was forgotten now of the days of their thralldom, their toil and mocking and stripes; and within certain days all the sort of them came before the host clad in green raiment, and garlanded with flowers for the joy of their deliverance; and great feast was made to them.

"As for them of the Burg, the battle and chase over, no more were slain, save that certain of the great ones were made shorter by the head. But the Champions and the Wheat-wearers both, said that none of that bitter and cruel folk should abide any longer in the town; so that after a delay long enough for them to provide stuff for their wayfaring, they were all thrust out a-gates, rich and poor, old and young, man, woman and child.  Proudly and with a stout countenance they went, for now was their valour come again to them. And it is like that we shall hear of them oft again; for though they had but a few weapons amongst them when they were driven out of their old home, and neither hauberk nor shield nor helm, yet so learned in war be they and so marvellous great of pride, that they will somehow get them weapons; and even armed but with headless staves, and cudgels of the thicket, woe betide the peaceful folk whom they shall first fall on.  Yea, fair sir, the day shall come meseemeth when folk shall call on thee to lead the hunt after these famished wolves, and when thou dost so, call on me to tell thee tales of their doings which shall make thine heart hard, and thine hand heavy against them."

"Meantime," said Ralph, "what has betid to the Fellowship of the Dry Tree? for I see that thou hast some grief on thy mind because of them."

Roger kept silence a little and then he said:  "I grieve because Hampton is no more a strong place of warriors; two or three carles and a dozen of women dwell now in the halls and chambers of the Scaur.  Here on earth, all endeth. God send us to find the world without end!"

"What then," said Ralph, "have they then had another great overthrow, worse than that other?"  "Nay," said Roger doggedly, "it is not so." "But where is the Fellowship?" said Ralph.  "It is scattered abroad," quoth Roger.  "For some of the Dry Tree had no heart to leave the women whom they had wooed in the Wheat-wearer's land: and some, and a great many, have taken their dears to dwell in the Burg of the Four Friths, whereas a many of the Wheat-wearers have gone to beget children on the old bondwomen of the Burgers; of whom there were some two thousand alive after the Burg was taken; besides that many women also came with the carles from their own land.

"So that now a mixed folk are dwelling in the Burg, partly of those women-thralls, partly of carles and queans come newly from the Wheat-wearers, partly of men of our Fellowship the more part of whom are wedded to queans of the Wheat-wearers, and partly of men, chapmen and craftsmen and others who have drifted into the town, having heard that there is no lack of wealth there, and many fair women unmated."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and is all this so ill?"  Said Roger, "Meseems it is ill enough that there is no longer, rightly said, a Fellowship of the Dry Tree, though the men be alive who were once of that fellowship." "Nay," said Ralph, "and why should they not make a new fellowship in the Burg, whereas they may well be peaceful, since they have come to their above of their foemen?"

"Yea," said Roger slowly, "that is sooth; and so is this, that there in the Burg they are a strong band, with a captain of their own, and much worshipped of the peaceful folk; and moreover, though they be not cruel to torment helpless folk, or hard to make an end of all joy to-day, lest they lose their joy to-morrow, they now array all men in good order within the Burg, so that it shall be no easier for a foeman to win that erst it was."

"What, man!" said Ralph, "then be of better cheer, and come thou with us, and may be the old steel of the champions may look on the sun down in Upmeads. Come thou with me, I say, and show me and my luck to some of thy fellows who are dwelling in the Burg, and it may be when thou hast told my tale to them, that some of them shall be content to leave their beds cold for a while, that they may come help a Friend of the Well in his need."

Roger sat silent as if he were pondering the matter, while Richard and the Sage, both of them, took up the word one after the other, and urged him to it.

At last he said:  "Well, so be it for this adventure.  Only I say not that I shall give up this hermitage and my holiness for ever. Come thou aside, wise man of Swevenham, and I shall tell thee wherefore." "Yea," said Ralph, laughing, "and when he hath told thee, tell me not again; for sure I am that he is right to go with us, and belike shall be wrong in his reason therefore."

Roger looked a little askance at him, and he went without doors with the Sage, and when they were out of earshot, he said to him: "Hearken, I would have gone with my lord at the first word, and have been fain thereof; but there is this woman that followeth him. At every turn she shall mind me of our Lady that was; and I shall loath her, and her fairness and the allurements of her body, because I see of her, that she it is that hath gotten my Lady's luck, and that but for her my Lady might yet have been alive."

Said the Sage:  "Well quoth my lord that thou wouldst give me a fool's reason!  What! dost not thou know, thou that knowest so much of the Lady of Abundance, that she it was who ordained this Ursula to be Ralph's bedmate, when she herself should be gone from him, were she dead or alive, and that she also should be a Friend of the Well, so that he might not lack a fellow his life long? But this thou sayest, not knowing the mind of our Lady, and how she loved him in her inmost heart."

Roger hung his head and spake not for a while, and then he said: "Well, wise man, I have said that I will go on this adventure, and I will smooth my tongue for this while at least, and for what may come hereafter, let it be.  And now we were best get to horse; for what with meat and minstrelsy, we have worn away the day till it wants but a little of noon.  Go tell thy lord that I am ready. Farewell peace, and welcome war and grudging!"

So the Sage went within, and came out with the others, and they mounted their horses anon, and Roger went ahead on foot, and led them through the thicket-ways without fumbling; and they lay down that night on the farther side of the Swelling Flood.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_18]

CHAPTER 18

A Change of Days in the Burg of the Four Friths

There is naught to tell of their ways till they came out of the thicket into the fields about the Burg of the Four Friths; and even there was a look of a bettering of men's lives; though forsooth the husbandmen there were much the same as had abided in the fields aforetime, whereas they were not for the most part freemen of the Burg, but aliens who did service in war and otherwise thereto.  But, it being eventide, there were men and women and children, who had come out of gates, walking about and disporting themselves in the loveliness of early summer, and that in far merrier guise than they had durst do in the bygone days. Moreover, there was scarce a sword or spear to be seen amongst them, whereat Roger grudged somewhat, and Richard said:  "Meseems this folk trusts the peace of the Burg overmuch since, when all is told, unpeace is not so far from their borders."

But as they drew a little nigher Ralph pointed out to his fellows the gleam of helms and weapons on the walls, and they saw a watchman on each of the high towers of the south gate; and then quoth Roger: "Nay, the Burg will not be won so easily; and if a few fools get themselves slain outside it is no great matter."

Folk nowise let them come up to the gate unheeded, but gathered about them to look at the newcomers, but not so as to hinder them, and they could see that these summerers were goodly folk enough, and demeaned them as though they had but few troubles weighing on them.  But the wayfarers were not unchallenged at the gate, for a stout man-at-arms stayed them and said: "Ye ride somewhat late, friends.  What are ye?"  Quoth Ralph: "We be peaceful wayfarers save to them that would fall on us, and we seek toward Upmeads."  "Yea?" said the man, "belike ye shall find something less than peace betwixt here and Upmeads, for rumour goes that there are alien riders come into the lands of Higham, and for aught I know the said unpeace may spread further on. Well if ye will go to the Flower de Luce and abide there this night, ye shall have a let-pass to-morn betimes."

Then Ralph spake a word in Roger's ear, and Roger nodded his head, and, throwing his cowl aback, went up to the man-at-arms and said: "Stephen a-Hurst, hast thou time for a word with an old friend?" "Yea, Roger," said the man "is it verily thou?  I deemed that thou hadst fled away from all of us to live in the wilds."

"So it was, lad," said Roger, "but times change from good to bad and back again; and now am I of this good lord's company; and I shall tell thee, Stephen, that though he rideth but few to-day, yet merry shall he be that rideth with him to-morrow if unpeace be in the land. Lo you, Stephen, this is the Child of Upmeads, whom belike thou hast heard of; and if thou wilt take me into the chamber of thy tower, I will tell thee things of him that thou wottest not."  Stephen turned to Ralph and made obeisance to him and said: "Fair Sir, there are tales going about concerning thee, some whereof are strange enow, but none of them ill; and I deem by the look of thee that thou shalt be both a stark champion and a good lord; and I deem that it shall be my good luck, if I see more of thee, and much more.  Now if thou wilt, pass on with thine other fellows to the Flower de Luce, and leave this my old fellow-in-arms with me, and he shall tell me of thy mind; for I see that thou wouldest have somewhat of us; and since, I doubt not by the looks of thee, that thou wilt not bid us aught unknightly, when we know thy will, we shall try to pleasure thee."

"Yea, Lord Ralph," said Roger, "thou mayest leave all the business with me, and I will come to thee not later than betimes to-morrow, and let thee wot how matters have sped. And methinks ye may hope to wend out-a-gates this time otherwise than thou didest before."

So Ralph gave him yeasay and thanked the man-at-arms and rode his ways with the others toward the Flower de Luce, and whereas the sun was but newly set, Ralph noted that the booths were gayer and the houses brighter and more fairly adorned than aforetimes. As for the folk, they were such that the streets seemed full of holiday makers, so joyous and well dight were they; and the women like to those fair thralls whom he had seen that other time, saving that they were not clad so wantonly, however gaily. They came into the great square, and there they saw that the masons and builders had begun on the master church to make it fairer and bigger; the people were sporting there as in the streets, and amongst them were some weaponed men, but the most part of these bore the token of the Dry Tree.

So they entered the Flower de Luce, and had good welcome there, as if they were come home to their own house; for when its people saw such a goodly old man in the Sage, and so stout and trim a knight as was Richard, and above all when they beheld the loveliness of Ralph and Ursula, they praised them open-mouthed, and could scarce make enough of them. And when they had had their meat and were rested came two of the maids there and asked them if it were lawful to talk with them; and Ralph laughed and bade them sit by them, and eat a dainty morsel; and they took that blushing, for they were fair and young, and Ralph's face and the merry words of his mouth stirred the hearts within them: and forsooth it was not so much they that spake as Ursula and the Sage; for Ralph was somewhat few spoken, whereas he pondered concerning the coming days, and what he half deemed that he saw a-doing at Upmeads. But at last they found their tongues, and said how that already rumour was abroad that they were in the Burg who had drunk of the Water of the Well at the World's End; and said one: "It is indeed a fair sight to see you folk coming back in triumph; and so methinks will many deem if ye abide with us over to-morrow, and yet, Lady, for a while we are well-nigh as joyous as ye can be, whereas we have but newly come into new life also: some of us from very thralldom of the most grievous, and I am of those; and some of us in daily peril of it, like to my sister here. So mayhappen," said she, smiling, "none of us shall seek to the Well until we have worn our present bliss a little threadbare."

Ursula smiled on her, but the Sage said:  "Mayhappen it is of no avail speaking of such things to a young and fair woman; but what would betide you if the old Burgers were to come back and win their walls again?"  The maid who had been a thrall changed countenance at his word; but the other one said: "If the Burgers come back, they will find them upon the walls who have already chaced them.  Thou mayst deem me slim and tender, old wise man; but such as mine arm is, it has upheaved the edges against the foe; and if it be a murder to slay a Burger, then am I worthy of the gallows."  "Yea, yea," quoth Richard, laughing, "ye shall be double-manned then in this good town: ye may well win, unless the sight of you shall make the foe over fierce for the gain."

Said the Sage "It is well, maiden, and if ye hold to that, and keep your carles in the same road, ye need not to fear the Burgers: and to say sooth, I have it in my mind, that before long ye shall have both war and victory."

Then Ralph seemed to wake up as from a dream, and he arose, and said: "Thou art in the right, Sage, and to mine eyes it seemeth that both thou and I shall be sharers in the war and the victory." And therewith he fell to striding up and down the hall, while the two maidens sat gazing on him with gleaming eyes and flushed cheeks.

But in a little while he came back to his seat and sat him down, and fell to talk with the women, and asked them of the town and the building therein, and the markets, whether they throve; and they and two or three of the townsmen or merchants answered all, and told him how fair their estate was, and how thriving was the lot of one and all with them. Therewith was Ralph well pleased, and they sat talking there in good fellowship till the night was somewhat worn, and all men fared to bed.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_19]

CHAPTER 19

Ralph Sees Hampton and the Scaur

When it was morning Ralph arose and went into the hall of the hostelry, and even as he entered it the outside door opened, and in came Roger, and Richard with him (for he had been astir very early) and Roger, who was armed from head to foot and wore a coat of the Dry Tree, cried out: "Now, Lord, thou wert best do on thy war-gear, for thou shalt presently be captain of an host."  "Yea, Roger," quoth Ralph, "and hast thou done well?" "Well enough," said Richard; "thine host shall not be a great one, but no man in it will be a blencher, for they be all champions of the Dry Tree."

"Yea," quoth Roger, "so it was that Stephen a-Hurst brought me to a company of my old fellows, and we went all of us together to the Captain of the Burg (e'en he of the Dry Tree, who in these latest days is made captain of all), and did him to wit that thou hadst a need; and whereas he, as all of us, had heard of the strokes that thou struckest in the wood that day when thy happiness first began, (woe worth the while!) he stickled not to give some of us leave to look on the hand-play with thee. But soft, my Lord! abound not in thanks as yet, till I tell thee. The said Captain hath gotten somewhat of the mind of a chapman by dwelling in a town, 'tis like (the saints forgive me for saying so!) and would strike a bargain with thee." "Yea," said Ralph, smiling, "I partly guess what like the bargain is; but say thou."

Said Roger:  "I like not his bargain, not for thy sake but mine own; this it is, that we shall ride, all of us who are to be of thy fellowship, to the Castle of the Scaur to-day, and there thy Lady shall sit in the throne whereas in past days our Lady and Queen was wont to sit; and that thou shalt swear upon her head, that whensoever he biddeth thee come to the help of the Burg of the Four Friths and the tribes of the Wheat-wearers, thou shalt come in arms by the straightest road with such fellowship as thou mayst gather; and if thou wilt so do, we of the Dry Tree who go with thee on this journey are thine to save or to spend by flood or field, or castle wall, amidst the edges and the shafts and the fire-flaught. What sayest thou-- thou who art lucky, and hast of late become wise?  And I will tell thee, that though I hope it not, yet I would thou shouldst naysay it; for it will be hard for me to see another woman sitting in our Lady's seat: yea, to see her sitting there, who hath stolen her luck."

Said Ralph:  "Now this proffer of the Captain's I call friendly and knightly, and I will gladly swear as he will; all the more as without any oath I should never fail him whensoever he may send for me. As for thee, Roger, ride with us if thou wilt, and thou shalt be welcome both in the company, and at the High House of Upmeads whenso we come there."

Then was Roger silent, but nowise abashed; and as they spoke they heard the tramp of horses and the clash of weapons, and they saw through the open door three men-at-arms riding up to the house; so Ralph went out to welcome them; they were armed full well in bright armour, and their coats were of the Dry Tree, and were tall men and warrior-like. They hailed Ralph as captain, and he gave them the sele of the day and bade come in and drink a cup; so did they, but they were scarce off their horses ere there came another three, and then six together, and so one after other till the hall of the Flower de Luce was full of the gleam of steel and clash of armour, and the lads held their horses without and were merry with the sight of the stalwart men-at-arms. Now cometh Ursula down from her chamber clad in her bravery; and when they saw her they set up a shout for joy of her, so that the rafters rang again; but she laughed for pleasure of them, and poured them out the wine, till they were merrier with the sight of her than with the good liquor.

Now Roger comes to Ralph and tells him that he deems his host hath come to the last man.  Then Ralph armed him, and those two maidens brought him his horse, and they mount all of them and draw up in the Square; and Roger and Stephen a-Hurst array them, for they were chosen of them as leaders along with Ralph, and Richard, whom they all knew, at least by hearsay. Then Roger drew from his pouch a parchment, and read the roll of names, and there was no man lacking, and they were threescore save five, besides Roger and the way-farers, and never was a band of like number seen better; and Richard said softly unto Ralph:  "If we had a few more of these, I should care little what foemen we should meet in Upmeads:  soothly, my lord, they had as well have ridden into red Hell as into our green fields." "Fear not, Richard," said Ralph, "we shall have enough."

So then they rode out of the Square and through the streets to the North Gate, and much folk was abroad to look on them, and they blessed them as they went, both carles and queans; for the rumour was toward that there was riding a good and dear Lord and a Friend of the Well to get his own again from out of the hands of the aliens.

Herewith they ride a little trot through the Freedom of the Burg, and when they were clear of it they turned aside from the woodland highway whereon Ralph had erst ridden with Roger and followed the rides a good way till it was past noon, when they came into a very close thicket where there was but a narrow and winding way whereon two men might not ride abreast, and Roger said: "Now, if we were the old Burgers, and the Dry Tree still holding the Scaur, we should presently know what steel-point dinner meaneth; if the dead could rise out of their graves to greet their foemen, we should anon be a merry company here.  But at last they learned the trick, and were wont to fetch a compass round about Grey Goose Thicket as it hight amongst us."

"Well," said Ralph, "but how if there by any waylaying us; the Burgers may be wiser still than thou deemest, and ye may have learned them more than thou art minded to think."

"Nay," said Roger, "I bade a half score turn aside by the thicket path on our left hands; that shall make all sure; but indeed I look for no lurkers as yet.  In a month's time that may betide, but not yet; not yet. But tell me, fair Sir, have ye any deeming of where thou mayst get thee more folk who be not afraid of the hard hand-play? For Richard hath been telling me that there be tidings in the air."

Said Ralph:  "If hope play me not false, I look to gather some stout carles of the Shepherd Country."  "Yea," said Roger, "but I shall tell thee that they have been at whiles unfriends of the Dry Tree."  Said Ralph: "I think they will be friends unto me."  "Then it shall do well," said Roger, "for they be good in a fray."

So talked they as they rode, but ever Roger would give no heed to Ursula. but made as if he wotted not that she was there, though ever and anon Ralph would be turning back to speak to her and help her through the passes.

At last the thicket began to dwindle, and presently riding out of a little valley or long trench on to a ridge nearly bare of trees, they saw below them a fair green plain, and in the midst of it a great heap of grey rocks rising out of it like a reef out of the sea, and on the said reef, and climbing up as it were to the topmost of it, the white walls of a great castle, the crown whereof was a huge round tower. At the foot of the ridge was a thorp of white houses thatched with straw scattered over a good piece of the plain. The company drew rein on the ridge-top, and the Champions raised a great shout at the sight of their old strong-place; and Roger turned to Ralph and said:  "Fair Sir, how deemest thou of the Castle of the Scaur?" but Richard broke in: "For my part, friend Roger, I deem that ye do like to people unlearned in war to leave the stronghold ungarnished of men. This is a fool's deed."  "Nay, nay," said Roger, "we need not be over-hasty, while it is our chief business to order the mingled folk of the Wheat-wearers and others who dwell in the Burg as now."

Then spake Ralph:  "Yet how wilt thou say but that the foemen whom we go to meet in Upmeads may be some of those very Burgers:  hast thou heard whether they have found a new dwelling among some unhappy folk, or be still roving: maybe they shall deem Upmeads fair."

Spake Michael a-Hurst: "By thy leave, fair Sir, we have had a word of those riders and strong-thieves that they have fetched a far compass, and got them armour, and be come into the woodland north of the Wood Debateable. For like all strong-thieves, they love the wood."

Roger laughed:  "Yea, as we did, friend Michael, when we were thieves; whereas now we be lords and gentlemen.  But as to thy tidings, I set not much by them; for of the same message was this word that they had already fallen on Higham by the Way; and we know that this cannot be true; since though forsooth the Abbot has had unpeace on his hands, we know where his foemen came from, the West to wit, and the Banded Barons."

"Yea, yea," quoth the Sage, "but may not the Burgers have taken service with them?"  "Yea, forsooth," quoth Roger, "but I deem not, or we had been surer thereof."

Thus they spake, and they lighted down all of them to breathe their horses, and Ursula spake with Ralph as they walked the greensward together a little apart, and said: "Sweetheart, I am afraid of to-day."

"Yea, dear," said he, "and wherefore?"  She said: "It will be hard for me to enter that grim house yonder, and sit in the seat whence I was erewhile threatened by the evil hag with hair like a grey she-bear."

He made much of her and said:  "Yet belike a Friend of the Well may overcome this also; and withal the hall shall be far other to-day when it was."

She looked about on the warriors as they lay on the grass or loitered by their horses; then she smiled, and her face lightened, and she reddened and cast down her eyes and said: "Yea, that is sooth; that day there were few men in the hall, and they old and evil of semblance.  It was a band of women who took me in the thorp and brought me up into the Castle, and mishandled me there, and cast me into prison there; whereas these be good fellows, and frank and free of aspect. But O, my heart, look thou how fearful the piled-up rocks rise from the plain and the walls wind up amongst them; and that huge tower, the crown of all!  Surely there is none more fearful in the world."

He kissed her and laughed merrily, and said:  "Yea, sweetheart, and there will be another change in the folk of the hall when we come there this time, to wit, that thou shouldst not be alone therein, even were all these champions, and Richard and the Sage away from thee. Wilt thou tell me how that shall be?"

She turned to him and kissed him and caressed him, and then they turned back again toward their fellows, for by now they had walked together a good way along the ridge.

So then they gat to horse again and rode into the thorp, where men and women stood about to behold them, and made them humble reverence as they passed by. So rode they to the bailly of the Castle; and if that stronghold looked terrible from the ridge above, tenfold more terrible of aspect it was when the upper parts were hidden by the grey rocks, and they so huge and beetling, and though the sun was bright about them, and they in the midst of their friends, yet even Ralph felt somewhat of dread creep over him: yet he smiled cheerfully as Ursula turned an anxious face on him. They alighted from their horses in the bailly, for over steep for horse-hoofs was the walled way upward; and as they began to mount, even the merry Champions hushed their holiday clamour for awe of the huge stronghold, and Ralph took Ursula by the hand, and she sidled up to him, and said softly:  "Yea, it was here they drave me up, those women, thrusting and smiting me; and some would have stripped off my raiment, but one who seemed the wisest, said, 'Nay, leave her till she come before the ancient Lady, for her gear may be a token of whence she is, and whither, if she be come as a spy.'  So I escaped them for that moment. And now I wonder what we shall find in the hall when we come in thither. It is somewhat like to me, as when one gets up from bed in the dead night, when all is quiet and the moon is shining, and goes out of the chamber into the hall, and coming back, almost dreads to see some horror lying in one's place amid the familiar bedclothes."

And she grew paler as she spake.  Then Ralph comforted her and trimmed his countenance to a look of mirth, but inwardly he was ill at ease.

So up they went and up, till they came to a level place whereon was built the chief hall and its chambers:  there they stood awhile to breathe them before the door, which was rather low than great; and Ursula clung to Ralph and trembled, but Ralph spake in her ear: "Take heart, my sweet, or these men, and Roger in especial, will think the worse of thee; and thou a Friend of the Well. What! here is naught to hurt thee! this is naught beside the perils of the desert, and the slaves and the evil lord of Utterbol." "Yea," she said, "but meseemeth I loved thee not so sore as now I do. O friend, I am become a weak woman and unvaliant, and there is naught in me but love of thee, and love of life because of thee; nor dost thou know altogether what befell me in that hall."

But Ralph turned about and cried out in a loud, cheerful voice: "Let us enter, friends! and lo you, I will show the Champions of the Dry Tree the way into their own hall and high place." Therewith he thrust the door open, for it was not locked, and strode into the hall, still leading Ursula by the hand, and all the company followed him, the clash of their armour resounding through the huge building.  Though it was long, it was not so much that it was long as that it was broad, and exceeding high, so that in the dusk of it the great vault of the roof was dim and misty.  There was no man therein, no halling on its walls, no benches nor boards, naught but the great standing table of stone on the dais, and the stone high-seat amidst of it: and the place did verily seem like the house and hall of a people that had died out in one hour because of their evil deeds.

They stood still a moment when they were all fairly within doors, and Roger thrust up to Ralph and said, but softly:  "The woman is blenching, and all for naught; were it not for the oath, we had best have left her in the thorp: I fear me she will bring evil days on our old home with her shivering fear. How far otherwise came our Lady in hither when first she came amongst us, when the Duke of us found her in the wood after she had been thrust out from Sunway by the Baron whom thou slewest afterward. Our Duke brought her in hither wrapped up in his knight's scarlet cloak, and went up with her on to the dais; but when she came thither, she turned about and let her cloak fall to earth, and stood there barefoot in her smock, as she had been cast out into the wildwood, and she spread abroad her hands, and cried out in a loud voice as sweet as the May blackbird, 'May God bless this House and the abode of the valiant, and the shelter of the hapless.'"

Said Ursula (and her voice was firm and the colour come back to her cheeks now, while Ralph stood agaze and wondering): "Roger, thou lovest me little, meseemeth, though if I did less than I do, I should do against the will of thy Lady that was Queen in this hall. But tell me, Roger, where is gone that other one, the fearful she-bear of this crag, who sat in yonder stone high-seat, and roared at me and mocked me, and gave me over into the hands of her tormentors, who haled me away to the prison wherefrom thy very Lady delivered me?"

"Lady," said Roger, "the tale of her is short since the day thou sawest her herein.  On the day when we first had the evil tidings of the slaying of my Lady we were sad at heart, and called to mind ancient transgressions against us; therefore we fell on the she-bear, as thou callest her, and her company of men and women, and some we slew and some we thrust forth; but as to her, I slew her not three feet from where thou standest now. A rumour there is that she walketh, and it may be so; yet in the summer noon ye need not look to see her."

Ralph said coldly:  "Roger, let us be done with minstrels' tales; lead me to the place where the oath is to be sworn, for time presses."

Scarce were the words out of his mouth ere Roger strode forward and gat him on to the dais and went hastily to the wall behind the high-seat, whence he took down a very great horn, and set it to his lips and winded it loudly thrice, so that the great and high hall was full of its echoes. Richard started thereat and half drew his sword; but the Sage put his hand upon the hilts, and said:  "It is naught, let the edges lie quiet." Ursula stared astonished, but now she quaked no more; Ralph changed not countenance a wit, and the champions of the Tree made as if naught had been done that they looked not for.  But thereafter cried Roger from the dais: "This is the token that the men of the Dry Tree are met for matters of import; thus is the Mote hallowed.  Come up hither, ye aliens, and ye also of the fellowship, that the oath may be sworn, and we may go our ways, even as the alien captain biddeth."

Then Ralph took Ursula's hand again, and went up the hall calmly and proudly, and the champions followed with Richard and the Sage. Ralph and Ursula went up on to the dais, and he set down Ursula in the stone high-seat, and even in the halldusk a right fair-coloured picture she looked therein; for she was clad in a goodly green gown broidered with flowers, and a green cloak with gold orphreys over it; her hair was spread abroad over her shoulders, and on her head was a garland of roses which the women of the Flower de Luce had given her; so there she sat with her fair face, whence now all the wrinkles of trouble and fear were smoothed out, looking like an image of the early summer-tide itself. And the champions looked on her and marvelled, and one whispered to the other that it was their Lady of aforetime come back again; only Roger, who had now gone back to the rest of the fellowship, cast his eyes upon the ground, and muttered.

Now Ralph draws his sword, and lays it naked on the stone table, and he stood beside Ursula and said:  "Champions of the Dry Tree, by the blade of Upmeads which lieth here before me, and by the head which I love best in the world, and is best worthy of love" (and herewith he laid his hand on Ursula's head), "I swear that whensoever the Captain of the Dry Tree calleth on me, whether I be eating or drinking, abed or standing on my feet, at peace or at war, glad or sorry, I shall do my utmost to come to his aid straightway with whatso force I may gather. Is this rightly sworn, Champions?"

Said Stephen a-Hurst: "It is sworn well and knightly, and now cometh our oath."

"Nay," said Ralph, "I had no mind to drive a bargain with you; your deeds shall prove you; and I fear not for your doughtiness."

Said Stephen:  "Yea, Lord; but he bade us swear to thee. Reach me thy sword, I pray thee."

Then Ralph reached him his sword across the great stone table, and Stephen took it, and kissed the blade and the hilts; and then lifted up his voice and said:  "By the hilts and the blade, by the point and the edge, we swear to follow the Lord Ralph of Upmeads for a year and a day, and to do his will in all wise. So help us God and Allhallows!"

And therewith he gave the sword to the others, and each man of them kissed it as he had.

But Ralph said:  "Champions, for this oath I thank you all heartily. But it is not my meaning that I should hold you by me for a year, whereas I deem I shall do all that my kindred may need in three days' space from the first hour wherein we set foot in Upmeads."

Stephen smiled friendly at him and nodded, and said:  "That may well be; but now to make a good end of this mote I will tell thee a thing; to wit, that our Captain, yea, and all we, are minded to try thee by this fray in Upmeads, now we know that thou hast become a Friend of the Well. And if thou turn out as we deem is likest, we will give thee this Castle of the Scaur, for thee and those that shall spring from thy loins; for we deem that some such man as thou will be the only one to hold it worthily, and in such wise as it may be a stronghold against tyrants and for the helping of peaceable folk; since forsooth, we of the Dry Tree have heard somewhat of the Well at the World's End, and trow in the might thereof."

He made an end; and Ralph kept silence and pondered the matter. But Roger lifted up his head and broke in, and said:  "Yea, yea! that is it: we are all become men of peace, we riders of the Dry Tree!" And he laughed withal, but as one nowise best pleased.

But as Ralph was gathering his words together, and Ursula was looking up to him with trouble in her face again, came a man of the thorp rushing into the hall, and cried out: "O, my lords! there are weaponed men coming forth from the thicket. Save us, we pray you, for we are ill-weaponed and men of peace."

Roger laughed, and said:  "Eh, good man!  So ye want us back again? But my Lord Ralph, and thou Richard, and thou Stephen, come ye to the shot-window here, that giveth on to the forest. We are high up here, and we shall see all as clearly as in a good mirror. Hast thou shut the gates, carle?"  "Yea, Lord Roger," quoth he, "and there are some fifty of us together down in the base-court."

Ralph and Richard and Stephen looked forth from the shot window, and saw verily a band of men riding down the bent into the thorp, and Ralph, who as aforesaid was far-sighted and clear-sighted, said: "Yea, it is strange:  but without doubt these are riders of the Dry Tree; and they seem to me to be some ten-score. Thou Stephen, thou Roger, what is to hand?  Is your Captain wont to give a gift and take it back...and somewhat more with it?"  Stephen looked abashed at his word; and Roger hung his head again.

But therewith the Sage drew up to them and said:  "Be not dismayed, Lord Ralph.  What wert thou going to say to the Champions when this carle brake in?"

"This," said Ralph, "that I thanked the Dry Tree heartily for its gift, but that meseemed it naught wise to leave this stronghold disgarnished of men till I can come or send back from Upmeads."

Stephen's face cleared at the word, and he said:  "I bid thee believe it, lord, that there is no treason in our Captain's heart; and that if there were I would fight against him and his men on thy behalf."  And Roger, though in a somewhat surly voice, said the like.

Ralph thought a little, and then he said:  "It is well; go we down and out of gates to meet them, that we may the sooner get on our way to Upmeads." And without more words he went up to Ursula and took her hand and went out of the hall, and down the rock-cut stair, and all they with him. And when they came into the Base-court, Ralph spoke to the carles of the thorp, who stood huddled together sore afeard, and said: "Throw open the gates.  These riders who have so scared you are naught else than the Champions of the Dry Tree who are coming back to their stronghold that they may keep you sure against wicked tyrants who would oppress you."

The carles looked askance at one another, but straightway opened the gates, and Ralph and his company went forth, and abode the new-comers on a little green mound half a bowshot from the Castle. Ralph sat down on the grass and Ursula by him, and she said: "My heart tells me that these Champions are no traitors, however rough and fierce they have been, and still shall be if occasion serve. But O, sweetheart, how dear and sweet is this sunlit greensward after yonder grim hold.  Surely, sweet, it shall never be our dwelling?"

"I wot not, beloved," said he; "must we not go and dwell where deeds shall lead us? and the hand of Weird is mighty. But lo thou, here are the newcomers to hand!"

So it was as he said, and presently the whole band came before them, and they were all of the Dry Tree, stout men and well weaponed, and they had ridden exceeding fast, so that their horses were somewhat spent. A tall man very gallantly armed, who rode at their head, leapt at once from his horse and came up to Ralph and hailed him, and Roger and Stephen both made obeisance to him.  Ralph, who had risen up, hailed him in his turn, and the tall man said:  "I am the Captain of the Dry Tree for lack of a better; art thou Ralph of Upmeads, fair sir?" "Even so," said Ralph.

Said the Captain:  "Thou wilt marvel that I have ridden after thee on the spur; so here is the tale shortly. Your backs were not turned on the walls of the Burg an hour, ere three of my riders brought in to me a man who said, and gave me tokens of his word being true, that he had fallen in with a company of the old Burgers in the Wood Debateable, which belike thou wottest of."

"All we of Upmeads wot of it," said Ralph.  "Well," said the Captain, "amongst these said Burgers, who were dwelling in the wildwood in summer content, the word went free that they would gather to them other bands of strong-thieves who haunt that wood, and go with them upon Upmeads, and from Upmeads, when they were waxen strong, they would fall upon Higham by the Way, and thence with yet more strength on their old dwelling of the Burg. Now whereas I know that thou art of Upmeads, and also what thou art, and what thou hast done, I have ridden after thee to tell thee what is toward. But if thou deemest I have brought thee all these riders it is not wholly so. For it was borne into my mind that our old stronghold was left bare of men, and I knew not what might betide; and that the more, as more than one man has told us how that another band of the disinherited Burgers have fallen upon Higham or the lands thereof, and Higham is no great way hence; so that some five score of these riders are to hold our Castle of the Scaur, and the rest are for thee to ride afield with.  As for the others, thou hast been told already that the Scaur, and Hampton therewith is a gift from us to thee; for henceforward we be the lords of the Burg of the Four Friths, and that is more than enough for us."

Ralph thanked the Captain for this, and did him to wit that he would take the gift if he came back out the Upmeads fray alive:  said he, "With thee and the Wheat-wearers in the Burg, and me in the Scaur, no strong-thief shall dare lift up his hand in these parts."

The Captain smiled, and Ralph went on:  "And now I must needs ask thee for leave to depart; which is all the more needful, whereas thy men have over-ridden their horses, and we must needs go a soft pace till we come to Higham."

"Yea, art thou for Higham, fair sir?" said the Captain.  "That is well; for ye may get men therefrom, and at the least it is like that ye shall hear tidings:  as to my men and their horses, this hath been looked to. For five hundred good men of the Wheat-wearers, men who have not learned the feat of arms a-horseback, are coming through the woods hither to help ward thy castle, fair lord; they will be here in some three hours' space and will bring horses for thy five score men, therefore do ye but ride softly to Higham and if these sergeants catch up with you it is well, but if not, abide them at Higham."

"Thanks have thou for this once more," said Ralph; "and now I have no more word than this for thee; that I will come to thee at thy least word, and serve thee with all that I have, to my very life if need be.  And yet I must say this, that I wot not why ye and these others are become to me, who am alien to you, as very brothers."  Said the Captain: "There is this to be said of it, as was aforesaid, that all we count thy winning of the Well at the World's End as valiancy in thee, yea, and luck withal.  But, moreover, she who was Our Lady would have had thee for her friend had she lived, and how then could we be less than friends to thee? Depart in peace, my friend, and we look to see thee again in a little while."

Therewith he kissed him, and bade farewell; and Ralph bade his band to horse, and they were in the saddle in a twinkling, and rode away from Hampton at a soft pace.

But as they went, Ralph turned to Ursula and said: "And now belike shall we see Bourton Abbas once more, and the house where first I saw thee.  And O how sweet thou wert! And I was so happy and so young."

"Yea," she said, "and sorely I longed for thee, and now we have long been together, as it seemeth; and yet that long space shall be but a little while of our lives.  But, my friend, as to Bourton Abbas, I misdoubt me of our seeing it; for there is a nigher road by the by-ways to Higham, which these men know, and doubtless that way we shall wend: and I am glad thereof; for I shall tell thee, that somewhat I fear that thorp, lest it should lay hold of me, and wake me from a dream."

"Yea," said Ralph, "but even then, belike thou shouldst find me beside thee; as if I had fallen asleep in the ale-house, and dreamed of the Well at the World's End, and then awoke and seen the dear barefoot maiden busying her about her house and its matters. That were naught so ill."

"Ah," she said, "look round on thy men, and think of the might of war that is in them, and think of the deeds to come. But O how I would that these next few days were worn away, and we yet alive for a long while."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_20]

CHAPTER 20

They Come to the Gate of Higham By the Way

It was as Ursula had deemed, and they made for Higham by the shortest road, so that they came before the gate a little before sunset: to the very gate they came not; for there were strong barriers before it, and men-at-arms within them, as though they were looking for an onfall. And amongst these were bowmen who bended their bows on Ralph and his company. So Ralph stayed his men, and rode up to the barriers with Richard and Stephen a-Hurst, all three of them bare-headed with their swords in the sheaths; and Stephen moreover bearing a white cloth on a truncheon.  Then a knight of the town, very bravely armed, came forth from the barriers and went up to Ralph, and said:  "Fair sir, art thou a knight?"  "Yea," said Ralph. Said the knight, "Who be ye?"  "I hight Ralph of Upmeads," said Ralph, "and these be my men:  and we pray thee for guesting in the town of my Lord Abbot to-night, and leave to depart to-morrow betimes."

"O unhappy young man," said the knight, "meseems these men be not so much thine as thou art theirs; for they are of the Dry Tree, and bear their token openly.  Wilt thou then lodge thy company of strong-thieves with honest men?"

Stephen a-Hurst laughed roughly at this word, but Ralph said mildly: "These men are indeed of the Dry Tree, but they are my men and under my rule, and they be riding on my errands, which be lawful."

The knight was silent a while and then he said:  "Well, it may be so; but into this town they come not, for the tale of them is over long for honest men to hearken to."

Even as he spake, a man-at-arms somewhat evilly armed shoved through the barriers, thrusting aback certain of his fellows, and, coming up to Ralph, stood staring up into his face with the tears starting into his eyes. Ralph looked a moment, and then reached down his arms to embrace him, and kissed his face; for lo! it was his own brother Hugh. Withal he whispered in his ear:  "Get thee behind us, Hugh, if thou wilt come with us, lad."  So Hugh passed on quietly toward the band, while Ralph turned to the knight again, who said to him, "Who is that man?" "He is mine own brother," said Ralph.  "Be he the brother of whom he will," said the knight, "he was none the less our sworn man.  Ye fools," said he, turning toward the men in the barrier, "why did ye not slay him?" "He slipped out," said they, "before we wotted what he was about." Said the knight, "Where were your bows, then?"

Said a man:  "They were pressing so hard on the barrier, that we could not draw a bowstring.  Besides, how might we shoot him without hitting thee, belike?"

The knight turned toward Ralph, grown wroth and surly, and that the more he saw Stephen and Richard grinning; he said: "Fair sir, ye have strengthened the old saw that saith, Tell me what thy friends are, and I will tell thee what thou art. Thou hast stolen our man with not a word on it."

"Fair sir," said Ralph, "meseemeth thou makest more words than enough about it.  Shall I buy my brother of thee, then? I have a good few pieces in my pouch."  The captain shook his head angrily.

"Well," said Ralph, "how can I please thee, fair sir?"

Quoth the knight:  "Thou canst please me best by turning thy horses' heads away from Higham, all the sort of you."  He stepped back toward the barriers, and then came forward again, and said: "Look you, man-at-arms, I warn thee that I trust thee not, and deem that thou liest.  Now have I mind to issue out and fall upon you: for ye shall be evil guests in my Lord Abbot's lands."

Now at last Ralph waxed somewhat wroth, and he said: "Come out then, if you will, and we shall meet you man for man; there is yet light on this lily lea, and we will do so much for thee, churl though thou be."

But as he spoke, came the sounds of horns, and lo, over the bent showed the points of spears, and then all those five-score of the Dry Tree whom the captain had sent after Ralph came pouring down the bent. The knight looked on them under the sharp of his hand, till he saw the Dry Tree on their coats also, and then he turned and gat him hastily into the barriers; and when he was amongst his own men he fell to roaring out a defiance to Ralph, and a bolt flew forth, and two or three shafts, but hurt no one.  Richard and Stephen drew their swords, but Ralph cried out: "Come away, friends, tarry not to bicker with these fools, who are afraid of they know not what:  it is but lying under the naked heaven to-night instead of under the rafters, but we have all lodged thus a many times: and we shall be nigher to our journey's end to-morrow when we wake up."

Therewith he turned his horse with Richard and Stephen and came to his own men.  There was much laughter and jeering at the Abbot's men amidst of the Dry Tree, both of those who had ridden with Ralph, and the new-comers; but they arrayed them to ride further in good order, and presently were skirting the walls of Higham out of bow-shot, and making for the Down country by the clear of the moon. The sergeants had gotten a horse for Hugh, and by Ralph's bidding he rode beside him as they went their ways, and the two brethren talked together lovingly.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_21]

CHAPTER 21

Talk Between Those Two Brethren

Ralph asked Hugh first if he wotted aught of Gregory their brother. Hugh laughed and pointed to Higham, and said:  "He is yonder." "What," said Ralph, "in the Abbot's host?"  "Yea," said Hugh, laughing again, "but in his spiritual, not his worldly host: he is turned monk, brother; that is, he is already a novice, and will be a brother of the Abbey in six months' space."  Said Ralph: "And Launcelot Long-tongue, thy squire, how hath he sped?"  Said Hugh: "He is yonder also, but in the worldly host, not the spiritual: he is a sergeant of theirs, and somewhat of a catch for them, for he is no ill man-at-arms, as thou wottest, and besides he adorneth everything with words, so that men hearken to him gladly." "But tell me," said Ralph, "how it befalleth that the Abbot's men of war be so churlish, and chary of the inside of their town; what have they to fear?  Is not the Lord Abbot still a mighty man?" Hugh shook his head:  "There hath been a change of days at Higham; though I say not but that the knights are over careful, and much over fearful."  "What has the change been?" said Ralph. Hugh said:  "In time past my Lord Abbot was indeed a mighty man, and both this town of Higham was well garnished of men-at-arms, and also many of his manors had castles and strong-houses on them, and the yeomen were ready to run to their weapons whenso the gathering was blown.  In short, Higham was as mighty as it was wealthy; and the Abbot's men had naught to do with any, save with thy friends here who bear the Tree Leafless; all else feared those holy walls and the well-blessed men who warded them.  But the Dry Tree feared, as men said, neither man nor devil (and I hope it may be so still since they are become thy friends), and they would whiles lift in the Abbot's lands when they had no merrier business on hand, and not seldom came to their above in their dealings with his men. But all things come to an end; for, as I am told, some year and a half ago, the Abbot had debate with the Westland Barons, who both were and are ill men to deal with, being both hungry and doughty. The quarrel grew till my Lord must needs defy them, and to make a long tale short, he himself in worldly armour led his host against them, and they met some twenty miles to the west in the field of the Wry Bridge, and there was Holy Church overthrown; and the Abbot, who is as valiant a man as ever sang mass, though not over-wise in war, would not flee, and as none would slay him, might they help it, they had to lead him away, and he sits to this day in their strongest castle, the Red Mount west-away. Well, he being gone, and many of his wisest warriors slain, the rest ran into gates again; but when the Westlanders beset Higham and thought to have it good cheap, the monks and their men warded it not so ill but that the Westlanders broke their teeth over it.  Forsooth, they turned away thence and took most of the castles and strong-houses of the Abbot's lands; burned some and put garrisons into others, and drave away a mighty spoil of chattels and men and women, so that the lands of Higham are half ruined; and thereby the monks, though they be stout enough within their walls, will not suffer their men to ride abroad. Whereby, being cooped up in a narrow place, and with no deeds to hand to cheer their hearts withal, they are grown sour and churlish."

"But, brother," said Ralph, "howsoever churlish they may be, and howso timorous, I cannot see why they should shut their gates in our faces, a little band, when there is no foe anear them."

"Ralph," said Hugh, "thou must think of this once more, that the Dry Tree is no good let-pass to flourish in honest men's faces; specialiter if they be monks.  Amongst the brothers of Higham the tale goes that those Champions have made covenant with the devil to come to their above whensoever they be not more than one to five. Nay, moreover, it is said that there be very devils amongst them; some in the likeness of carles, and some (God help us) dressed up in women's flesh; and fair flesh also, meseemeth. Also to-day they say in Higham that no otherwise might they ever have overcome the stark and cruel carles of the Burg of the Four Friths and chased them out of their town, as we know they have done. Hah! what sayest thou?"

"I say, Hugh," quoth Ralph angrily, "that thou art a fool to go about with a budget of slanderous old wives' tales."  Hugh laughed.  "Be not so wroth, little lord, or I shall be asking thee tales of marvels also.  But hearken. I shall smooth out thy frowns with a smile when thou hast heard this: this folk are not only afeard of their old enemies, the devil-led men, but also they fear those whom the devil-led men have driven out of house and home, to wit, the Burgers.  Yet again they fear the Burgers yet more, because they have beaten some of the very foes of Higham, to wit, the Westland Barons; for they have taken from them some of their strong-holds, and are deemed to be gathering force."

Ralph pondered a while, and then he said:  "Brother, hast thou any tidings of Upmeads, or that these Burgers have gone down thither?" "God forbid!" said Hugh.  "Nay, I have had no tidings of Upmeads since I was fool enough to leave it."

"What! brother," said Ralph, "thou hast not thriven then?"

"I have had ups and downs," said Hugh, "but the ups have been one rung of the ladder, and the downs three--or more. Three months I sat in prison for getting me a broken head in a quarrel that concerned me not.  Six months was I besieged in a town whither naught led me but ill-luck. Two days I wore in running thence, having scaled the wall and swam the ditch in the night. Three months I served squire to a knight who gave me the business of watching his wife of whom he was jealous; and to help me out of the weariness of his house I must needs make love myself to the said wife, who sooth to say was perchance worth it. Thence again I went by night and cloud.  Ten months I wore away at the edge of the wildwood, and sometimes in it, with a sort of fellows who taught me many things, but not how to keep my hands from other men's goods when I was hungry. There was I taken with some five others by certain sergeants of Higham, whom the warriors of the town had sent out cautiously to see if they might catch a few men for their ranks. Well, they gave me the choice of the gallows-tree or service for the Church, and so, my choice made, there have I been ever since, till I saw thy face this evening, fair sir."

"Well, brother," said Ralph, "all that shall be amended, and thou shalt back to Upmeads with me.  Yet wert thou to amend thyself somewhat, it might not be ill."

Quoth Hugh:  "It shall be tried, brother.  But may I ask thee somewhat?" Said Ralph:  "Ask on."  "Fair Sir," said Hugh, "thou seemedst grown into a pretty man when I saw thee e'en-now before this twilight made us all alike; but the men at thy back are not wont to be led by men who have not earned a warrior's name, yet they follow thee: how cometh that about?  Again, before the twilight gathered I saw the woman that rideth anigh us (who is now but a shadow) how fair and gentle she is: indeed there is no marvel in her following thee (though if she be an earl's daughter she is a fair getting for an imp of Upmeads), for thou art a well shapen lad, little lord, and carriest a sweet tongue in thy mouth. But tell me, what is she?"

"Brother," said Ralph kindly, "she is my wife."

"I kiss her hands," said Hugh; "but of what lineage is she?"

"She is my wife," said Ralph.  Said Hugh:  "That is, forsooth, a high dignity."  Said Ralph:  "Thou sayest sooth, though in mockery thou speakest, which is scarce kind to thine own mother's son: but learn, brother, that I am become a Friend of the Well, and were meet to wed with the daughters of the best of the Kings: yet is this one meeter to wed with me than the highest of the Queens; for she also is a Friend of the Well.  Moreover, thou sayest it that the champions of the Dry Tree, who would think but little of an earl for a leader, are eager to follow me: and if thou still doubt what this may mean, abide, till in two days or three thou see me before the foeman.  Then shalt thou tell me how much changed I am from the stripling whom thou knewest in Upmeads a little while ago."

Then was Hugh somewhat abashed, and he said:  "I crave thy pardon, brother, but never had I a well filed tongue, and belike it hath grown no smoother amid the hard haps which have befallen me of late. Besides it was dull in there, and I must needs try to win a little mirth out of kith and kin."

"So be it, lad," quoth Ralph kindly, "thou didst ask and I told, and all is said."

"Yet forsooth," said Hugh, "thou hast given me marvel for marvel, brother." "Even so," said Ralph, "and hereafter I will tell thee more when we sit safe by the wine at Upmeads."

Now cometh back one of the fore-riders and draweth rein by Ralph and saith that they are hard on a little thorp under the hanging of the hill that was the beginning of the Down country on that road. So Ralph bade make stay there and rest the night over, and seek new tidings on the morrow; and the man told Ralph that the folk of the thorp were fleeing fast at the tidings of their company, and that it were best that he and some half score should ride sharply into the thorp, so that it might not be quite bare of victuals when they came to their night's lodging. Ralph bids him so do, but to heed well that he hurt no man, or let fire get into any house or roof; so he takes his knot of men and rides off on the spur, and Ralph and the main of them come on quietly; and when they came into the street of the thorp, lo there by the cross a big fire lighted, and the elders standing thereby cap in hand, and a score of stout carles with weapons in their hands. Then the chief man came up to Ralph and greeted him and said: "Lord, when we heard that an armed company was at hand we deemed no less than that the riders of the Burg were upon us, and deemed that there was nought for it but to flee each as far and as fast as he might.  But now we have heard that thou art a good lord seeking his own with the help of worthy champions, and a foeman to those devils of the Burg, we bid thee look upon us and all we have as thine, lord, and take kindly such guesting as we may give thee."

The old man's voice quavered a little as he looked on the stark shapes of the Dry Tree; but Ralph looked kindly on him, and said: "Yea, my master, we will but ask for a covering for our heads, and what victual thou mayst easily spare us in return for good silver, and thou shalt have our thanks withal. But who be these stout lads with staves and bucklers, or whither will they to-night?"

Thereat a tall young man with a spear in his hand and girt with a short sword came forth and said boldly:  "Lord, we be a few who thought when we heard that the Burg-devils were at hand that we might as well die in the field giving stroke for stroke, as be hauled off and drop to pieces under the hands of their tormentors; and now thou hast come, we have little will to abide behind, but were fain to follow thee, and do thee what good we can: and after thou hast come to thine above, when we go back to our kin thou mayst give us a gift if it please thee: but we deem that no great matter if thou but give us leave to have the comfort of thee and thy Champions for a while in these hard days."

When he had done speaking there rose up from the Champions a hum as of praise, and Ralph was well-pleased withal, deeming it a good omen; so he said:  "Fear not, good fellows, that I shall forget you when we have overcome the foemen, and meanwhile we will live and die together. But thou, ancient man, show our sergeants where our riders shall lie to-night, and what they shall do with their horses."

So the elders marshalled the little host to their abodes for that night, lodging the more part of them in a big barn on the western outskirt of the thorp.  The elder who led them thither, brought them victual and good drink, and said to them: "Lords, ye were best to keep a good watch to-night because it is on this side that we may look for an onfall from the foemen if they be abroad to-night; and sooth to say that is one cause we have bestowed you here, deeming that ye would not grudge us the solace of knowing that your valiant bodies were betwixt us and them, for we be a poor unwalled people."

Stephen to whom he spake laughed at his word, and said: "Heart-up, carle! within these few days we shall build up a better wall than ye may have of stone and lime; and that is the overthrow of our foemen in the open field."

So there was kindness and good fellowship betwixt the thorp-dwellers and the riders, and the country folk told those others many tales of the evil deeds of the Burg-devils, as they called them; but they could not tell them for certain whether they had gone down into Upmeads.

As to Ralph and Ursula they, with Richard and Roger, were lodged in the headman's house, and had good feast there, and he also talked over the where-abouts of the Burgers with the thorp-dwellers, but might have no certain tidings. So he and Ursula and his fellows went to bed and slept peacefully for the first hours of the night.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_22]

CHAPTER 22

An Old Acquaintance Comes From the Down Country to See Ralph

But an hour after midnight Ralph arose, as his purpose was, and called Richard, and they took their swords and went forth and about the thorp and around its outskirts, and found naught worse than their own watch any where; so they came back again to their quarters and found Roger standing at the door, who said to Ralph:  "Lord, here is a man who would see thee." "What like is he?" said Ralph.  Said Roger "He is an old man, but a tough one; however, I have got his weapons from him." "Bring him in," said Ralph, "and he shall have his say."

So they all went into the chamber together and there was light therein; but the man said to Ralph:  "Art thou the Captain of the men-at-arms, lord?" "Yea," said Ralph.  Said the man, "I were as lief have these others away." "So be it," said Ralph; "depart for a little while, friends." So they went but Ursula lay in the bed, which was in a nook in the wall; the man looked about the chamber and said:  "Is there any one in the bed?" "Yea," said Ralph, "my wife, good fellow; shall she go also?" "Nay," said the carle, "we shall do as we are now.  So I will begin my tale."

Ralph looked on him and deemed he had seen him before, but could not altogether call his visage to mind; so he held his peace and the man went on.

"I am of the folk of the shepherds of the Downs:  we be not a many by count of noses, but each one of us who is come to man's yean, and many who be past them, as I myself, can handle weapons at a pinch. Now some deal we have been harried and have suffered by these wretches who have eaten into the bowels of this land; that is to say, they have lifted our sheep, and slain some of us who withstood them: but whereas our houses be uncostly and that we move about easily from one hill-side to another, it is like that we should have deemed it wisest to have borne this trouble, like others of wind and weather, without seeking new remedy, but that there have been tokens on earth and in the heavens, whereof it is too long to tell thee, lord, at present, which have stirred up our scattered folk to meet together in arms. Moreover, the blood of our young men is up, because the Burg-devils have taken some of our women, and have mishandled them grievously and shamefully, so that naught will keep point and edge from seeking the war-clash. Furthermore, there is an old tale which hath now come up again, That some time when our folk shall be in great need, there shall come to our helping one from afar, whose home is anigh; a stripling and a great man; a runaway, and the conqueror of many: then, say they, shall the point and the edge bring the red water down on the dear dales; whereby we understand that the blood of men shall be shed there, and naught to our shame or dishonour. Again I mind me of a rhyme concerning this which sayeth:

    The Dry Tree shall be seen
     On the green earth, and green
     The Well-spring shall arise
     For the hope of the wise.
     They are one which were twain,
     The Tree bloometh again,
     And the Well-spring hath come
     From the waste to the home.

Well, lord, thou shalt tell me presently if this hath aught to do with thee: for indeed I saw the Dry Tree, which hath scared us so many a time, beaten on thy sergeants' coats; but now I will go on and make an end of my story."

Ralph nodded to him kindly, for now he remembered the carle, though he had seen him but that once when he rode the Greenway across the downs to Higham. The old man looked up at him as if he too had an inkling of old acquaintance with Ralph, but went on presently:

"There is a woman who dwells alone with none to help her, anigh to Saint Ann's Chapel; a woman not very old; for she is of mine own age, and time was we have had many a fair play in the ingles of the downs in the July weather--not very old, I say, but wondrous wise, as I know better than most men; for oft, even when she was young, would she foretell things to come to me, and ever it fell out according to her spaedom. To the said woman I sought to-day in the morning, not to win any wisdom of her, but to talk over remembrances of old days; but when I came into her house, lo, there was my carline walking up and down the floor, and she turned round upon me like the young woman of past days, and stamped her foot and cried out: 'What does the sluggard dallying about women's chambers when the time is come for the deliverance?'

"I let her talk, and spake no word lest I should spoil her story, and she went on:

"'Take thy staff, lad, for thou art stout as well as merry, and go adown to the thorps at the feet of the downs toward Higham; keep thee well from the Burg-devils, and go from stead to stead till thou comest on a captain of men-at-arms who is lord over a company of green-coats, green-coats of the Dry Tree--a young lord, fair-faced, and kind-faced, and mighty, and not to be conquered, and the blessing of the folk and the leader of the Shepherds, and the foe of their foeman and the well-beloved of Bear-father. Go night and day, sit not down to eat, stand not to drink; heed none that crieth after thee for deliverance, but go, go, go till thou hast found him.  Meseems I see him riding toward Higham, but those dastards will not open gate to him, of that be sure. He shall pass on and lie to-night, it may be at Mileham, it may be at Milton, it may be at Garton; at one of those thorps shall ye find him. And when ye have found him thus bespeak him:  O bright Friend of the Well, turn not aside to fall on the Burgers in this land, either at Foxworth Castle, or the Longford, or the Nineways Garth: all that thou mayest do hereafter, thou or thy champions. There be Burgers otherwhere, housed in no strong castle, but wending the road toward the fair greensward of Upmeads. If thou delay to go look on them, then shall thy work be to begin again amid sorrow of heart and loss that may not be remedied.' Hast thou heard me, lord?"

"Yea, verily," said Ralph, "and at sunrise shall we be in the saddle to ride straight to Upmeads.  For I know thee, friend."

"Hold a while," said the carle, "for meseemeth I know thee also. But this withal she said:  'But hearken, Giles, hearken a while, for I see him clearly, and the men that he rideth with, and the men that are following to his aid, fierce and fell are they; but so withal are the foemen that await them, and his are few, howsoever fierce. Therefore bid him this also.  Haste, haste, haste!  But haste not overmuch, lest thou speed the worse:  in Bear Castle I see a mote of our folk, and thee amidst of it with thy champions, and I see the staves of the Shepherds rising round thee like a wood.  In Wulstead I see a valiant man with sword by side and sallet on head, and with him sitteth a tall man-at-arms grizzle-headed and red-bearded, big-boned and mighty; they sit at the wine in a fair chamber, and a well-looking dame serveth them; and there are weaponed men no few about the streets. Wilt thou pass by friends, and old friends?  Now ride on, Green Coats! stride forth, Shepherds! staves on your shoulders, Wool-wards! and there goes the host over the hills into Upmeads, and the Burg-devils will have come from the Wood Debateable to find graves by the fair river. And then do thy will, O Friend of the Well.'"

The carle took a breath, and then he said:  "Lord, this is the say I was charged with, and if thou understandest it, well; but if it be dark to thee, I may make it clear if thou ask me aught."

Ralph pondered a while, and then he said:  "Is it known of others than thy spaewife that the Burgers be in Upmeads?" "Nay, lord," said the carle, "and this also I say to thee, that I deem what she said that they be not in Upmeads yet, and but drawing thitherward, as I deem from the Wood Debateable."

Ralph arose from his seat and strode up and down the chamber a while; then he went to bed, and stood over Ursula, who lay twixt sleeping and waking, for she was weary; then he came back to the carle, and said to him:  "Good friend, I thank thee, and this is what I shall do: when daylight is broad (and lo, the dawn beginning!) I shall gather my men, and ride the shortest way, which thou shalt show me, to Bear Castle, and there I shall give the token of the four fires which erewhile a good man of the Shepherds bade me if I were in need.  And it seems to me that there shall the mote be hallowed, though it may be not before nightfall. But the mote done, we shall wend, the whole host of us, be we few or many, down to Wulstead, where we shall fall in with my friend Clement Chapman, and hear tidings.  Thence shall we wend the dear ways I know into the land where I was born and the folk amongst whom I shall die. And so let St. Nicholas and All Hallows do as they will with us. Deemest thou, friend, that this is the meaning of thy wise she-friend?"

The carle's eyes glittered, and he rose up and stood close by Ralph, and said:  "Even so she meant; and now I seem to see that but few of thy riders shall be lacking when they turn their heads away from Upmeads towards the strong-places of the Burg-devils that are hereabouts. But tell me, Captain of the host, is that victual and bread that I see on the board?"

Ralph laughed:  "Fall to, friend, and eat thy fill; and here is wine withal. Thou needest not to fear it.  Wert thou any the worse of the wine that Thirly poured into thee that other day?"

"Nay, nay, master," said the carle between his mouthfuls, "but mickle the better, as I shall be after this:  all luck to thee! Yet see I that I need not wish thee luck, since that is thine already. Sooth to say, I deemed I knew thee when I first set eyes on thee again. I looked not to see thee more; though I spoke to thee words at that time which came from my heart, almost without my will. Though it is but a little while ago, thou hast changed much since then, and hast got another sort of look in the eyes than then they had. Nay, nay," said he laughing, "not when thou lookest on me so frankly and kindly; that is like thy look when we passed Thirly about. Yea, I see the fashion of it:  one look is for thy friends, another for thy foes.  God be praised for both.  And now I am full, I will go look on thy wife."

So he went up to the bed and stood over Ursula, while she, who was not fully awake, smiled up into his face.  The old man smiled back at her and bent down and kissed her mouth, and said: "I ask thy pardon, lady, and thine, my lord, if I be too free, but such is our custom of the Downs; and sooth to say thy face is one that even a old man should not fail to kiss if occasion serve, so that he may go to paradise with the taste thereof on his lips."

"We are nowise hurt by thy love, friend," said Ursula; "God make thy latter days of life sweet to thee!"

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_23]

CHAPTER 23

They Ride to Bear Castle

But while they spake thus and were merry, the dawn had wellnigh passed into daylight.  Then Ralph bade old Giles sleep for an hour, and went forth and called Roger and Richard and went to the great barn. There he bade the watch wake up Stephen and all men, and they gat to horse as speedily as they might, and were on the road ere the sun was fully up. The spearmen of the thorp did not fail them, and numbered twenty and three all told.  Giles had a horse given him and rode the way by Ralph.

They rode up and down the hills and dales, but went across country and not by the Greenway, for thuswise the road was shorter.

But when they had gone some two leagues, and were nigh on top of a certain low green ridge, they deemed that they heard men's voices anigh and the clash of arms; and it must be said that by Ralph's rede they journeyed somewhat silently. So Ralph, who was riding first with Giles, bid all stay and let the crown of the ridge cover them.  So did they, and Giles gat off his horse and crept on to the top of the ridge till he could see down to the dale below.  Presently he came down again the old face of him puckered with mirth, and said softly to Ralph: "Did I not say thou wert lucky? here is the first fruits thereof. Ride over the ridge, lord, at once, and ye shall have what there is of them as safe as a sheep in a penfold."

So Ralph drew sword and beckoned his men up, and they all handled their weapons and rode over the brow, and tarried not one moment there, not even to cry their cries; for down in the bottom were a sort of men, two score and six (as they counted them afterward) sitting or lying about a cooking fire, or loitering here and there, with their horses standing behind them, and they mostly unhelmed. The Champions knew them at once for men of their old foes, and there was scarce time for a word ere the full half of them had passed by the sword of the Dry Tree; then Ralph cried out to spare the rest, unless they offered to run; so the foemen cast down their weapons and stood still, and were presently brought before Ralph, who sat on the grass amidst of the ring of the Champions.  He looked on them a while and remembered the favour of those whom he had seen erewhile in the Burg; but ere he could speak Giles said softly in his ear: "These be of the Burg, forsooth, as ye may see by their dogs' faces; but they be not clad nor armed as those whom we have met heretofore. Ask them whence they be, lord."

Ralph spake and said:  "Whence and whither are ye, ye manslayers?" But no man of them answered.  Then said Ralph:  "Pass these murderers by the edge of the sword, Stephen; unless some one of them will save his life and the life of his fellows by speaking."

As he spake, one of the youngest of the men hung down his head a little, and then raised it up:  "Wilt thou spare our lives if I speak?" "Yea," said Ralph.  "Wilt thou swear it by the edge of the blade?" said the man.  Ralph drew forth his sword and said:  "Lo then! I swear it."  The man nodded his head, and said:  "Few words are best; and whereas I wot not if my words will avail thee aught, and since they will save our lives, I will tell thee truly. We are men of the Burg whom these green-coated thieves drave out of the Burg on an unlucky day.  Well, some of us, of whom I was one, fetched a compass and crossed the water that runneth through Upmeads by the Red Bridge, and so gat us into the Wood Debateable through the Uplands.  There we struck a bargain with the main band of strong-thieves of the wood, that we and they together would get us a new home in Upmeads, which is a fat and pleasant land. So we got us ready; but the Woodmen told us that the Upmeads carles, though they be not many, are strong and dauntless, and since we now had pleasant life before us, with good thralls to work for us, and with plenty of fair women for our bed-mates, we deemed it best to have the most numbers we might, so that we might over-whelm the said carles at one blow, and get as few of ourselves slain as might be. Now we knew that another band of us had entered the lands of the Abbot of Higham, and had taken hold of some of his castles; wherefore the captains considered and thought, and sent us to give bidding to our folk south here to march at once toward us in Upmeads, that our bands might meet there, and scatter all before us. There is our story, lord."

Ralph knitted his brow, and said:  "Tell me (and thy life lieth on thy giving true answers), do thy folk in these strongholds know of your purpose of falling upon Upmeads?" "Nay," said the Burger.  Said Ralph:  "And will they know otherwise if ye do them not to wit?"  "Nay," again said the man. Said Ralph:  "Are thy folk already in Upmeads?"  "Nay," said the captive, "but by this time they will be on the road thither." "How many all told?" said Ralph The man reddened and stammered: "A thousand--two--two thousand--A thousand, lord," said he. "Get thy sword ready, Stephen," said Ralph.  "How many, on thy life, Burger?"  "Two thousand, lord," said the man. "And how many do ye look to have from Higham-land?" Said the Burger, "Somewhat more than a thousand."  Withal he looked uneasily at his fellows, some of whom were scowling on him felly. "Tell me now," said Ralph, "where be the other bands of the Burgers?"

Ere the captive could speak, he who stood next him snatched an unsheathed knife from the girdle of one of the Dry Tree, and quick as lightning thrust it into his fellow's belly, so that he fell dead at once amongst them. Then Stephen, who had his sword naked in his hand, straightway hewed down the slayer, and swords came out of the scabbards everywhere; and it went but a little but that all the Burgers were slain at once. But Ralph cried out:  "Put up your swords, Champions!  Stephen slew yonder man for slaying his fellow, who was under my ward, and that was but his due. But I have given life to these others, and so it must be held to. Tie their hands behind them and let us on to Bear Castle.  For this tide brooks no delay."

So they gat to horse, and the footmen from Garton mounted the horses of the slain Burgers, and had the charge of guarding the twenty that were left. So they rode off all of them toward Bear Castle, and shortly to say it, came within sight of its rampart two hours before noon.  Sooner had they came thither; but divers times they caught up with small companies of weaponed men, whose heads were turned the same way; and Giles told Ralph each time that they were of the Shepherd-folk going to the mote. But now when they were come so nigh to the castle they saw a very stream of men setting that way, and winding up the hill to the rampart. And Giles said:  "It is not to be doubted but that Martha hath sent round the war-brand, and thou wilt presently have an host that will meet thy foemen without delay; and what there lacks in number shall be made good by thy luck, which once again was shown by our falling in with that company e'en now."

"Yea truly," said Ralph, "but wilt thou now tell me how I shall guide myself amongst thy folk, and if they will grant me the aid I ask?"

"Look, look," said Giles, "already some one hath made clear thine asking to our folk; and hearken! up there they are naming the ancient Father of our Race, without whom we may do nought, even with the blessed saints to aid. There then is thine answer, lord."

Indeed as he spoke came down on the wind the voice of a chant, sung by many folk, the words whereof he well remembered: SMITE ASIDE AXE, O BEAR-FATHER. And therewith rose up into the air a column of smoke intermingled with fire from each of the four corners of that stronghold of the Ancient Folk. Ralph rejoiced when he saw it, and the heart rose within him and fluttered in his bosom, and Ursula, who rode close behind him, looked up into his face well pleased and happy.

Thus rode they up the bent and over the turf bridge into the plain of the garth, and whatso of people were there flocked about to behold the new-come warriors; sooth to say, there were but some two hundreds, who looked but few indeed in the great square place, but more were streaming in every minute. Giles led him and his men into the north-east corner of the castle, and there they gat off their horses and lay down on the grass awaiting what should betide.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_24]

CHAPTER 24

The Folkmote of the Shepherds

In about an hour all the folk within the castle began to set toward the ingle wherein lay Ralph and his fellows, and then all rose up, while the folk of the Shepherds took their places on the slopes of the earth walls, but on the top hard by the fire, which was still burning, stood up an old hoar man with a beard exceeding long; he had a sallet on his head, and held a guisarme in his hand. All men held their peace when they saw him standing there; and straightway he proclaimed the hallowing of the Mote in such form of words as was due amongst that folk, and which were somewhat long to tell here. Then was silence again for a little, and then the old man spake: "Few words are best to-day, neighbours; for wherefore are we met together?" There arose a hum of assent from the Shepherds as he spoke and men clashed their weapons together; but none said any clear word. Then spake the old man:  "We be met together because we have trouble on hand, and because there is a helper to hand, of whom the words of the wise and tales of old have told us; and because as he shall help us, so shall we help him, since indeed our trouble is his also: now, neighbours, shall I say the word for you which ye would say to this young man, who is nevertheless old in wisdom, and true-hearted and kind?"

Then came the hum of yeasay again, the clashing of weapons, and the old man spake again:  "Ralph of Upmeads, there thou standest, wilt thou help us against the tyrants, as we shall help thee?"

"Yea," said Ralph.  Said the Elder:  "Wilt thou be our Captain, if we do according to thy bidding?  For thou needest not fear our failing thee."

"Yea verily," said Ralph.

Said the Elder:  "Ralph of Upmeads, wilt thou be our Captain as an alien and a hireling, or as a brother?"

"As a brother," quoth Ralph.

"Come up here then, Captain of our folk, and take my hand in thine, and swear by our fathers and thine to be a true brother of us, and take this ancient staff of war in thine hand. And, ye kindred of the Shepherds, bear witness of his swearing. Yea and ye also, O neighbours of the Dry Tree!"

So Ralph went up on the wall-top and took the Elder's hand, and took from him the ancient guisarme, which was inlaid with gold letters of old time; and he swore in a loud voice to be a true brother of the Shepherd-folk, and raised the weapon aloft and shook it strongly, and all the Folk cried, "Hail our brother!" and the Champions shouted gladly withal, and great joy there was in that ingle of the ancient work.

Then spake the Elder and said:  "Ye champions of the Dry Tree, will ye wend with us under the Captain our brother against his foemen and ours?"

Then stood forth Stephen a-Hurst and said, "Master shepherd, for nought else are we come hither."

Said the Elder:  "Will ye come with us as friends or as hirelings? for in any case we would have you by our sides, and not in face of us; and though we be shepherds, and unhoused, or ill-housed, yet have we wherewithal to wage you, as ye know well enough, who have whiles lifted our gear."

Then Stephen laughed and said:  "True it is that we have whiles driven prey in your country, yea, and had some hard knocks therein; but all that was in playing the game of war, and now since we are to fight side by side, we will be paid by our foes and not by our friends; so neither hair nor wool will we have of yours, whatever we may have of the Burgers; and it is like that we shall be good friends of yours hence-forward."

Once more all they that were there shouted.  But once more the Elder spoke and said:  "Is any man now wishful to speak?" None answered till a big and burly man rose up and said: "Nay, Tall Thomas, thou hast said and done all that need was, and I deem that time presses; wherefore my mind is that we now break up this mote, and that after we have eaten a morsel we get ourselves into due array and take to the road. Now let any man speak against this if he will."

None gainsaid him; nay, all seemed well-pleased. So the Elder proclaimed the breaking up of the mote, and they went from out the hallowed place and sat down in the dyke on the outside of the rampart and behind the country which stretched out all lovely and blue before them, for the day was bright and fair. There then certain women brought victual and drink to them, and served the strangers first.

So when they had eaten and drunk, Ralph bade the Shepherds array them duly, and appointed them leaders of tens and hundreds with the help of Giles, who was now clad in a hauberk and mail-coif and looked a proper man-at-arms. Then they told over their company, and numbered of the Dry Tree one hundred and fifty champions, outtaken Stephen and Roger; of the men of Garton were twenty and two, and of the Shepherds three hundred and seventy and seven stout carles, some eighty of whom had bows, and the rest glaives and spears and other staff-weapons. There was not much armour of defence amongst them, but they were one and all stark carles and doughty.

So when they were told over and made five hundred and fifty and four, they gat them into array for the road; and Ralph went afoot with no armour but his sallet, and a light coat of fence which he had gotten him in the Burg. He would have had Ursula ride on her palfrey with the Sage, but she would not, and held it for mirth and pleasure that she should go afoot through the land, now she was so nigh come home to her lord's house; so she went forth by Ralph's side with her broidered gown trussed through her girdle so that the trimness of her feet drew the eyes of all men to them. As for Richard, he took a half score of the champions, and they rode on ahead to see that all was clear before the main host; which he might well do, as he knew the country so well.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_25]

CHAPTER 25

They Come to Wulstead

Thus went they, and nought befell them to tell of till they came anigh the gates of Wulstead hard on sunset. The gates, it has been said; for whereas Ralph left Wulstead a town unwalled, he now found it fenced with pales, and with two towers strongly framed of timber, one on either side the gate, and on the battlements of the said towers they saw spears glittering; before the gate they saw a barrier of big beams also, and the gleaming of armour therein. Ralph was glad when he saw that they meant some defence; for though Wulstead was not in the lands of Upmeads, yet it was always a friendly neighbour, and he looked to eke out his host therein.

Wulstead standeth on a little hill or swelling of the earth, and the road that the company of Ralph took went up to the gate across the plain meadows, which had but here and there a tree upon them, so that the going of the company was beheld clearly from the gate; as was well seen, because anon came the sound of the blowing of great horns, and the spears thickened in the towers. Then Ralph stayed his company two bowshots from the barriers, while he himself, with his sword in his sheath, took Ursula's hand and set forth an easy pace toward the gate.  Some of his company, and specially Roger and Stephen, would have letted him; but he laughed and said, "Why, lads, why? these be friends." "Yea," quoth Roger, "but an arrow knoweth no kindred nor well-willers: have a care, lord."  Said the Sage of Swevenham: "Ye speak but after the folly of men of war; the hands and the eyes that be behind the bows have other hands and eyes behind them which shall not suffer that a Friend of the Well shall be hurt."

So Ralph and Ursula went forth, and came within a stone's cast of the barrier, when Ralph lifted up his voice and said: "Is there a captain of the townsfolk within the timber there?" A cheery voice answered him:  "Yea, yea, lad; spare thy breath; I am coming to thee."

And therewith a man came from out the barrier and did off his headpiece and ran straight toward Ralph, who saw at once that it was Clement Chapman; he made no more ado, but coming up to Ralph fell to clipping him in his arms, while the tears ran down his face. Then he stood aloof and gazed upon him speechless a little while, and then spake:  "Hail, and a hundred times hail! but now I look on thee I see what hath betid, and that thou art too noble and high that I should have cast mine arms about thee. But now as for this one, I will be better mannered with her."

Therewith he knelt down before Ursula, and kissed her feet, but reverently. And she stooped down and raised him up, with a merry countenance kissed his face, and stroked his cheeks with her hand and said: "Hail, friend of my lord!  Was it not rather thou than he who delivered me from the pain and shame of Utterbol, whereas thou didst bring him safe through the mountains unto Goldburg? And but for that there had been no Well, either for him or for me."

But Clement stood with his head hanging down, and his face reddening. Till Ralph said to him:  "Hail, friend! many a time we thought of this meeting when we were far away and hard bestead; but this is better than all we thought of.  But now, Clement, hold up thine head and be a stout man of war, for thou seest that we are not alone."

Said Clement:  "Yea, fair lord, and timely ye come, both thou and thy company; and now that I have my speech again which joy hath taken away from me at the first, I shall tell thee this, that if ye go further than the good town ye shall be met and fought withal by men who are over-many and over-fierce for us." "Yea," said Ralph, "and how many be they?"  Quoth Clement: "How many men may be amongst them I wot not, but I deem there be some two thousand devils."

Now Ralph reddened, and he took Clement by the shoulder, and said: "Tell me, Clement, are they yet in Upmeads?"  "Sooth to say," said Clement, "by this while they may be therein; but this morn it was yet free of them; but when thou art home in our house, thy gossip shall belike tell thee much more than I can; for she is foreseeing, and hath told us much in this matter also that hath come to pass." Then spake Ralph:  "Where are my father and my mother; and shall I go after them at once without resting, through the dark night and all?"

Said Clement, and therewith his face brightened:  "Nay, thou needest go no further to look for them than the House of Black Canons within our walls: there are they dwelling in all honour and dignity these two days past." "What!" said Ralph, "have they fled from Upmeads, and left the High House empty?  I pray thee, Clement, bring me to them as speedily as may be."

"Verily," said Clement, "they have fled, with many another, women and children and old men, who should but hinder the carles who have abided behind. Nicholas Longshanks is the leader of them down there, and the High House is their stronghold in a way; though forsooth their stout heads and strong hands are better defence."

Here Ralph brake in:  "Sweetling Ursula, though thy feet have worn a many miles to-day, I bid thee hasten back to the company and tell Richard that it is as I said, to wit, that friends, and good guesting await them; so let them hasten hither and come within gates at once. For as for me, I have sworn it that I will not go one step back till I have seen my father and mother in their house of Upmeads. Is it well said, Clement?"  "Yea, forsooth," said Clement; but he could not take his eyes off Ursula's loveliness, as she kilted her skirts and ran her ways like one of Diana's ladies in the wildwood. At last he said, "Thou shalt wot, fair sir, that ye will have a little band to go with thee from us of Wulstead; forsooth we had gone to-morrow morn in any case, but since thou art here, all is well." Even as he spake a great shout broke out from the company as Ursula had given her message, and then came the tramp of men and horses and the clash of weapons as they set forward; and Clement looked and beheld how first of all the array came Ursula, bearing the hallowed staff in her hand; for her heart also was set on what was to come.  Then cried out Clement: "Happy art thou, lord, and happy shalt thou be, and who shall withstand thee? Lo! what a war-duke it is! and what a leader that marches with fate in her hands before thine host!"

Therewith were they all joined together, and Ursula gave the guisarme into Ralph's hand, and with his other hand he took hers, and the bar of the barrier was lifted and the gates thrown open, and they all streamed into the street, the champions coming last and towering over the footmen as they sat, big men on their big horses, as if they were very bodyguards of the God of War.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_26]

CHAPTER 26

Ralph Sees His Father and Mother Again

Thus came they into the market-place of Wulstead nigh to Clement's house, and there the company stood in ordered ranks. Ralph looked round about half expecting to see his gossip standing in the door; but Clement smiled and said: "Thou art looking round for thy gossip, fair sir; but she is upon the north gate in war-gear; for we be too few in Wulstead to spare so clean-limbed and strong-armed a dame from our muster; but she shall be here against thou comest back from the Austin Canons, wither forsooth thou mayst go at once if thou wilt let me be master in the matter of lodging." Said Ralph, smiling:  "Well, Ring of Wulstead, since thou givest leave I will e'en take it, nor needest thou give me any guide to the House of St. Austin, for I know it well. Sweetheart," said he, turning to Ursula, "what sayest thou: wilt thou come with me, or abide till to-morrow, when I shall show thee to my kinsmen?"  "Nay," she said, "I will with thee at once, my lord, if thou wilt be kind and take me; for meseemeth I also have a word to say to thy father, and the mother that bore thee."

"And thou, Hugh," said Ralph, "what sayest thou?"  "Why, brother," said Hugh, "I think my blessing will abide the morrow's morn, for I have nought so fair and dear to show our father and mother as thou hast. Also to-morrow thou wilt have more to do; since thou art a captain, and I but a single varlet."  And he smiled a little sourly on Ralph; who heeded it little, but took Ursula's hand and went his way with her.

It was but a few minutes for them to come to the House of the Canons, which was well walled toward the fields at the west of the town, so that it was its chief defence of that side. It was a fair house with a church but just finished, and Ralph could see down the street its new white pinnacles and the cross on its eastern gable rising over the ridge of the dortoir. They came to the gate, and round about it were standing men-at-arms not a few, who seemed doughty enough at first sight; but when Ralph looked on them he knew some of them, that they were old men, and somewhat past warlike deeds, for in sooth they were carles of Upmeads.  Him they knew not, for he had somewhat cast down the visor of his helm; but they looked eagerly on the fair lady and the goodly knight.

So Ralph spake to the porter and bade him show him where was King Peter of Upmeads and his Lady wife; and the porter made him obeisance and told him that they were in the church, wherein was service toward; and bade him enter.  So they went in and entered the church, and it was somewhat dim, because the sun was set, and there were many pictures, and knots of flowers in the glass of the windows.

So they went halfway down the nave, and stood together there; and the whole church was full of the music that the minstrels were making in the rood-loft, and most heavenly sweet it was; and as Ralph stood there his heart heaved with hope and love and the sweetness of his youth; and he looked at Ursula, and she hung her head, and he saw that her shoulders were shaken with sobs; but he knew that it was with her as with him, so he spake no word to her.

Now when his eyes cleared and he was used to the twilight of the church, he looked toward the choir, and saw near to the Jesus altar a man and a woman standing together even as they were standing, and they were somewhat stricken in years. So presently he knew that this would be his father and mother; so he stood still and waited till the service should be over; and by then it was done the twilight was growing fast in the church, and the sacristan was lighting a lamp here and there in some of the chapels, and the aisles of the choir.

So King Peter and his wife turned and came slowly down the nave, and when they were come anigh, Ralph spake aloud, and said: "Hail, King Peter of Upmeads!"  And the old man stopped and said unto him: "Yea, forsooth, my name is Peter, and my business is to be a king, or a kinglet rather; and once it seemed no such hard craft; but now it all goes otherwise, and belike my craft has left me; even as it fares with a leech when folk are either too well or too ill to need his leech-craft."

Then he looked at Ralph and at Ursula, and said:  "Either my eyes are worse than I deemed yesterday, or thou art young, and a gallant knight, and she that is standing by thee is young, and fair.  Ah, lad! time was when I would have bid thee come home, thou and thy sweetling, to my house with me, and abide there in ease and feastfully; but now the best rede I can give thee is to get thee gone from the land, for there is all unpeace in it. And yet, forsooth, friend, I know not where to send thee to seek for peace, since Upmeads hath failed us."

While he spoke, and Ralph was sore moved by the sound of his voice, and his speech wherein kindness and mocking was so blended, the Dame of Upmeads came to Ralph and laid her hand on his arm, and said in a pleasant voice, for she was soft-hearted and soft-spoken both: "Will not the fair young warrior and his mate do so much for an old man and his wife, who have heard not tidings of their best beloved son for two years well nigh, as to come with them to their chamber, and answer a little question or two as to the parts of the world they have seen of late?"

Ralph nodded yeasay and began to move toward the porch, the Dame of Upmeads sticking close to him all the time, and King Peter following after and saying:  "Yea, young man, thou mayst think the worse of me for hanging about here amongst the monks, when e'en now, for all I know, the battle is pitched in Upmeads; but Nicholas and all of them would have it so--Yea, and all my sons are away, fair sir; though of the eldest, who meseems was born with a long head, we hear that he is thriving, and hath grown great."

As he spake they were come into the porch, and passed into the open air, where it was still light; then the Dame turned round on Ralph and caught him by the two arms and cried out and cast her arms about his neck; and when she could sunder herself a little from him, she said: "O Ralph, I deemed that I knew thy voice, but I durst not halse thee till I knew it was mine own flesh and blood, lest I should have died for grief to think it was thee when it was not.  O son, how fair thou art! Now do off thy sallet that I may see thee, thy face and thy curly head."

So did he, smiling as one who loved her, and again she fell to kissing and clipping him.  Then his father came up and thrust her aside gently and embraced him also, and said:  "Tell me, son, what thou are become? Thou art grown much of a man since thou stolest thyself away from me. Is there aught behind this goodly raiment of thine?  And this fair lady, hath she stolen thee away from thy foes to bring thee home to us?"

Ralph laughed and said:  "No less than that, father; I will tell thee all presently; but this first, that I am the captain of a goodly company of men-at-arms; and"----"Ah, son, sweetheart," said his mother, "and thou wilt be going away from us again to seek more fame: and yet, as I look on thee thou seemest to have grown great enough already. I deem thou wilt not leave us."

"Mother, my dear," said Ralph, "to-morrow morn we shall go down to battle in Upmeads, and the day after I shall come hither again, and bring you back to the High House with all honour and glory. But look, mother," and he took Ursula's hand, "here is a daughter and a darling that I have brought back to thee, for this is my wedded wife."

Then Ursula looked beseechingly at the Dame, who took her in her arms and clipped her and kissed her; and said, "Welcome, daughter; for I feel thy body that thou lovest me."

Then said King Peter; "Forsooth, son, she is a sweet and dainty creature. If there be a fairer than her, I wot not; but none so fair have mine eyes looked on.  Tell me whose daughter she is, and of what lineage?" And therewith he took her hand and kissed her.

But Ursula said:  "I am come of no earl or baron. I am a yeoman's daughter, and both my father and my mother are dead, and I have no nigh kin save one brother who loveth me not, and would heed it little if he never saw my face again. Now I tell thee this:  that if my lord biddeth me go from him, I will depart; but for the bidding of none else will I leave him."

King Peter laughed and said:  "Never will I bid thee depart." Then he took her hand and said:  "Sweetling, fair daughter, what is thy name?" "Ursula," she said.  Said he:  "Ursula, thy palms are harder than be the hands of the dainty dames of the cities, but there is no churls' blood in thee meseemeth.  What is thy kindred of the yeoman?"  She said: "We be come of the Geirings of old time:  it may be that the spear is broken, and the banner torn; but we forget not our forefathers, though we labour afield, and the barons and the earls call us churls. It is told amongst us that that word is but another way of saying earl and that it meaneth a man."

Then spoke Ralph:  "Father and mother both, I may well thank thee and bless thee that your eyes look upon this half of me with kind eyes.  And now I shall tell thee that for this woman, her heart is greater than a king's or a leader of folk. And meseemeth her palms have hardened with the labour of delivering me from many troubles."

Then the Dame of Upmeads put her arms about Ursula's neck again, and bade her all welcome once more, with sweet words of darling and dear, and well-beloved daughter.

But King Peter said:  "Son, thou hast not told me what thou are become; and true it is that thou hast the look of a great one."

Said Ralph:  "Father and King, I have become the Lord of the Little Land of Abundance, the sworn brother of the Champions of the Dry Tree, the Lord of the Castle of the Scaur, the brother and Warduke of the Shepherds; and to-morrow shall I be the Conqueror of the robbers and the devils of the Burg. And this be not enough for me, hearken!  I and my wife both, yea and she leading me, have drunk of the Well at the World's End, and have become Friends thereof."

And he looked at his father with looks of love, and his father drew nigh to him again, and embraced him once more, and stroked his cheeks and kissed him as if he had become a child again: "O son," said he, "whatsoever thou dost, that thou dost full well. And lo, one while when I look on thee thou art my dear and sweet child, as thou wert years agone, and I love thee dearly and finely; and another while thou art a great and mighty man, and I fear thee; so much greater thou seemest than we poor upland folk."

Then smiled Ralph for love and happiness, and he said: "Father, I am thy child in the house and at the board, and that is for thine helping.  And I am thy champion and the fierce warrior afield, and that also is for thine helping. Be of good cheer; for thine house shall not wane, but wax." And all those four were full of joy and their hearts were raised aloft.

But as they spake thus came a lay-brother and bent the knee before King Peter and bade him and the Dame of Upmeads to supper in the name of the Prior, and the Captain and the Lady therewith; for indeed the rumour of the coming of an host for the helping of the countryside had gotten into that House, and the Prior and the brethern sorely desired to look upon the Captain, not knowing him for Ralph of Upmeads. So into the Hall they went together, and there the holy fathers made them great feast and joy; and King Peter might not refrain him, but told the Prior how this was his son come back from far lands, with the goodly Lady he had won to wife therein; and the Prior and all the fathers made much of Ralph, and rejoiced in their hearts when they saw how goodly a man of war he had gotten to be. And the Prior would lead him on to tell him of the marvels he had seen in the far parts of the world; but Ralph said but little thereon, whereas his thought was set on the days that lay even before his feet; yet some deal he told him of the uncouth manners of the lands beyond Whitwall, and at last he said:  "Father, when the battles be over here, and there is peace on our lands again, I will ask thee to give me guesting for a night, that I may tell thee all the tale of what hath befallen me since the last summer day when I rode through Wulstead; but now I ask leave of thee to depart, for I have many things to do this even, as behoveth a captain, before I sleep for an hour or two. And if it be thy will, I would leave the Lady my wife with my mother here at least till morrow morn."

So the Prior gave him leave, loth though he were, and Ralph kissed his father and mother, and they blessed him.  But Ursula said to him softly: "It is my meaning to go with thee down into Upmeads to-morrow; for who knoweth what may befall thee."  Then he smiled upon her and went his ways down the hall and out-a-gates, while all men looked on him and did him worship.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_27]

CHAPTER 27

Ralph Holds Converse With Katherine His Gossip

Ralph went straight from St. Austin's to Clement's house, and found much people about the door thereof, what of the townsmen, what of the men of his own host. He passed through these, and found Clement in his chamber, and with him a half score of such company as was without, and amongst them Roger and the Sage; but Stephen and Richard both were amongst their men doing what was needful. All men arose when Ralph entered; but he looked around, and could see nought of his gossip amongst them. Then he sat down by Clement and asked if he had any fresh tidings; and Clement did him to wit that there had come in a carle from out of Upmeads, who had told them by sure tokens that the foe were come into the Upmeads-land at noon that day, and between then and sunset had skirmished with Nicholas and them that were holding the High House, but had gotten nought thereby. This man, said Clement, being both bold and of good sleight had mingled with the foe; and had heard the talk of them, and he said that they had no inkling of the Shepherds or the Dry Tree coming against them; but they looked to have aid from their own folk from the lands of Higham; wherefore they made a mock of the defence of the Upmeads' men; and said that since, when they were all joined together in Upmeads, they might enter where they would without the loss of a half-score men, therefore they would risk nought now; nor would they burn either the High House or the other steadings, since, said they, they were minded to keep them sound and whole for their own.

These tidings seemed good to Ralph; so he took a cup of wine and pledged the company, and said:  "My masters, such of you as list to sleep long to-night had best be abed presently, for I warn you that the trumpets will blow for departure before the sun riseth to-morrow; and he that faileth to see to-morrow's battle will be sorry for his lack all his life long."

When he had thus spoken they all cried hail to him, and anon arose and went their ways.  Then Ralph bade Clement come with him that he might visit the quarters of his men-at-arms, and see that all the leaders knew of the muster, and of the order of departing on the morrow; and Clement arose and went with him.

As they were on the way Ralph asked Clement what ailed his gossip Katherine that she had not come to meet him already; and Clement laughed and said:  "Nought, nought; she is somewhat shamefaced to meet thee first amongst a many folk, and she not able belike to refrain her kisses and caresses to thee. Fear not, she is in her bower-aloft, and we shall find her there when we come back from our errand; fear not! she will not sleep till she hath had her arms about thee." "Good is that," said Ralph; "I had looked to see her ere now; but when we meet apart from folk, something we shall be able to say to each other, which belike neither she nor I had liked to leave unsaid till we meet again."

So came they to the chief quarters of the fighting men, and Ralph had all the leaders called to him, and he spake to them of how they should do on the morrow, both footmen and horsemen, whatwise they should stand together, and how they should fall on; and he told them all as clearly as if he were already in the field with the foe before him; so that they wondered at him, so young in years, being so old in the wisdom of war. Withal they saw of him that he had no doubt but that they should come to their above on the morrow; and all men, not only of the tried men-at-arms of the Dry Tree, but they of the Shepherds also, even those of them who had never stricken a stroke in anger, were of high heart and feared not what should befall.

So when all this business was over, they turned about and came their ways home to Clement's house again.

They saw lights in the chamber or ever they entered, and when they came to the door, lo! there within was Katherine walking up and down the floor as if she knew not how to contain herself.  She turned and saw Ralph at the door, and she cried aloud and ran towards him with arms outspread. But when she drew nigh to him and beheld him closely, she withheld her, and falling down on her knees before him took his hand and fell to kissing it and weeping and crying out, "O my lord, my lord, thou art come again to us!" But Ralph stooped down to her, and lifted her up, and embraced her and kissed her on the cheeks and the mouth, and led her to the settle and sat down beside her and put his arm about her; and Clement looked on smiling, and sat him down over against them.

Then spake Katherine:  "O my lord! how great and masterful hast thou grown; never did I hope to see thee come back so mighty a man." And again she wept for joy; but Ralph kissed her again, and she said, laughing through her tears:  "Master Clement, this lord and warrior hath brought back with him something that I have not seen; and belike he hath had one fair woman in his arms, or more it may be, since I saw him last. For though he but kisses me as his gossip and foster-mother, yet are his kisses closer and kinder than they were aforetime."

Said Clement:  "Sooth is the Sage's guess; yet verily, fair sir, I have told her somewhat of thy journeys, so far as I knew of them."

Said Katherine:  "Dear lord and gossip, wilt thou not tell me more thereof now?"

"What!" said Ralph; "shall I not sleep to-night?"

"Dear gossip," she said, "thou art over-mighty to need sleep.  And ah! I had forgotten in the joy of our meeting that to-morrow thou goest to battle; and how if thou come not again?"

"Fear nought," said Ralph; "art thou not somewhat foreseeing? Dost thou not know that to-morrow or the day after I shall come back unhurt and victorious; and then shall both thou and Clement come to Upmeads and abide there as long as ye will; and then shall I tell thee a many tales of my wanderings; and Ursula my beloved, she also shall tell thee."

Katherine reddened somewhat, but she said:  "Would I might kiss her feet, dear lord.  But now, I pray thee, tell me somewhat, now at once."

"So shall it be," said Ralph, "since thou wilt have it, dear gossip; but when I have done I shall ask thee to tell me somewhat, whereof hath long been wonder in my mind; and meseemeth that by the time we are both done with tales, I shall needs be putting on my helm again.--Nay, again I tell thee it is but a show of battle that I go to!"

So then he went and sat by Clement's side, and began and told over as shortly as might be the tidings of his journeys. And oft she wept for pity thereat.

But when he was done and he had sat beholding her, and saw how goodly a woman she was, and how straight and well knit of body, he said: "Gossip, I wonder now, if thou also hast drunk of the Well; for thou art too fair and goodly to be of the age that we call thee. How is this!  Also tell me how thou camest by this pair of beads that seem to have led me to the Well at the World's End? For as I said e'en now, I have long marvelled how thou hadst them and where."

"Fair sir," said Clement, "as for her drinking of the Well at the World's End, it is not so; but this is a good woman, and a valiant, and of great wisdom; and such women wear well, even as a well-wrought piece of armour that hath borne many strokes of the craftsman's hand, and hath in it some deal of his very mind and the wisdom of him. But now let her tell thee her tale (which forsooth I know not), for night is growing old."

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_28]

CHAPTER 28

Dame Katherine Tells of the Pair of Beads, and Whence She Had Them

Katherine cast friendly looks on them and said:  "Gossip, and thou, Clement, I will make a clean breast of it once for all. In the days when I was first wedded to Master Clement yonder, he found his bed cold without me, for he was a hot lover; therefore would he often have me with him on his journeys, how hard soever or perilous the way might be.  Yea, Clement, thou lookest the sooth, though thou sayest it not, I was nought loth thereto, partly because I would not grieve thee, my man; but partly, and belike mostly, because I was wishful to see the ways of the world even at the risk of being thrust out of the world. So it befell us on a time to make a journey together, a journey exceeding long, in the company of certain chapmen, whereof some, and not a few, died on the way.  But we lived, and came into the eastern parts of the earth to a city right ancient, and fulfilled of marvels, which hight Sarras the Holy. There saw we wonders whereof were it overlong to tell of here; but one while I will tell thee, my lord.  But this I must needs say, that I heard tell of a woman dwelling there, who was not old by seeming, but had in her the wisdom of ten lives, and the longing gat hold of me to see her and learn wisdom of her. So I entreated many who were called wise, some with prayers, and some with gifts also, to help me to speech of her; but I gat nothing either by praying or giving; they that would have helped me could not, and they that could would not. So, what between one thing and another, the longing to see the Wise Woman grew as it were into a madness in me.  Amidst of which we fell in with a merchant exceeding wise in ancient lore, who looked at me (though Clement knew it not) with eyes of love. Of this man I asked concerning the Wise Woman, and he seeing my desire, strove to use it merchant-like, and would deal with me and have in payment for his learning a gift which I had nought to do to give. Howbeit madness and my desire for speech with the Wise Woman got the better of me, and I promised to give no less than he would, trusting to beguile him after I had got my desire, and be quit of him.  So he led me to the woman and went his ways. She dwelt all by herself in a nook of an ancient ruined palace, erst the house of the ancientest of all the kings of Sarras. When I came to her, I saw nought dreadful or ugsome about her: she was cheerful of countenance and courteous of demeanour, and greeted me kindly as one neighbour in the street of Wulstead might do to another.  I saw her, that she was by seeming a woman of some forty winters, trim and well-fashioned of body, nowise big, but slender, of dark red hair and brown eyes somewhat small.

"Now, she said to me, 'I have looked for thee a while; now thou art come, thou shalt tell me what thou needest, and thy needs will I fulfil. Yet needs must thou do a thing for me in return, and maybe thou wilt deem it a great thing.  Yet whereas thou has struck a bargain before thou camest hither, if I undo that for thee, the bargain with me may be nought so burdensome. How sayest thou?'

"Well, I saw now that I was in the trap, for ill had it been in those days had Clement come to know that I had done amiss; for he was a jealous lover, and a violent man."

Clement smiled hereat, but said nought, and Katherine went on: "Trap or no trap, if I were eager before, I was over-eager now; so when she bade me swear to do her will, I swore it without tarrying.

"Then she said:  'Sit down before me, and I will teach thee wisdom.' What did she teach me? say ye.  Well, if I told you belike ye would be none the wiser; but so much she told me, that my heart swelled with joy of the wisdom which I garnered. Say thou, Clement, if I have been the worser woman to thee, or thy friends, or mine."

"Nay, goodwife," said Clement, "I have nought against thee."

Katherine laughed and went on:

"At last the Wise Woman said, 'Now that thou hast of me all that may avail thee, comes the other part of our bargain, wherein I shall take and thou shalt give.'

"Quoth I, 'That is but fair, and thou shalt find me true to thee.' She said, 'If thou be not, I shall know it, and shall amend it in such wise that it shall cost thee much.'

"Then she looked on me long and keenly, and said afterward: 'Forsooth I should forbear laying this charge upon thee if I did not deem that thou wouldst be no less than true. But now I will try it, whereas I deem that the days of my life henceforward shall not be many; and many days would it take me to find a woman as little foolish as thee and as little false, and thereto as fairly fashioned.'

"Therewith she put her hand to her neck, and took thence the self-same pair of beads which I gave to thee, dear gossip, and which (praise be to All Hallows!) thou hast borne ever since; and she said:  'Now hearken! Thou shalt take this pair of beads, and do with them as I bid thee. Swear again thereto.'  So I swore by All Angels; and she said again: 'This pair of beads shall one day lead a man unto the Well at the World's End, but no woman; forsooth, if a woman have them of a woman, or the like of them, (for there be others,) they may serve her for a token; but will be no talisman or leading-stone to her; and this I tell thee lest thou seek to the Well on the strength of them. For I bid thee give them to a man that thou lovest--that thou lovest well, when he is in most need; only he shall not be of thine own blood.  This is all that I lay upon thee; and if thou do it, thou shalt thrive, and if thou do it not, thou shalt come to harm. And I will tell thee now that this meeting betwixt us is not by chance-hap, but of my bringing about; for I have laboured to draw thee to me, knowing that thou alone of women would avail me herein. Now shalt thou go home to thine hostel, and take this for a token of my sooth-saying. The wise merchant who led thee unto me is abiding thine homecoming that he may have of thee that which thou promisedst to him. If then thou find him at thine hostel, and he take thee by the hand and lead thee to bed, whereas Clement is away till to-morrow even, then shalt thou call me a vain word-spinner and a liar; but if when thou comest home there, the folk there say to thee merchant Valerius is ridden away hastily, being called afar on a message of life and death, then shalt thou trow in me as a wise woman. Herewith depart, and I bid thee farewell.'

"So I went my ways to my hostel trembling, and at the door I met the chamberlain, who said to me, 'Lady, the merchant Valerius hath been here seeking thee, and he said that he would abide thy coming; but amidst of his abiding cometh a man who would speak to him privily; whereof it came that he called for his horse and bade me tell thee, Lady, that he was summoned on a matter of life and death, and would return to kiss thine hands in five days' space.'

"So I wotted that the woman had spoken sooth, and was wise and foreseeing, and something of a dread of her came upon me. But the next even back cometh Clement, and the day after we rode away from Sarras the Holy, and Valerius I saw never again. And as to the beads, there is nought to tell of them till they came into thine hands; and something tells me that it was the will of the Wise Woman that to no other hands they should come."

Here Katherine made an end, and both the men sat pondering her tale a little. As for Ralph, he deemed it certain that the Wise Woman of Sarras would be none other than she who had taught lore to the Lady of Abundance; but why she should have meant the beads for him he wotted not. Again he wondered how it was that the Lady of Abundance should have given the beads to Ursula, and whether she knew that they had no might to lead her to the Well at the World's End.  And yet further he wondered how it was that Ursula, unholpen by the talisman, should have done so much to bring him to the Well; yea, and how she was the first to see it while he slept. But his heart told him that whereas he was seeking the Well with her, she must needs come thither with him, unless they were both cast away; withal Katherine looked at him and said:  "Yea, dear lord, I wot what thou art thinking of; but couldest thou have left her, when thou hadst once found her again, Well or no Well?"  "Sooth is that," said Ralph, "yet for all that she hath done without help of talisman or witchcraft is she the more worshipful and the dearer."

Then speech came into Clement's mouth, and he said:  "Wife, it is as I said before, when thy gossip had just departed from us. It was meet enough that thou shouldst have loved him better than me; but now it is even less to be undone than ever, when he has come back bringing with him a woman so valiant and lovely as is my Lady Ursula. So thou must e'en take the life that fate hath sent thee." Katherine laughed through her tears, and said:  "Withal, goodman, I have been no bad wife to thee.  And moreover, look thou, gossip dear: when I was wandering about with Clement amongst many perils, when our need seemed sorest, then would I think to give the beads to Clement; but so soon as I began to speak to him of the Well at the World's End he would belittle the tale of it, and would bid me look to it if it were not so, that where the world endeth the clouds begin."

As she spoke, Ralph lifted up his hand and pointed to the window, and said: "Friends, as we were speaking of all these marvels we were forgetting the need of Upmeads and the day of battle; and lo now! how the dawn is widening and the candles fading."

Scarce were the words out of his mouth, when on the quietness of the beginning of day brake out the sound of four trumpets, which were sounding in the four quarters of the town, and blowing men to the gathering. Then rose up both Ralph and Clement and took their weapons, and they kissed Katherine and went soberly out-a-doors into the market-place, where already weaponed men were streaming in to the muster.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_29]

CHAPTER 29

They Go Down to Battle in Upmeads

Before it was light were all men come into the market-place, and Ralph and Richard and Clement and Stephen a-Hurst fell to and arrayed them duly; and now, what with the company which Ralph had led into Wulstead, what with the men of the town, and them that had fled from Upmeads (though these last were mostly old men and lads), they were a thousand and four score and three. Ralph would go afoot as he went yesterday; but today he bore in his hand the ancient staff of war, the gold-written guisarme; and he went amongst the Shepherds, with whom were joined the feeble folk of Upmeads, men whom he had known of old and who knew him, and it was as if their hearts had caught fire from his high heart, and that whatever their past days had been to them, this day at least should be glorious. Withal anon comes Ursula from St. Austin's with the Sage of Swevenham, whose face was full smiling and cheerful. Ursula wore that day a hauberk under her gown, and was helmed with a sallet; and because of her armour she rode upon a little horse.  Ralph gave her into the warding of the Sage, who was armed at all points, and looked a valiant man of war. But Ralph's brother, Hugh, had gotten him a horse, and had fallen into the company of the Champions, saying that he deemed they would go further forth than a sort of sheep-tending churls and the runaways of Upmeads.

As for Ralph, he walked up and down the ranks of the stout men of the Down-country, and saw how they had but little armour for defence, though their weapons for cutting and thrusting looked fell and handy. So presently he turned about to Giles, who, as aforesaid, bore a long hauberk, and said:  "Friend, the walk we are on to-day is a long one for carrying burdens, and an hour after sunrise it will be hot. Wilt thou not do with thy raiment as I do?"  And therewith he did off his hauberk and his other armour save his sallet.  "This is good," said he, "for the sun to shine on, so that I may be seen from far; but these other matters are good for folk who fight a-horseback or on a wall; we striders have no need of them."

Then arose great shouting from the Shepherds, and men stretched out the hand to him and called hail on his valiant heart.

Amidst of which cries Giles muttered, but so as Ralph might hear him: "It is all down hill to Upmeads; I shall take off my iron-coat coming back again."  So Ralph clapped him on the shoulder and bade him come back whole and well in any case.  "Yea, and so shalt thou come back," said he.

Then the horns blew for departure, and they went their ways out of the market-place, and out into the fields through the new wooden wall of Wulstead.  Richard led the way with a half score of the Champions, but he rode but a little way before Ralph, who marched at the head of the Shepherds.

So they went in the fresh morning over the old familiar fields, and strange it seemed to Ralph that he was leading an host into the little land of Upmeads. Speedily they went, though in good order, and it was but a little after sunrise when they were wending toward the brow of the little hill whence they would look down into the fair meads whose image Ralph had seen on so many days of peril and weariness.

And now Richard and his fore-riders had come up on to the brow and sat there on their horses clear against the sky; and Ralph saw how Richard drew his sword from the scabbard and waved it over his head, and he and his men shouted; then the whole host set up a great shout, and hastened up the bent, but with the end of their shout and the sound of the tramp of their feet and the rattle of their war-gear was mingled a confused noise of cries a way off, and the blowing of horns, and as Ralph and his company came crowding up on to the brow, he looked down and saw the happy meadows black with weaponed men, and armour gleaming in the clear morning, and the points of weapons casting back the low sun's rays and glittering like the sparks in a dying fire of straw. Then again he looked, and lo! the High House rising over the meadows unburned and unhurt, and the banner of the fruited tree hanging forth from the topmost tower thereof.

Then he felt a hand come on to his cheek, and lo, Ursula beside him, her cheeks flushed and her eyes glittering; and she cried out: "O thine home, my beloved, thine home!"  And he turned to her and said; "Yea, presently, sweetheart!"  "Ah," she said, "will it be long? and they so many!"  "And we so mighty!" said Ralph. "Nay, it will be but a little while.  Wise man of Swevenham, see to it that my beloved is anigh me to-day, for where I am, there will be safety."

The Sage nodded yeasay and smiled.

Then Ralph looked along the ridge to right and left of him, and saw that all the host had come up and had a sight of the foemen; on the right stood the Shepherds staring down into the meadow and laughing for the joy of battle and the rage of the oppressed. On the left sat the Champions of the Dry Tree on their horses, and they also were tossing up their weapons and roaring like lions for the prey; and down below the black crowd had drawn together into ordered ranks, and still the clamour and rude roaring of the warriors arose thence, and beat against the hill's brow.

Now so fierce and ready were the men of Ralph's company that it was a near thing but that they, and the Shepherds in especial, did not rush tumultuously down the hill all breathless and in ill order. But Ralph cried out to Richard to go left, and Giles to go right, and stay the onset for a while; and to bid the leaders come to him where he stood. Then the tumult amidst his folk lulled, and Stephen a-Hurst and Roger and three others of the Dry Tree came to him, and Giles brought three of the Shepherds, and there was Clement and a fellow of his. So when they were come and standing in a ring round Ralph, he said to them:

"Brothers in arms, ye see that our foes are all in array to meet us, having had belike some spy in Wulstead, who hath brought them the tale of what was toward.  Albeit methinks that this irks not either you nor me; for otherwise we might have found them straggling, and scattered far and wide, which would have made our labour the greater. Now ye can see with your eyes that they are many more than we be, even were Nicholas to issue out of the High House against them, as doubtless he will do if need be.  Brethren, though they be so many, yet my heart tells me that we shall overcome them; yet if we leave our strength and come down to them, both our toil shall be greater, and some of us, belike many, shall be slain; and evil should I deem it if but a score of my friends should lose their lives on this joyous day when at last I see Upmeads again after many troubles. Wherefore my rede is that we abide their onset on the hillside here; and needs must they fall on us, whereas we have Wulstead and friends behind us, and they nought but Nicholas and the bows and bills of the High House. But if any have aught to say against it let him speak, but be speedy; for already I see a stir in their array, and I deem that they will send men to challenge us to come down to them."

Then spake Stephen a-Hurst: "I, and we all meseemeth, deem that thou art in the right, Captain; though sooth to say, when we first set eyes on these dogs again, the blood so stirred in us that we were like to let all go and ride down on them."

Said Richard:  "Thou biddest us wisdom of war; let them have the hill against them."  Said Clement:  "Yea, for they are well learned and well armed; another sort of folk to those wild men whom we otherthrew in the mountains."

And in like wise said they all.

Then spake Stephen again:  "Lord, since thou wilt fight afoot with our friends of the Shepherds, we of the Dry Tree are minded to fare in like wise and to forego our horses; but if thou gainsay it----"

"Champion," said Ralph, "I do gainsay it.  Thou seest how many of them be horsed, and withal ye it is who must hold the chase of them; for I will that no man of them shall escape."

They laughed joyously at his word, and then he said: "Go now, and give your leaders of scores and tens the word that I have said, and come back speedily for a little while; for now I see three men sundering them from their battle, and one beareth a white cloth at the end of his spear; these shall be the challengers."

So they did after his bidding, and by then they had come back to Ralph those three men were at the foot of the hill, which was but low.  Then Ralph said to his captains: "Stand before me, so that I be not seen of them until one of you hath made answer, 'Speak of this to our leader and captain.'" Even so they did; and presently those three came so nigh that they could see the whites of their eyes.  They were all three well armed, but the foremost of them was clad in white steel from head to foot, so that he looked like a steel image, all but his face, which was pale and sallow and grim. He and his two fellows, when they were right nigh, rode slowly all along the front of Ralph's battles thrice, and none spake aught to them, and they gave no word to any; but when they came over against the captains who stood before Ralph for the fourth time, they reined up and faced them, and the leader put back his sallet and spake in a great and rough voice:

"Ye men! we have heard these three hours that ye were coming, wherefore we have drawn out into the meads which we have taken, that ye might see how many and how valiant we be, and might fear us. Wherefore now, ye broken reivers of the Dry Tree, ye silly shepherds of silly sheep, ye weavers and apprentices of Wulstead, and if there by any more, ye fools! we give you two choices this morn. Either come down to us into the meadow yonder, that we may slay you with less labour, or else, which will be the better for you, give up to us the Upmeads thralls who be with you, and then turn your faces and go back to your houses, and abide there till we come and pull you out of them, which may be some while yet. Hah! what say ye, fools?"

Then spake Clement and said:  "Ye messengers of the robbers and oppressors, why make ye this roaring to the common people and the sergeants? Why speak ye not with our Captain?"

Cried out the challenger, "Where then is the Captain of the Fools? is he hidden? can he hear my word?"

Scarce was it out of his mouth ere the captains fell away to right and left, and there, standing by himself, was Ralph, holding the ancient lettered war-staff; his head was bare, for now he had done off his sallet, and the sun and the wind played in his bright hair; glorious was his face, and his grey eyes gleamed with wrath and mastery as he spake in a clear voice, and there was silence all along the ranks to hearken him:

"O messenger of the robbers!  I am the captain of this folk. I see that the voice hath died away within the jaws of you; but it matters not, for I have heard thy windy talk, and this is the answer:  we will neither depart, nor come down to you, but will abide our death by your hands here on this hill-side. Go with this answer."

The man stared wild at Ralph while he was speaking, and seemed to stagger in his saddle; then he let his sallet fall over his face, and, turning his horse about, rode swiftly, he and his two fellows, down the hill and away to the battle of the Burgers. None followed or cried after him; for now had a great longing and expectation fallen upon Ralph's folk, and they abode what shall befall with little noise.  They noted so soon as the messenger was gotten to the main of the foemen that there was a stir amongst them, and they were ordering their ranks to move against the hill. And withal they saw men all armed coming from out the High House, who went down to the Bridge and abode there.  Upmeads-water ran through the meadows betwixt the hill and the High House, as hath been said afore; but as it winded along, one reach of it went nigh to the House, and made wellnigh a quarter of a circle about it before it turned to run down the meadows to the eastward; and at this nighest point was there a wide bridge well builded of stone.

The Burg-devils heeded not the men at the Bridge, but, being all arrayed, made but short tarrying (and that belike only to hear the tale of their messenger) ere they came in two battles straight across the meadow. They on their right were all riders, and these faced the Champions of the Dry Tree, but a great battle of footmen came against the Shepherds and the rest of Ralph's footmen, but in their rearward was a company of well-horsed men-at-arms; and all of them were well armed and went right orderly and warrior-like.

It was but some fifteen minutes ere they were come to the foot of the hill, and they fell to mounting it with laughter and mockery, but Ralph's men held their peace.  The horsemen were somewhat speedier than those on foot, though they rode but at a foot's pace, and when they were about halfway up the hill and were faltering a little (for it was somewhat steep, though nought high), the Champions of the Dry Tree could forbear them no longer, but set up a huge roar, and rode at them, so that they all went down the hill together, but the Champions were lost amidst of the huge mass of the foemen.

But Ralph was left at the very left end of his folk, and the foemen came up the hill speedily with much noise and many foul mocks as aforesaid, and they were many and many more than Ralph's folk, and now that the Champions were gone, could have enfolded them at either end; but no man of the company blenched or faltered, only here and there one spake soft to his neighbour, and here and there one laughed the battle-laugh.

Now at the hanging of the hill, whenas either side could see the whites of the foemen's eyes, the robbers stayed a little to gather breath; and in that nick of time Ralph strode forth into the midst between the two lines and up on to a little mound on the hill-side (which well he knew), and he lifted up the ancient guisarme, and cried on high:  "Home now! Home to Upmeads!"

Then befell a marvel, for even as all eyes of the foemen were turned on him, straightway their shouts and jeering and laughter fell dead, and then gave place to shrieks and wailing, as all they who beheld him cast down their weapons and fled wildly down the hill, overturning whatever stood in their way, till the whole mass of them was broken to pieces, and the hill was covered with nought but cravens and the light-footed Shepherds slaughtering them in the chase.

But Ralph called Clement to him and they drew a stalworth band together, and, heeding nought the chase of the runaways, they fell on those who had the Champions in their midst, and fell to smiting down men on either hand; and every man who looked on Ralph crouched and cowered before him, casting down his weapons and throwing up his hands. Shortly to say it, when these horsemen felt this new onset, and looking round saw their men fleeing hither and thither over the green fields of Upmeads, smitten by the Shepherds and leaping into the deep pools of the river, they turned and fled, every man who could keep his saddle, and made for the Bridge, the Dry Tree thundering at their backs.  But even as they came within bowshot, a great flight of arrows came from the further side of the water, and the banner of the Fruitful Tree came forth from the bridge-end with Nicholas and his tried men-at-arms behind it; and then indeed great and grim was the murder, and the proud men of the Burg grovelled on the ground and prayed for mercy till neither the Champions nor the men of Nicholas could smite helpless men any longer.

Now had Ralph held his hand from the chase, and he was sitting on a mound amidst of the meadow under an ancient thorn, and beside him sat the Sage of Swevenham and Ursula. And she was grown pale now and looked somewhat scared, and she spake in a trembling voice to Ralph, and said: "Alas friend! that this should be so grim!  When we hear the owls a-nighttime about the High House, shall we not deem at whiles that it is the ghosts of this dreadful battle and slaughter wandering about our fair fields?" But Ralph spake sternly and wrathfully as he sat there bareheaded and all unarmed save for the ancient glaive: "Why did they not slay me then?  Better the ghosts of robbers in our fields by night, than the over-burdened hapless thrall by day, and the scourged woman, and ruined child. These things they sought for us and have found death on the way-- let it be!"

He laughed as he spake; but then the grief of the end of battle came upon him and he trembled and shook, and great tears burst from his eyes and rolled down his cheeks, and he became stark and hard-faced.

Then Ursula took his hands and caressed them, and kissed his face, and fell a-talking to him of how they rode the pass to the Valley of Sweet Chestnuts; and in a while his heart and his mind came back to him as it did that other time of which she spake, and he kissed her in turn, and began to tell her of his old chamber in the turret of the High House.

And now there come riding across the field two warriors. They draw rein by the mound, and one lights down, and lo! it is Long Nicholas; and he took Ralph in his arms, and kissed him and wept over him for all his grizzled beard and his gaunt limbs; but few words he had for him, save this:  "My little Lord, was it thou that was the wise captain to-day, or this stout lifter and reiver!" But the other man was Stephen a-Hurst, who laughed and said: "Nay, Nicholas, I was the fool, and this stripling the wise warrior. But, Lord Ralph, thou wilt pardon me, I hope, but we could not kill them all, for they would not fight in any wise; what shall we do with them?"  Ralph knit his brows and thought a little; then he said: "How many hast thou taken?"  Said Stephen:  "Some two hundred alive." "Well," quoth Ralph; "strip them of all armour and weapons, and let a score of thy riders drive them back the way they came into the Debateable Wood.  But give them this last word from me, that or long I shall clear the said wood of all strong-thieves."  Stephen departed on that errand; and presently comes Giles and another of the Shepherds with a like tale, and had a like answer.

Now amidst all these deeds it yet lacked an hour of noon.  So presently Ralph arose and took Richard apart for a while and spoke with him a little, and then came back to Ursula and took her by the hand, and said: "Beloved, Richard shall take thee now to a pleasant abode this side the water; for I grudge that thou shouldst enter the High House without me; and as for me I must needs ride back to Wulstead to bring hither my father and mother, as I promised to do after the battle. In good sooth, I deemed it would have lasted longer."  Said Ursula: "Dear friend, this is even what I should have bidden thee myself. Depart speedily, that thou mayst be back the sooner; for sorely do I long to enter thine house, beloved."  Then Ralph turned to Nicholas, and said: "Our host is not so great but that thou mayst victual it well; yet I deem it is little less than when we left Wulstead early this morning."

"True is that, little lord," said Nicholas.  "Hear a wonder amongst battles: of thy Shepherds and the other footmen is not one slain, and but some five hurt.  The Champions have lost three men slain outright, and some fifteen hurt; of whom is thy brother Hugh, but not sorely." "Better than well is thy story then," said Ralph.  "Now let them bring me a horse."  So when he was horsed, he kissed Ursula and went his ways. And she abode his coming back at Richard's house anigh the water.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_30]

CHAPTER 30

Ralph Brings His Father and Mother to Upmeads

Short was the road back again to Wulstead, and whereas the day was not very old when Ralph came there, he failed not to stop at Clement's house, and came into the chamber where sat Dame Katherine in pensive wise nigh to the window, with her open hands in her lap. Quoth Ralph:  "Rejoice, gossip! for neither is Clement hurt, nor I, and all is done that should be done."  She moved her but little, but the tears came into her eyes and rolled down her cheeks. "What, gossip?" quoth Ralph; "these be scarce tears of joy; what aileth thee?"  "Nay," said Katherine, "indeed I am joyful of thy tidings, though sooth to say I looked for none other. But, dear lord and gossip, forgive me my tears on the day of thy triumph; for if they be not wholly of joy, so also are they not wholly of sorrow. But love and the passing of the days are bittersweet within my heart to-day. Later on thou shalt see few faces more cheerful and merry in the hall at Upmeads than this of thy gossip's. So be merry now, and go fetch thy father and thy mother, and rejoice their hearts that thou hast been even better than thy word to them. Farewell, gossip; but look to see me at Upmeads before many days are past; for I know thee what thou art; and that the days will presently find deeds for thee, and thou wilt be riding into peril, and coming safe from out of it.  Farewell!"

So he departed and rode to the House of St. Austin, and the folk gathered so about him in the street that at the gate of the Priory he had to turn about and speak to them; and he said:  "Good people, rejoice! there are no more foemen of Wulstead anigh you now; and take this word of me, that I will see to it in time to come that ye live in peace and quiet here."

Folk shouted for joy, and the fathers who were standing within the gate heard his word and rejoiced, and some of them ran off to tell King Peter that his son was come back victorious already; so that by then he had dismounted at the Guest-house door, lo! there was the King and his wife with him, and both they alboun for departure.  And when they saw him King Peter cried out: "There is no need to say a word, my son; unless thou wouldst tell the tale to the holy father Prior, who, as ye see, has e'en now come out to us."

Said Ralph:  "Father and mother, I pray your blessing, and also the blessing of the father Prior here; and the tale is short enough: that we have overthrown them and slain the more part, and the others are now being driven like a herd of swine into their stronghold of the Wood Debateable, where, forsooth, I shall be ere the world is one month older.  And in the doing of all this have but three of our men been slain and a few hurt, amongst whom is thy son Hugh, but not sorely."

"O yea, son," said his mother, "he shall do well enough. But now with thy leave, holy Prior, we will depart, so that we may sleep in the High House to-night, and feel that my dear son's hand is over us to ward us."

Then Ralph knelt before them, and King Peter and his wife blessed their son when they had kissed and embraced each other, and they wept for joy of him.  The Prior also, who was old, and a worthy prelate, and an ancient friend of King Peter, might not refrain his tears at the joy of his friends as he gave Ralph his blessing.  And then, when Ralph had risen up and the horses were come, he said to him: "One thing thou art not to forget, young conqueror, to wit, that thou art to come here early one day, and tell me all thy tale at full length."

"Yea, Prior," said Ralph, "or there is the High House of Upmeads for thee to use as thine own, and a rest for thee of three or four days while thou hearkenest the tale; for it may need that."

"Hearken," said King Peter softly to the Dame, "how he reckons it all his own; my day is done, my dear."  He spake smiling, and she said: "Soothly he is waxen masterful, and well it becometh the dear youngling."

Now they get to horse and ride their ways, while all folk blessed them. The two old folk rode fast and pressed their nags whatever Ralph might do to give them pastime of words; so they came into the plain field of Upmeads two hours before sunset; and King Peter said: "Now I account it that I have had one day more of my life than was my due, and thou, son, hast added it to the others whereas thou didst not promise to bring me hither till morrow."

Ralph led them round by the ford, so that they might not come across the corpses of the robbers; but already were the Upmeads carles at work digging trenches wherein to bury them.

So Ralph led his father and his mother to the gate of the garth of High House; then he got off his horse and helped them down, and as he so dealt with his father, he said to him: "Thou art springy and limber yet, father; maybe thou wilt put on thine helm this year to ride the Debateable Wood with me."

The old man laughed and said:  "Maybe, son; but as now it is time for thee to enter under our roof-tree once more."

"Nay," said Ralph, "but go ye in and sit in the high-seat and abide me. For did I not go straight back to you from the field of battle; and can I suffer it that any other hand than mine should lead my wife into the hall and up to the high-seat of my fathers; and therefore I go to fetch her from the house of Richard the Red where she is abiding me; but presently I shall lead her in, and do ye then with us what ye will."

Therewith he turned about and rode his ways to Richard's house, which was but a half-mile thence.  But his father and mother laughed when he was gone, and King Peter said:  "There again! thou seest, wife, it is he that commands and we that obey."

"O happy hour that so it is!" said the Lady, "and happy now shall be the wearing of our days."

So they entered the garth and came into the house, and were welcomed with all joy by Nicholas, and told him all that Ralph had said, and bade him array the house as he best might; for there was much folk about the High House, though the Upmeads carles and queans had taken the more part of the host to their houses, which they had delivered from the fire and sword, and they made much of them there with a good heart.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_31]

CHAPTER 31

Ralph Brings Ursula Home to the High House

Ralph speedily came to Richard's house and entered the chamber, and found Ursula alone therein, clad in the daintiest of her woman's gear of the web of Goldburg.  She rose up to meet him, and he took her in his arms, and said: "Now is come the very ending of our journey that we so often longed for; and all will be ready by then we come to the High House."

"Ah," she said, as she clung to him, "but they were happy days the days of our journey; and to-morrow begins a new life."

"Nay," he said, "but rather this even; shall it be loathly to thee, lady?"

She said:  "There will be many people whom I knew not yesterday." "There will be but me," he said, "when the night hath been dark for a little."

She kissed him and said nought.  And therewithal came some of Richard's folk, for it was his house, and led with them a white palfrey for Ursula's riding, dight all gay and goodly.

"Come then," said Ralph, "thou needest not to fear the ancient house, for it is kind and lovely, and my father and my mother thou hast seen already, and they love thee.  Come then, lest the hall be grown too dusk for men to see thy fairness."  "Yea, yea," she said, "but first here is a garland I made for thee, and one also for me, while I was abiding thee after the battle, and my love and my hope is woven into it."  And she set it on his head, and said, "O thou art fair, and I did well to meet thee in the dark wood." Then he kissed her dearly on the mouth and led her forth, and none went with them, and they mounted and went their ways.

But Ralph said:  "I deem that we should ride the meadow to the bridge, because that way lies the great door of the hall, and if I know my father and Nicholas they will look for us that way.  Dost thou yet fear these dead men, sweetheart, whom our folk slew this morning?" "Nay," she said, "it has been a long time since the morning, and they, and their fieriness which has so burned out, are now to me as a tale that hath been told.  It is the living that I am going to, and I hope to do well by them."

Came they then to the bridge-end and there was no man there, nought but the kine that were wandering about over the dewy grass of eventide. Then they rode over the bridge and through the orchard, and still there was no man, and all gates were open wide.  So they came into the base-court of the house, and it also was empty of folk; and they came to the great doors of the hall and they were open wide, and they could see through them that the hall was full of folk, and therein by the light of the low sun that streamed in at the shot-window at the other end they saw the faces of men and the gleam of steel and gold.

So they lighted down from their horses, and took hand in hand and entered bright-faced and calm, and goodly beyond the goodliness of men; then indeed all that folk burst forth into glad cries, and tossed up their weapons, and many wept for joy.

As they went slowly up the long hall (and it was thirty fathom of length) Ralph looked cheerfully and friendly from side to side, and beheld the faces of the Shepherds and the Champions, and the men of Wulstead, and his own folk; and all they cried hail to him and the lovely and valiant Lady. Then he looked up to the high-seat, and saw that his father's throne was empty, and his mother's also; but behind the throne stood a knight all armed in bright armour holding the banner of Upmeads; but his father and mother stood on the edge of the dais to meet him and Ursula; and when they came up thither these old folk embraced them and kissed them and led them up to the table.  Then Ralph bade Ursula sit by his mother, and made him ready to sit by his father in all love and duty. But King Peter stayed him and said:  "Nay, dear son, not there, but here shalt thou sit, thou saviour of Upmeads and conqueror of the hearts of men; this is a little land, but therein shall be none above thee." And therewith he set Ralph down in the throne, and Ralph, turning to his left hand, saw that it was Ursula, and not his mother, who sat beside him. But at the sight of these two in the throne the glad cries and shouts shook the very timbers of the roof, and the sun sank under while yet they cried hail to the King of Upmeads.

Then were the lights brought and the supper, and all men fell to feast, and plenteous was the wine in the hall; and sure since first men met to eat together none have been merrier than they.

But now when men had well eaten, and the great cup called the River of Upmeads was brought in, the cupbearers, being so bidden before, brought it last of all to King Peter, and he stood up with the River in his hand and spoke aloud, and said: "Lords and warriors, and good people all, here I do you to wit, that it is not because my son Ralph has come home to-day and wrought us a great deliverance, and that my love hath overcome me; it is not for this cause that I have set him in my throne this even; but because I see and perceive that of all the kindred he is meetest to sit therein so long as he liveth; unless perchance this lovely and valiant woman should bear him a son even better than himself-- and so may it be.  Therefore I do you all to wit that this man is the King of Upmeads, and this woman is his Lady and Queen; and so deem I of his prowess, and his wisdom, and kindliness, that I trow he shall be lord and servant of other lands than Upmeads, and shall draw the good towns and the kindreds and worthy good lords into peace and might and well-being, such as they have not known heretofore.  Now within three days shall mass be sung in the choir of St. Laurence, and then shall King Ralph swear on the gospels such oaths as ye wot of, to guard his people, and help the needy, and oppress no man, even as I have sworn it. And I say to you, that if I have kept the oath to my power, yet shall he keep it better, as he is mightier than I.

"Furthermore, when he hath sworn, then shall the vassals swear to him according to ancient custom, to be true to him and hardy in all due service. But so please you I will not abide till then, but will kneel to him and to his Lady and Queen here and now."

Even so he did, and took Ralph's hand in his and swore service to him such as was due; and he knelt to Ursula also, and bade her all thanks for what she had done in the helping of his son; and they raised him up and made much of him and of Ralph's mother; and great was the joy of all folk in the hall.

So the feast went on a while till the night grew old, and folk must fare bedward.  Then King Peter and his wife brought Ralph and Ursula to the chamber of the solar, the kingly chamber, which was well and goodly dight with hangings and a fair and glorious bed, and was newly decked with such fair flowers as the summer might furnish; and at the threshold King Peter stayed them and said: "Kinsman, and thou, dear friend, this is become your due chamber and resting-place while ye live in the world, and this night of all others it shall be a chamber of love; for ye are, as it were, new wedded, since now first ye are come amongst the kindred as lover and beloved; and thou, Ursula, art now at last the bride of this ancient house; now tell me, doth it not look friendly and kindly on thee?"

"O yea, yea," she said.  "Come thou, my man and my darling and let us be alone in the master-chamber of this ancient House."

Then Ralph drew her unto him; and the old man blessed them and prayed for goodly offspring for them, that the House of Upmeads might long endure.

And thus were they two left alone amidst the love and hope of the kindred, as erst they lay alone in the desert.

The Well at the World's End, by William Morris, [1896], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_32]

CHAPTER 32

Yet a Few Words Concerning Ralph of Upmeads

Certain it is that Ralph failed not of his promise to the good Prior of St. Austin's at Wulstead, but went to see him speedily, and told him all the tale of his wanderings as closely as he might, and hid naught from him; which, as ye may wot, was more than one day's work or two or three.  And ever when Ralph thus spoke was a brother of the House sitting with the Prior, which brother was a learned and wise man and very speedy and deft with his pen. Wherefore it has been deemed not unlike that from this monk's writing has come the more part of the tale above told. And if it be so, it is well.

Furthermore, it is told of Ralph of Upmeads that he ruled over his lands in right and might, and suffered no oppression within them, and delivered other lands and good towns when they fell under tyrants and oppressors; and for as kind a man as he was in hall and at hearth, in the field he was a warrior so wise and dreadful, that oft forsooth the very sound of his name and rumour of his coming stayed the march of hosts and the ravage of fair lands; and no lord was ever more beloved. Till his deathday he held the Castle of the Scaur, and cleansed the Wood Perilous of all strong-thieves and reivers, so that no high-street of a good town was safer than its glades and its byways. The new folk of the Burg of the Four Friths made him their lord and captain, and the Champions of the Dry Tree obeyed him in all honour so long as any of them lasted.  He rode to Higham and offered himself as captain to the abbot thereof, and drave out the tyrants and oppressors thence, and gave back peace to the Frank of Higham. Ever was he true captain and brother to the Shepherd-folk, and in many battles they followed him; and were there any scarcity or ill hap amongst them, he helped them to the uttermost of his power. The Wood Debateable also he cleared of foul robbers and reivers, and rooted out the last of the Burg-devils, and delivered three good towns beyond the wood from the cruelty of the oppressor.

Once in every year he and Ursula his wife visited the Land of Abundance, and he went into the castle there as into a holy place, and worshipped the memory of the Lady whom he had loved so dearly. With all the friends of his quest he was kind and well-beloved.

In about two years from the day when he rode home, came to him the Lord Bull of Utterbol with a chosen band, of whom were both Otter and Redhead. That very day they came he was about putting his foot in the stirrup to ride against the foemen; so Bull and his men would not go into the High House to eat, but drank a cup where they stood, and turned and rode with him straightway, and did him right manly service in battle; and went back with him afterwards to Upmeads, and abode with him there in feasting and joyance for two months' wearing.  And thrice in the years that followed, when his lands at home seemed safest and most at peace, Ralph took a chosen band, and Ursula with them, and Clement withal, and journeyed through the wastes and the mountains to Utterbol, and passed joyous days with his old thrall of war, Bull Nosy, now become a very mighty man and the warder of the peace of the Uttermost lands.

Clement and Katherine came oft to the High House, and Katherine exceeding often; and she loved and cherished Ursula and lived long in health of body and peace of mind.

All the days that Ralph of Upmeads lived, he was the goodliest of men, and no man to look on him had known it when he grew old; and when he changed his life, an exceeding ancient man, he was to all men's eyes in the very blossom of his age.

As to Ursula his wife, she was ever as valiant and true as when they met in the dark night amidst of the Eastland wood.  Eight goodly children she bore him, and saw four generations of her kindred wax up; but even as it was with Ralph, never was she less goodly of body, nay rather, but fairer than when first she came to Upmeads; and the day whereon any man saw her was a day of joyful feast to him, a day to be remembered for ever.  On one day they two died and were laid together in one tomb in the choir of St. Laurence of Upmeads.

AND HERE ENDS THE TALE OF THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: wwi.txt =====



The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

THE WATER OF THE WONDROUS ISLES

BY WILLIAM MORRIS

Kelmscott Press

[1897]

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

The First Part: Of the House of Captivity

[*Chapter I. Catch At Utterhay]

[*Chapter II. Now Shall Be Told of the House by the Water-Side]

[*Chapter III. Of Skin-Changing]

[*Chapter IV. Of the Waxing of the Stolen Child]

[*Chapter V. Of Birdalone, and How She is Grown Into Maidenhood]

[*Chapter VI. Herein Is Told of Birdalone's Raiment]

[*Chapter VII. Birdalone Hath an Adventure in the Wood]

[*Chapter VIII. Of Birdalone and the Witch-Wife]

[*Chapter IX. Of Birdalone's Swimming]

[*Chapter X. Birdalone Comes on New Tidings]

[*Chapter XI. Of Birdalone's Guilt and the Chastisement Thereof]

[*Chapter XII. The Words of the Witch-Wife to Birdalone]

[*Chapter XIII. Birdalone Meeteth the Wood-Woman Again]

[*Chapter XIV. Of Birdalone's Fishing]

[*Chapter XV. Birdalone Weareth Her Serpent-Ring]

[*Chapter XVI. Birdalone Meeteth Habundia Again; and Learneth Her First Wisdom of Her]

[*Chapter XVII. The Passing of the Year into Winter]

[*Chapter XVIII. Of Spring-Tide and the Mind of Birdalone]

[*Chapter XIX. They Bid Farewell, Birdalone and the Wood-Mother]

[*Chapter XX. Of Birdalone and the Sending Boat]

The Second Part: Of the Wondrous Isles

[*Chapter I. The First Isle]

[*Chapter II. Birdalone Falleth in with New Friends]

[*Chapter III. Birdalone is Brought Before the Witch-Wife's Sister]

[*Chapter IV. Of The Witch's Prison in the Wailing-Tower]

[*Chapter V. They Feast in the Witch's Prison]

[*Chapter VI. Atra Tells of How They Three Came Unto the Isle of Increase Unsought]

[*Chapter VII. The Three Damsels Take Birdalone out of the Witch's Prison]

[*Chapter VIII. In What Wise Birdalone Was Clad, and How She Went Her Ways From the Isle of Increase Unsought]

[*Chapter IX. How Birdalone Came to the Isle of the Young and the Old]

[*Chapter X. Birdalone Comes to the Isle of the Queens]

[*Chapter XI. And Now She Comes to the Isle of the Kings]

[*Chapter XII. Of Birdalone, How She Came Unto the Isle of Nothing]

The Third Part: Of the Castle of the Quest

[*Chapter I. Birdalone Comes to the Castle of the Quest]

[*Chapter II. Of Birdalone, and How She Rested the Night Through in a Bower Without the Castle of the Quest]

[*Chapter III. How Birdalone Dight Her For Meeting the Champions of the Quest]

[*Chapter IV. And Now She Meets the Champions]

[*Chapter V. Birdalone Has True Tokens From the Champions of the Quest]

[*Chapter VI. How The Champions Would Do Birdalone to be Clad Anew in the Castle of the Quest]

[*Chapter VII. Of Birdalone, How She Told the Champions All Her Tale]

[*Chapter VIII. In The Meanwhile of the Departing of the Champions, They Would Pleasure Birdalone With Feats of Arms and Games of Prowess]

[*Chapter IX. Birdalone Cometh Before the Champions In Her New Array]

[*Chapter X. The Champions Go Their Ways in the Sending Boat]

The Fourth Part: Of the Days of Abiding

[*Chapter I. Of Birdalone's Grief; and of Leonard the Chaplain]

[*Chapter II. Birdalone Learneth Lore of the Priest. Ten Days of Waiting Wear]

[*Chapter III. Now Would Birdalone Ride Abroad]

[*Chapter IV. Of Birdalone's Faring Abroad]

[*Chapter V. Sir Aymeris Showeth Birdalone the Mountains Afar Off]

[*Chapter VI. Birdalone Heareth Tell Tales of the Black Valley of the Greywethers]

[*Chapter VII. Birdalone Beguileth the Priest to Help Her to Outgoing]

[*Chapter VIII. Birdalone Fares On Her Adventure]

[*Chapter IX. Birdalone Comes to the Black Valley]

[*Chapter X. How Birdalone Fell In With a Man in the Black Valley of the Greywethers]

[*Chapter XI. Birdalone is Led Up the Black Valley]

[*Chapter XII. How Those Twain Get Them From out of the Black Valley of the Greywethers]

[*Chapter XIII. Now They Rest For the Night in the Strait Pass]

[*Chapter XIV. The Black Knight Tells the Truth of Himself]

[*Chapter XV. The Black Knight Brings Birdalone to the Bower in the Dale]

[*Chapter XVI. Yet a Day and a Night They Tarry in the Dale]

The Fifth Part: The Tale of the Quest's Ending

[*Chapter I. Of Sir Leonard's Trouble and the Coming of the Quest]

[*Chapter II. Now Ask They of Birdalone, and Sir Leonard Speaks]

[*Chapter III. How They Follow the Slot of Birdalone and the Black Knight]

[*Chapter IV. Of The Slaying of Friend and Foe]

[*Chapter V. They Come Home to the Castle of the Quest]

[*Chapter VI. Of The Talk Betwixt Birdalone and Viridis]

[*Chapter VII. Birdalone Telleth The tale of Her Wandering Up the Valley of the Greywethers]

[*Chapter VIII. Atra and Birdalone Talk Together While the Lords Sit at the Murder-Council]

[*Chapter IX. Hugh Tells The Story of the Quest's Ending.]

[*Chapter X. How It Fared With the Three Ladies After the Escape of Birdalone]

[*Chapter XI. Birdalone and the Black Squire Talk Together in the Hall of the Castle.]

[*Chapter XII. The Knights and Their Fellows Betake Them to the Assaulting of the Red Hold]

[*Chapter XIII. Birdalone Bethinks Her to Fulfil the Promise Made Unto Atra]

[*Chapter XIV. Birdalone Leaves the Castle of the Quest]

The Sixth Part: The Days of Absence

[*Chapter I. Birdalone Rides to Greenford and There Takes Leave of Arnold and His Men]

[*Chapter II. Of Birdalone and Her Fellowship, Their Faring Over the Downland]

[*Chapter III. They Come to the City of the Five Crafts, and Birdalone Meets With the Poor-Wife]

[*Chapter IV. Of The Love of Gerard's Sons and of Jacobus for Birdalone]

[*Chapter V. Of The Death of Audrey, Mother To Birdalone. She is Warned in a Dream to Seek the Black Squire, and is Minded to Depart the City of the Five Crafts, and Seek Again the Castle of the Quest]

[*Chapter VI. Of The Sundering of Birdalone From Gerard and his Sons]

[*Chapter VII. Birdalone Cometh to Greenford, and Hears of the Wasting of the Castle of the Quest]

[*Chapter VIII. Birdalone Cometh to the Castle of the Quest, Heareth the Tale Thereof From Leonard, and Departeth Thence by the Sending Boat]

[*Chapter IX. Birdalone Findeth the Isle of Nothing Greatly Bettered, and is Kindly Entreated There]

[*Chapter X. Of Birdalone's Flitting From the Isle of Nothing]

[*Chapter XI. Coming to the Isle of Kings Birdalone Findeth There A Score and Two of Fair Damsels Who Would Fain Have Her Company]

[*Chapter XII. Birdalone Cometh Again to the Isle of Queens, and Findeth a Perilous Adventure Therein]

[*Chapter XIII. Coming to the Isle of the Young and the Old, Birdalone Findeth It Peopled With Children]

[*Chapter XIV. The Sending Boat Disappeareth From the Isle of Increase Unsought, and Birdalone Seeketh to Escape Thence By Swimming]

[*Chapter XV. Birdalone Lacketh Little of Drowning, but Cometh Latterly to the Green Eyot]

[*Chapter XVI. Birdalone Findeth Her Witch-Mistress Dead]

[*Chapter XVII. Birdalone Layeth to Earth the Body of the Witch, and Findeth the Sending Boat Broken Up]

[*Chapter XVIII. The Wood-Mother Cometh to Birdalone and Heareth Her Story]

[*Chapter XIX. Habundia Hideth Birdalone's Nakedness With Faery Raiment]

[*Chapter XX. Birdalone Telleth Habundia of Her Love For Arthur, and Getteth From Her Promise of Help Therein]

[*Chapter XXI. How The Wood-Wife Entered the Cot, and a Wonder that Befell Thereon]

[*Chapter XXII. Birdalone Wendeth the Wildwood in Fellowship With Habundia]

[*Chapter XXIII. The Wood-Wife Bringeth Birdalone to the Sight of Arthur in the Wildwood]

[*Chapter XXIV. The Wood-Mother Changeth Her Form to That of a Woman Stricken in Years]

[*Chapter XXV. The Wood-Wife Healeth and Tendeth the Black Squire]

[*Chapter XXVI. The Black Squire Telleth the Wood-Wife of His Doings Since Birdalone Went From the Castle of the Quest]

[*Chapter XXVII. Sir Arthur Cometh to the House Under the Wood]

[*Chapter XXVIII. Fair Days in the House of Love]

[*Chapter XXIX. Those Twain Will Seek the Wisdom of the Wood-Wife]

[*Chapter XXX. They Have Speech With Habundia Concerning the Green Knight and his Fellows]

[*Chapter XXXI. Habundia Cometh with Tidings of Those Dear Friends]

[*Chapter XXXII. Of The Fight in the Forest and the Rescue of Those Friends From the Men of the Red Company]

[*Chapter XXXIII. Viridis Telleth the Tale of Their Seeking]

The Seventh Part: The Days of Returning

[*Chapter I. Sir Hugh Asketh Birdalone Where She Would Have the Abode of Their Fellowship to Be]

[*Chapter II. Birdalone Taketh Counsel With Her Wood-Mother Concerning the Matter of Sir Hugh]

[*Chapter III. Of The Journeying Through the Forest of Evilshaw Unto the Town of Utterhay]

[*Chapter IV. Of the Abiding in Utterhay in Love and Contentment]

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_01]

THE FIRST PART: OF THE HOUSE OF CAPTIVITY

CHAPTER I. CATCH AT UTTERHAY

Whilom, as tells the tale, was a walled cheaping-town hight Utterhay, which was builded in a bight of the land a little off the great highway which went from over the mountains to the sea.

The said town was hard on the borders of a wood, which men held to be mighty great, or maybe measureless; though few indeed had entered it, and they that had, brought back tales wild and confused thereof.

Therein was neither highway nor byway, nor wood-reeve nor way-warden; never came chapman thence into Utterhay; no man of Utterhay was so poor or so bold that he durst raise the hunt therein; no outlaw durst flee thereto; no man of God had such trust in the saints that he durst build him a cell in that wood.

For all men deemed it more than perilous; and some said that there walked the worst of the dead; othersome that the Goddesses of the Gentiles haunted there; others again that it was the faery rather, but they full of malice and guile.  But most commonly it was deemed that the devils swarmed amidst of its thickets, and that wheresoever a man sought to, who was once environed by it, ever it was the Gate of Hell whereto he came.  And the said wood was called Evilshaw.

Nevertheless the cheaping-town throve not ill; for whatso evil things haunted Evilshaw, never came they into Utterhay in such guise that men knew them, neither wotted they of any hurt that they had of the Devils of Evilshaw.

Now in the said cheaping-town, on a day, it was market and high noon, and in the market-place was much people thronging; and amidst of them went a woman, tall, and strong of aspect, of some thirty winters by seeming, black-haired, hook-nosed and hawk-eyed, not so fair to look on as masterful and proud.  She led a great grey ass betwixt two panniers, wherein she laded her marketings.  But now she had done her chaffer, and was looking about her as if to note the folk for her disport; but when she came across a child, whether it were borne in arms or led by its kinswomen, or were going alone, as were some, she seemed more heedful of it, and eyed it more closely than aught else.

So she strolled about till she was come to the outskirts of the throng, and there she happened on a babe of some two winters, which was crawling about on its hands and knees, with scarce a rag upon its little body.  She watched it, and looked whereto it was going, and saw a woman sitting on a stone, with none anigh her, her face bowed over her knees as if she were weary or sorry.  Unto her crept the little one, murmuring and merry, and put its arms about the woman's legs, and buried its face in the folds of her gown:  she looked up therewith, and showed a face which had once been full fair, but was now grown bony and haggard, though she were scarce past five and twenty years.  She took the child and strained it to her bosom, and kissed it, face and hands, and made it great cheer, but ever woefully.  The tall stranger stood looking down on her, and noted how evilly she was clad, and how she seemed to have nought to do with that throng of thriving cheapeners, and she smiled somewhat sourly.

At last she spake, and her voice was not so harsh as might have been looked for from her face:  Dame, she said, thou seemest to be less busy than most folk here; might I crave of thee to tell an alien who has but some hour to dwell in this good town where she may find her a chamber wherein to rest and eat a morsel, and be untroubled of ribalds and ill company?  Said the poor-wife:  Short shall be my tale; I am over poor to know of hostelries and ale-houses that I may tell thee aught thereof.  Said the other:  Maybe some neighbour of thine would take me in for thy sake?  Said the mother:  What neighbours have I since my man died; and I dying of hunger, and in this town of thrift and abundance?

The leader of the ass was silent a while, then she said:  Poor woman! I begin to have pity on thee; and I tell thee that luck hath come to thee to-day.

Now the poor-wife had stood up with the babe in her arms and was turning to go her ways; but the alien put forth a hand to her, and said:  Stand a while and hearken good tidings.  And she put her hand to her girdle-pouch, and drew thereout a good golden piece, a noble, and said:  When I am sitting down in thine house thou wilt have earned this, and when I take my soles out thereof there will be three more of like countenance, if I be content with thee meanwhile.

The woman looked on the gold, and tears came into her eyes; but she laughed and said:  Houseroom may I give thee for an hour truly, and therewithal water of the well, and a mouse's meal of bread.  If thou deem that worth three nobles, how may I say thee nay, when they may save the life of my little one.  But what else wouldst thou of me? Little enough, said the alien; so lead me straight to thine house.

So went they forth of the market-place, and the woman led them, the alien and the ass, out of the street through the west gate of Utterhay, that, to wit, which looked on Evilshaw, and so into a scattering street without the wall, the end of which neared a corner of the wood aforesaid:  the houses there were nought so evil of fashion, but whereas they were so nigh unto the Devil's Park, rich men might no longer away with them, and they were become wares for poor folk.

Now the townswoman laid her hand on the latch of the door that was hers, and threw the door open; then she put forth her palm to the other, and said:  Wilt thou give me the first gold now, since rest is made sure for thee, as long as thou wilt?  The ass-leader put it into her hand, and she took it and laid it on her baby's cheek, and then kissed both gold and child together; then she turned to the alien and said:  As for thy way-beast, I have nought for him, neither hay nor corn:  thou wert best to leave him in the street.  The stranger nodded a yeasay, and the three went in together, the mother, the child, and the alien.

Not right small was the chamber; but there was little therein; one stool to wit, a yew-chair, a little table, and a coffer:  there was no fire on the hearth, nought save white ashes of small wood; but it was June, so that was of no account.

The guest sat down in the yew-chair, and the poor-wife laid her child down gently on the floor and came and stood before the stranger, as if abiding her bidding.

Spake the alien:  Nought so uncomely or strait is thy chamber; and thy child, which I see is a woman, and therefore belike shall long abide with thee, is lovely of shape, and fair of flesh.  Now also thou shalt have better days, as I deem, and I pray them on thine head.

She spake in a kind wheedling voice, and the poor-wife's face grew softer, and presently tears fell down on to the table from her, but she spake no word.  The guest now drew forth, not three nobles, but four, and laid them on the table, and said:  Lo, my friend, the three nobles which I behight thee! now are they thine; but this other thou shalt take and spend for me.  Go up into the town, and buy for me white bread of the best; and right good flesh, or poulaine if it may be, already cooked and dight; and, withal, the best wine that thou mayst get, and sweetmeats for thy baby; and when thou comest back, we will sit together and dine here.  And thereafter, when we be full of meat and drink, we shall devise something more for thy good speed.

The woman knelt before her weeping, but might speak no word because of the fullness of her heart.  She kissed the guest's hands, and took the money, and then arose and caught up her child, and kissed her bare flesh eagerly many times, and then hastened out of the house and up the street and through the gate; and the guest sat hearkening to the sound of her footsteps till it died out, and there was nought to be heard save the far-off murmur of the market, and the chirrup of the little one on the floor.

Then arose the guest and took up the child from the floor, who kicked and screamed, and craved her mother as her broken speech might; but the alien spake softly to her, and said:  Hush, dear one, and be good, and we will go and find her; and she gave her therewith a sugar-plum from out of her scrip.  Then she came out of doors, and spake sweetly to the little one:  See now this pretty way-beast.  We will ride merrily on him to find thy mother.

Then she laid the child in the pannier with a soft cushion under, and a silk cloth over her, so that she lay there happily.  Then she took her ass's rein and went her ways over the waste toward Evilshaw; for, as ye may deem, where the houses and the street ended, the beaten way ended also.

Quietly and speedily she went, and met but three men on the way; and when these saw her, and that she was making for Evilshaw, they turned their heads away, each one, and blessed themselves, and went past swiftly.  Not one sought to stay her, or held any converse with her, and no foot she heard following after her.  So in scarce more than the saying of a low mass she was in amongst the trees, with her ass and her wares and her prey.

No stay she made there, but held forward at her best before the night should fall upon her.  And whatsoever might be told concerning the creatures that other folk had met in Evilshaw, of her it must needs be said that therein she happened on nought worser than herself.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_02]

CHAPTER II. NOW SHALL BE TOLD OF THE HOUSE BY THE WATER-SIDE

Four days they wended the wood, and nought befell to tell of.  The witch-wife (for even such was she) fed the stolen child well and duly, and whiles caressed her and spake sweetly unto her; whiles also she would take her out of the pannier, and set her on the ass's back and hold her thereon heedfully; or, otherwhiles, when they came upon grassy and flowery places, she would set her down on the ground and let her roam about, and pluck the flowers and the strawberries.  And whoso might be sorry, the child was glad, so many things new and fair as she came upon.

At last, when the fifth day was waning, and they had been a long while wending a wood set thick with trees, it began to grow grey betwixt the distant boles, and then from grey to white, and it was as if a new world of light lay before them.  Thitherward went they, and in a little, and before the sun was set, came they to the shore of a great water, and thence was no more land to be seen before them than if it had been the main sea itself, though this was a sweet water. Albeit, less than a half mile from the shore lay two eyots, as it might have been on the salt sea; but one of these sat low down on the water, and was green and well bushed, but the other, which lay east of it, and was nigher to the shore, was high, rocky, and barren.

Now the ending of the wood left a fair green plain betwixt it and the water, whiles more than a furlong across, whiles much less; and whiles the trees came down close to the water-side.  But the place whereas they came from out the wood was of the widest, and there it was a broad bight of greensward of the fashion of the moon seven nights old, and a close hedge of thicket there was at the back of it; and the lake lay south, and the wood north.  Some deal of this greensward was broken by closes of acre-land, and the tall green wheat stood blossoming therein; but the most was sweet meadow, and there as now was a gallant flock of goats feeding down it; five kine withal, and a tethered bull.  Through the widest of this meadow ran a clear stream winding down to the lake, and on a little knoll beside a lap of the said stream, two bow-shots from the water, was a knoll, whereon stood, amidst of a potherb garden, a little house strongly framed of timber.  Before it the steep bank of the lake broke down into a slowly-shelving beach, whose honey-coloured sand thrust up a tongue in amongst the grass of the mead.

Went the witch-wife straight to the door of the said house as if she were at home, as was sooth indeed.  She threw the door open, and unladed the ass of all his wares, and first of the youngling, whom she shook awake, and bore into the house, and laid safely on the floor of the chamber; nor did she wait on her wailing, but set about what was to be done to kindle fire, and milk a she-goat, and get meat upon the board.  That did she, and fed both herself and the child plenteously:  neither did she stint her of meat ever, from that time forward, however else she dealt with her.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_03]

CHAPTER III. OF SKIN-CHANGING

One thing must here be told:  Whenas the said dame stood forth clad amidst of the chamber the next morning, the child ran up to her to greet her or what not, but straightway when she saw her close, drew aback, and stood gasping with affright; for verily she deemed this was nowise she who had brought her last night into the fair chamber, and given bread and milk to her and put her to bed, but someone else. For this one had not dark hair, and hooked nose, and eyen hawk- bright; stark and tall was she indeed, as that other one, and by seeming of the same-like age; but there came to an end all her likeness to last night's housewife.  This one had golden-red hair flowing down from her head; eyes of hazel colour, long and not well- opened, but narrow and sly.  High of cheekbones she was, long-chinned and thin-lipped; her skin was fine and white, but without ruddiness; flat-breasted she was, and narrow-hipped.

Now she laughed at the babe's terror, and said, but in her old voice at least:  Thou foolish little beast!  I know what scares thee, to wit, that thou deemest me changed:  now I tell thee that I am the one who brought thee here last night, and fed thee; neither is my changing a matter of thine, since at least I am the one who shall keep thee from hunger and weather henceforward; that is enough for thee to know as now.  Now thou hast to eat and sleep and play and cry out, that thou mayest the sooner wax, and grow into the doing of my will.

Therewith she led her out into the sunshine, and tethered her to an ash sapling which grew anigh the door, that the child might be safe the while she went about her work in acre and mead.

But as for that matter of changing of aspect, the maiden came to know thereafter that the witch durst not go into the wood in the same skin as that which she wore at home, wherefore she had changed it for the journey to Utterhay, and changed back again in the night-tide before she arose.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_04]

CHAPTER IV. OF THE WAXING OF THE STOLEN CHILD

This little one, who is henceforth called Birdalone, though the witch called her but seldom so, nor indeed by any name, dwelt there betwixt the water and the wood, and saw none save the said witch-wife, who, as aforesaid, fed her well, but scarce meddled with her else for a long while; so she wandered well-nigh as she had will, and much in the wood; for she had no fear thereof, nor indeed of aught else save of the dame.  She learned of the ways and the wont of all the creatures round about her, and the very grass and flowers were friends to her, and she made tales of them in her mind; and the wild things feared her in no wise, and the fowl would come to her hand, and play with her and love her.  A lovely child she was, rosy and strong, and as merry as the birds on the bough; and had she trouble, for whiles she came across some ugly mood of the witch-wife, she bore it all as lightly as they.

Wore the years thus, till now she was grown tall and thin, and had seen twelve winters, and was far stronger and handier than at first sight she looked to be.  That found her mistress, and would not forego the using of her deftness.  For indeed the maiden knew all matters of wood and field full well, and somewhat of the water also (though no boat had she ever seen there), for she learned herself swimming, as the ducks do belike.

But now her mistress would learn her swinking, and hard was the lesson, for with twiggen rods and switches was she learned, and was somewhat stubborn with this woman, who she deemed loved her not; and, however it were, there began to grow in her an inkling that all was not well with the dame, and howsoever she might fear her, she trusted her not, nor worshipped her; otherwise she had learned her lesson speedily; for she was not slack nor a sluggard, and hated not the toil, even when it pained and wearied her, but against the anger and malice she hardened her heart.

It is to be said, that though there she dwelt alone with the witch- wife, she had somehow got to know that they two were not alone in the world, and she knew of male and female, and young and old.  Thereof doubtless the witch herself had learned her, would she, would she not; for though she were mostly few-spoken, yet whiles the tongue of her would loosen, and she would tell Birdalone tales of men and women, and kings and warriors and thralls, and the folk of the world beyond them, if it were but to scare the child.  Yea, and when she rated Birdalone, or girded at her, words would come forth which the maiden stored up, and by laying two and two together gat wisdom howso it were.  Moreover, she was of the race of Adam, and her heart conceived of diverse matters from her mother's milk and her father's blood, and her heart and her mind grew up along with her body. Herein also was she wise, to wit, how to give wrath the go-by, so that she oft found the wood a better home than the house:  for now she knew that the witch-wife would enter it never; wherefore she loved it much, and haunted it daily if she might.

Amidst all this she lived not unmerrily; for the earth was her friend, and solaced her when she had suffered aught:  withal she was soon grown hardy as well as strong; and evil she could thole, nor let it burden her with misery.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_05]

CHAPTER V. OF BIRDALONE, AND HOW SHE IS GROWN INTO MAIDENHOOD

Wear the years and the years amidst such days as these, and now is Birdalone grown a dear maiden of seventeen summers; and yet was her life not unhappy; though the mirth of her childhood was somewhat chastened in her, and she walked the earth soberly and measurely, as though deep thoughts were ever in her head:  though, forsooth, it is not all so sure that her serious face and solemn eyes were but a part of the beauty which was growing with the coming forth of childhood into youth and maidenhood.  But this at least is sure, that about this time those forebodings which had shown her that she had no call to love and honour her mistress took clearer shape, and became a burden on her, which she might never wholly shake off.  For this she saw, that she was not her own, but a chattel and a tool of one who not only used her as a thrall in the passing day, but had it in her mind to make of her a thing accursed like to herself, and to bait the trap with her for the taking of the sons of Adam.  Forsooth she saw, though dimly, that her mistress was indeed wicked, and that in the bonds of that wickedness was she bound.

One thing, moreover, had she noted now this long while, that once and again, it might be once every two moons, the witch-wife would arise in the dead of night and go forth from the house, and be away for a day, or two or three, or whiles more, and come back again weary and fordone; but never said she any word to Birdalone hereof.  Yet oft when she arose to go this errand, before she left the chamber would she come to Birdalone's truckle-bed, and stand over her to note if she were asleep or not; and ever at such times did Birdalone feign slumber amidst of sickening dread.  Forsooth in these latter days it whiles entered the maiden's head that when the dame was gone she would rise and follow her and see whither she went, and what she did; but terror constrained her that she went not.

Now from amidst all these imaginings arose a hope in her that she might one day escape from her thralldom:  and whiles, when she was lonely and safe in the wood, to this hope she yielded herself; but thereof came such tumult of her soul for joy of the hope, that she might not master her passion; the earth would seem to rise beneath her, and the woods to whirl about before her eyes, so that she might not keep her feet, but would sink adown to earth, and lie there weeping.  Then most oft would come the cold fit after the hot, and the terror would take her that some day the witch would surprise the joy of that hope in her eyes, and would know what it meant, or that some light word might bewray her; and therewith came imaginings of what would then befall her, nor were that hard to picture, and it would come before her over and over again till she became weary and worn out therewith.

But though they abode ever with her, these troubling thoughts pricked not so oft at the keenest, but were as the dull ache of little import that comes after pain overcome:  for in sooth busy and toilsome days did she wear, which irked her in nowise, since it eased her of the torment of those hopes and fears aforesaid, and brought her sound sleep and sweet awaking.  The kine and the goats must she milk, and plough and sow and reap the acre-land according to the seasons, and lead the beasts to the woodland pastures when their own were flooded or burned; she must gather the fruits of the orchard, and the hazel nuts up the woodlands, and beat the walnut-trees in September.  She must make the butter and the cheese, grind the wheat in the quern, make and bake the bread, and in all ways earn her livelihood hard enough.  Moreover, the bowman's craft had she learned, and at the dame's bidding must fare alone into the wood now and again to slay big deer and little, and win venison:  but neither did that irk her at all, for rest and peace were in the woods for her.

True it is, that as she wended thicket or glade or wood-lawn, she would at whiles grow timorous, and tread light and heedfully, lest rustling leaves or crackling stick should arouse some strange creature in human shape, devil, or god now damned, or woman of the faery.  But if such were there, either they were wise and would not be seen, or kind and had no will to scare the simple maiden; or else maybe there were none such in those days.  Anyhow, nought evil came to her out of Evilshaw.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_06]

CHAPTER VI. HEREIN IS TOLD OF BIRDALONE'S RAIMENT

Lank and long is Birdalone the sweet, with legs that come forth bare and browned from under her scant grey coat and scantier smock beneath, which was all her raiment save when the time was bitter, and then, forsooth, it was a cloak of goat-skin that eked her attire: for the dame heeded little the clothing of her; nor did Birdalone give so much heed thereto that she cared to risk the anger of her mistress by asking her for aught.

But on a day of this same spring, when the witch-wife was of sweeter temper than her wont was, and the day was very warm and kindly, though it was but one of the last of February days, Birdalone, blushing and shamefaced, craved timidly some more womanly attire. But the dame turned gruffly on her and said:  Tush, child! what needeth it? here be no men to behold thee.  I shall see to it, that when due time comes thou shalt be whitened and sleeked to the very utmost.  But look thou! thou art a handy wench; take the deer-skin that hangs up yonder and make thee brogues for thy feet, if so thou wilt.

Even so did Birdalone, and shaped the skin to her feet; but as she was sewing them a fancy came into her head; for she had just come across some threads of silk of divers colours; so she took them and her shoon and her needle up into the wood, and there sat down happily under a great spreading oak which much she haunted, and fell to broidering the kindly deer-skin.  And she got to be long about it, and came back to it the next day and the next, and many days, whenso her servitude would suffer it, and yet the shoon were scarce done.

So on a morning the dame looked on her feet as she moved about the chamber, and cried out at her:  What! art thou barefoot as an hen yet?  Hast thou spoilt the good deer-skin and art yet but shoeless? Nay, our lady, said Birdalone, but the shoon are not altogether done. Show them to me, said the dame.

Birdalone went to her little coffer to fetch them, and brought them somewhat timorously, for she knew not how her mistress would take her working on them so long, if perchance she would blame her, or it might be chastise her, for even in those days the witch-wife's hand was whiles raised against her.  But now when the dame took the shoes and looked on them, and saw how there were oak-leaves done into them, and flowers, and coneys, and squirrels, she but smiled somewhat grimly on Birdalone, and said:  Well, belike thou art a fool to waste thy time and mine in such toys; and to give thee thy due would be to give thee stripes.  But thou doest herein after the nature of earthly women, to adorn thy body, whatsoever else is toward.  And well is that, since I would have thee a woman so soon as may be; and I will help thy mind for finery, since thou art so deft with thy needle.

Therewith she went to the big coffer and drew forth thence a piece of fine green cloth, and another of fine linen, and said to Birdalone: This mayest thou take, and make thee a gown thereof and a new smock, and make them if thou wilt as gay as thy new shoon are gotten to be; and here is wherewithal.  And therewith she gave her two handfuls of silken threads and gold, and said:  Now I suppose that I must do the more part of thy work, while thou art making thee these gaudy garments.  But maybe someone may be coming this way ere long, who will deem the bird the finer for her fine feathers.  Now depart from me; for I would both work for thee and me, and ponder weighty matters.

Who was glad now but Birdalone; she grew red with new pleasure, and knelt down and kissed the witch's hand, and then went her ways to the wood with her precious lading, and wrought there under her oak-tree day after day, and all days, either there, or in the house when the weather was foul.  That was in the middle of March, when all birds were singing, and the young leaves showing on the hawthorns, so that there were pale green clouds, as it were, betwixt the great grey boles of oak and sweet-chestnut; and by the lake the meadow-saffron new-thrust-up was opening its blossom; and March wore and April, and still she was at work happily when now it was later May, and the hare-bells were in full bloom down the bent before her.

All this while the witch had meddled little with Birdalone, and had bidden her to no work afield or in the stead which was anywise grievous, but had done all herself; yet was she few-spoken with her, and would oft behold her gloomily.  And one evening when Birdalone came in from the wood, the witch came close up to her and stared her in the face, and said suddenly:  Is it in thine heart to flee away from me and leave me?

A sharp pang of fear shot through Birdalone's heart at that word, and she turned very red, and then pale to the lips, but stammered out: No, lady, it is not in mine heart.  The dame looked grimly on her and said:  If thou try it and fail, thou shalt rue it once only, to wit, lifelong; and thou canst but fail.  She was silent a while, and then spake in a milder voice:  Be content here a while with me, and thereafter thou shalt be more content, and that before long.

She said no more at that time; but her word clave to Birdalone's heart, and for some time thereafter she was sorely oppressed with a burden of fear, and knew not how to hold herself before the witch- wife.  But the days wore, and nought betid, and the maiden's heart grew lighter, and still she wrought on at her gown and her smock, and it was well-nigh done.  She had broidered the said gown with roses and lilies, and a tall tree springing up from amidmost the hem of the skirt, and a hart on either side thereof, face to face of each other. And the smock she had sewn daintily at the hems and the bosom with fair knots and buds.  It was now past the middle of June, hot and bright weather.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_07]

CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE HATH AN ADVENTURE IN THE WOOD

On a day she went to the wood, and sat down under her oak-tree, and it was far and far out of sight of anyone standing in the meadow by the lake; and in the wood Birdalone looked to see nought at all save the rabbits and squirrels, who were, forsooth, familiar enough with her, and fearless, so that they would come to her hand and sport with her when she hailed them.  Wherefore, as the day was exceeding hot, she put off from her her simple raiment, that she might feel all the pleasure of the cool shadow and what air was stirring, and the kindness of the greensward upon her very body.  So she sat sewing, covered but by a lap of the green gown which her needle was painting.

But as she sat there intent on her work, and her head bent over it, and it was now at the point of high noon, she heard as if some creature were going anigh to her; she heeded it not, deeming that it would be but some wandering hind.  But even therewith she heard one say her name in a soft voice, and she leapt up trembling, deeming at first that it would be the witch come to fetch her:  but yet more scared she was, when she saw standing before her the shape of a young woman as naked as herself, save that she had an oak wreath round about her loins.

The new-comer, who was now close to her, smiled on her, and said in a kind and sweet voice:  Fear nought, Birdalone, for I deem thou wilt find me a friend, and it is not unlike that thou wilt need one ere long.  And furthermore, I will say it, said she smiling, that since I am not afraid of thee, thou needest not be afraid of me.  Said Birdalone, she also smiling:  True it is that thou art nought fearsome to look on.  The new-comer laughed outright, and said:  Are we not well met then in the wildwood? and we both as two children whom the earth loveth.  So play we at a game.  At what game? said Birdalone.  Spake she of the oak-wreath:  This; thou shalt tell me what I am like in thine eyes first, because thou wert afraid of me; and then when thou art done, I will tell thee what thou seemest to me.

Quoth Birdalone:  For me that will be hard; for I have nought to liken thee to, whereas save this sight of thee I have seen nought save her that dwelleth in the House by the Water, and whom I serve. Nay, said the other, then will I begin, and tell thee first whatlike thou art, so that thou wilt know the better how to frame thy word concerning me.  But tell me, hast thou ever seen thyself in a mirror? What thing is that? said Birdalone.  It is a polished round of steel or some other white metal, said the wood-maiden, which giveth back in all truth the image of whatso cometh before it.  Said Birdalone and reddened therewith:  We have at home a broad latten dish, which it is my work, amongst other things, to brighten and keep bright; yet may I not make it so bright that I may see much of mine image therein; and yet.  What wouldst thou? said the wood-woman.  Said Birdalone:  I shall tell thee presently when thy part of the play is done.

Laughed the new-comer, and said:  It is well; now am I to be thy mirror.  Thus it is with thee:  thou standest before me a tall and slim maiden, somewhat thin, as befitteth thy seventeen summers; where thy flesh is bare of wont, as thy throat and thine arms and thy legs from the middle down, it is tanned a beauteous colour, but otherwhere it is even as fair a white, wholesome and clean, and as if the golden sunlight, which fulfilleth the promise of the earth, were playing therein.  Fairer and rounder shall be thine arms and thy shoulders when thou hast seen five more summers, yet scarce more lovesome, so strong and fine as now they are.  Low are thy breasts, as is meet for so young a maiden, yet is there no lack in them; nor ever shall they be fairer than now they are.  In goodly fashion sits thine head upon thy shoulders, upheld by a long and most well-wrought neck, that the sun hath tanned as aforesaid.  The hair of thee is simple brown, yet somewhat more golden than dark; and ah! now thou lettest it loose it waveth softly past thy fair smooth forehead and on to thy shoulders, and is not stayed by thy girdlestead, but hideth nought of thy knees, and thy legs shapely thin, and thy strong and clean-wrought ankles and feet, which are with thee as full of thine heart and thy soul and as wise and deft as be thy wrists and thine hands, and their very fellows.  Now as to thy face:  under that smooth forehead is thy nose, which is of measure, neither small nor great, straight, and lovely carven at the nostrils:  thine eyen are as grey as a hawk's, but kind and serious, and nothing fierce nor shifting.  Nay, now thou lettest thine eyelids fall, it is as fair with thy face as if they were open, so smooth and simple are they and with their long full lashes.  But well are thine eyen set in thine head, wide apart, well opened, and so as none shall say thou mayst not look in the face of them.  Thy cheeks shall one day be a snare for the unwary, yet are they not fully rounded, as some would have them; but not I, for most pitiful kind are they forsooth.  Delicate and clear-made is the little trench that goeth from thy nose to thy lips, and sweet it is, and there is more might in it than in sweet words spoken.  Thy lips, they are of the finest fashion, yet rather thin than full; and some would not have it so; but I would, whereas I see therein a sign of thy valiancy and friendliness.  Surely he who did thy carven chin had a mind to a master-work and did no less.  Great was the deftness of thine imaginer, and he would have all folk that see thee wonder at thy deep thinking and thy carefulness and thy kindness.  Ah maiden! is it so that thy thoughts are ever deep and solemn?  Yet at least I know it of thee that they be hale and true and sweet.

My friend, when thou hast a mirror, some of all this shalt thou see, but not all; and when thou hast a lover some deal wilt thou hear, but not all.  But now thy she-friend may tell it thee all, if she have eyes to see it, as have I; whereas no man could say so much of thee before the mere love should overtake him, and turn his speech into the folly of love and the madness of desire.  So now I have played the play, and told thee of thee; tell me now of me, and play thy play.

For a while stood Birdalone silent, blushing and confused, but whiles casting shy glances at her own body, what she might see of it.  At last she spake:  Fair friend, I would do thy will, but I am not deft of speech; for I speak but little, save with the fowl and wild things, and they may not learn me the speech of man.  Yet I will say that I wonder to hear thee call me fair and beauteous; for my dame tells me that never, nor sayeth aught of my aspect save in her anger, and then it is:  Rag! and bag-of-bones! and when wilt thou be a woman, thou lank elf thou?  The new-comer laughed well-favouredly hereat, and put forth a hand, and stroked her friend's cheek. Birdalone looked piteous kind on her and said:  But now I must needs believe thy words, thou who art so kind to me, and withal thyself so beauteous.  And I will tell thee that it fills my heart with joy to know that I am fair like to thee.  For this moreover I will tell thee, that I have seen nought in field or woodland that is as lovely to me as thou art; nay, not the fritillary nodding at our brook's mouth, nor the willow-boughs waving on Green Eyot; nor the wild-cat sporting on the little woodlawn, when she saw me not; nor the white doe rising up from the grass to look to her fawn; nor aught that moves and grows.  Yet there is another thing which I must tell thee, to wit, that what thou hast said about the fashion of any part of me, that same, setting aside thy lovely words, which make the tears come into the eyes of me, would I say of thee.  Look thou!  I take thine hair and lay the tress amongst mine, and thou mayst not tell which is which; and amidst the soft waves of it thy forehead is nestling smooth as thou saidst of mine:  hawk-grey and wide apart are thine eyen, and deep thought and all tenderness is in them, as of me thou sayest:  fine is thy nose and of due measure; and thy cheeks a little hollow, and somewhat thin thy lovely lips; and thy round chin so goodly carven, as it might not be better done.  And of thy body else I will say as thou sayst of mine, though I deem these hands have done more work than thine.  But see thou! thy leg and mine as they stand together; and thine arm, as if it were of my body.  Slim and slender thou art, or it may be lank; and I deem our dame would call thee also bag-of-bones.  Now is this strange.  Who art thou?  Art thou my very own sister?  I would thou wert.

Spake then to Birdalone that image of her, and said, smiling kindly on her:  As to our likeness, thou hast it now; so alike are we, as if we were cast in one mould.  But thy sister of blood I am not; nay, I will tell thee at once that I am not of the children of Adam.  As to what I am, that is a long story, and I may not tell it as now; but thou mayst call me Habundia, as I call thee Birdalone.  Now it is true that to everyone I show not myself in this fair shape of thee; but be not aghast thereat, or deem me like unto thy mistress herein, for as now I am, so ever shall I be unto thee.

Quoth Birdalone, looking on her anxiously:  Yea, and I shall see thee again, shall I not? else should I grieve, and wish that I had never seen thee at all.  Yea, forsooth, said Habundia, for I myself were most fain to see thee oft.  But now must thou presently get thee back home, for evil as now is the mood of thy mistress, and she is rueing the gift of the green gown, and hath in her mind to seek occasion to chastise thee.

Now was Birdalone half weeping, as she did on her raiment while her friend looked on her kindly.  She said presently:  Habundia, thou seest I am hard bestead; give me some good rede thereto.

That will I, said the wood-wife.  When thou goest home to the house, be glad of countenance, and joyous that thy gown is nigh done; and therewith be exceeding wary.  For I deem it most like that she will ask thee what thou hast seen in the wood, and then if thou falter, or thy face change, then she will have an inkling of what hath befallen, to wit, that thou hast seen someone; and then will she be minded to question thy skin.  But if thou keep countenance valiantly, then presently will her doubt run off her, and she will cease grudging, and will grow mild with thee and meddle not.  This is the first rede, and is for to-day; and now for the second, which is for days yet unborn.  Thou hast in thy mind to flee away from her; and even so shalt thou do one day, though it may be by way of Weeping Cross; for she is sly and wise and grim, though sooth it is that she hateth thee not utterly.  Now thou must note that nowise she hindereth thee from faring in this wood, and that is because she wotteth, as I do, that by this way there is no outgoing for thee.  Wherefore look thou to it that it is by the way of the water that thou shalt fare to the land of men-folk.  Belike this may seem marvellous to thee; but so it is; and belike I may tell thee more hereof when time serveth.  Now cometh the last word of my rede.  Maybe if thou come often to the wood, we shall whiles happen on each other; but if thou have occasion for me, and wouldst see me at once, come hither, and make fire, and burn a hair of my head therein, and I will be with thee:  here is for thee a tress of mine hair; now thou art clad, thou mayst take a knife from thy pouch and shear it from off me.

Even so did Birdalone, and set the tress in her pouch; and therewith they kissed and embraced each other, and Birdalone went her ways home to the house, but Habundia went back into the wood as she had come.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_08]

CHAPTER VIII. OF BIRDALONE AND THE WITCH-WIFE

It went with Birdalone as Habundia had foretold, for she came home to the house glad of semblance, flushed and light-foot, so that she was lovely and graceful beyond her wont.  The dame looked on her doubtfully and grimly a while, and then she said:  What ails thee, my servant, that thou lookest so masterful?  Nought ails me, lady, said Birdalone, save that I am gay because of the summer season, and chiefly because of thy kindness and thy gift, and that I have well- nigh done my work thereon, and that soon now I shall feel these dainty things beating about my ankles.  And she held up and spread abroad the skirt with her two hands, and it was indeed goodly to look on.

The witch-wife snorted scornfully and scowled on her, and said: Thine ankles forsooth!  Bag-o'-bones! thou wisp! forsooth, thou art in love with thy looks, though thou knowest not what like a fair woman is.  Forsooth, I begin to think that thou wilt never grow into a woman at all, but will abide a skinny elf thy life long.  Belike I did myself wrong to suffer thee to waste these three or four months of thy thrall's work, since for nought but thrall's work shalt thou ever be meet.

Birdalone hung her head adown, and blushed, but smiled a little, and swayed her body gently, as a willow-bough is swayed when a light air arises in the morning.  But the witch stood so scowling on her, and with so sour a look, that Birdalone, glancing at her, found her heart sink so within her, that she scarce kept countenance; yet she lost it not.

Then said the witch sharply:  Wert thou in the wood to-day?  Yea, lady, said the maiden.  Then said the dame fiercely:  And what sawest thou?  Quoth Birdalone, looking up with an innocent face somewhat scared:  Lady, I saw a bear, one of the big ones, crossing a glade. And thou without bow and arrow or wood-knife, I warrant me, said the witch.  Thou shalt be whipped, to keep thee in mind that thy life is mine and not thine.  Nay, nay, I pray thee be not wroth! said the maid; he was a long way down the glade, and would not have followed me if he had seen me:  there was no peril therein.  Said the witch- wife:  Didst thou see aught else?  Yea, said Birdalone, and was weeping somewhat now; which forsooth was not hard for her to do, over-wrought as she was betwixt hope and fear:  yea, I saw my white doe and her fawn, and they passed close by me; and two herons flew over my head toward the water; and . . .  But the witch turned sharply and said:  Thrall! hast thou seen a woman to-day in the wood? A woman? said Birdalone, and what woman, my lady, said Birdalone. Hath any woman come to the house, and passed forth into the wood?

The dame looked on her carefully, and remembered how she had faltered and changed countenance that other day, when she had charged her with being minded to flee; and now she saw her with wondering face, and in no wise confused or afraid of guilt, as it seemed; so she believed her tale, and being the more at ease thereby, her wrath ran off her, and she spake altogether pleasantly to Birdalone, and said:  Now I have had my gird at thee, my servant, I must tell thee that in sooth it is not all for nothing that thou hast had these months of rest; for verily thou hast grown more of a woman thereby, and hast sleekened and rounded much.  Albeit, the haysel will wait no longer for us, and the day after to-morrow we must fall to on it.  But when that is done, thou shalt be free to do thy green gown, or what thou wilt, till wheat harvest is toward; and thereafter we shall see to it.  Or what sayest thou?

Birdalone wondered somewhat at this so gracious word, but not much; for in her heart now was some guile born to meet the witch's guile; so she knelt down and took the dame's hands and kissed them, and said:  I say nought, lady, save that I thank thee over and over again that thou art become so good to me; and that I will full merrily work for thee in the hay-field, or at whatsoever else thou wilt.

And indeed she was so light-hearted that she had so escaped from the hand of the witch for that time, and above all, that she had gotten a friend so kind and dear as the wood-woman, that her heart went out even toward her mistress, so that she went nigh to loving her.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_09]

CHAPTER IX. OF BIRDALONE'S SWIMMING

Full fair was the morrow morn, and Birdalone arose betimes before the sun was up, and she thought she would make of this a holiday before the swink afield began again, since the witch was grown good toward her.  So she did on her fair shoes, and her new raiment, though the green gown was not fully done, and said to herself that she would consider what she would do with her holiday when she was amidst of her bathing.

So she went down to the water-side, and when she was standing knee- deep in the little sandy bight aforesaid, she looked over to Green Eyot, and was minded to swim over thither, as oft she did.  And it was a windless dawn after a hot night, and a light mist lay upon the face of the water, and above it rose the greenery of the eyot.

She pushed off into the deep and swam strongly through the still water, and the sun rose while she was on the way, and by then she had laid a hand on the willow-twigs of the eyot, was sending a long beam across the waters; and her wet shoulders rose up into the path of it and were turned into ruddy gold.  She hoisted herself up, and climbing the low bank, was standing amongst the meadow-sweet, and dripping on to its fragrance.  Then she turned about to the green plain and the house and the hedge of woodland beyond, and sighed, and said softly:  A pity of it, to leave it!  If it were no better otherwhere, and not so fair?

Then she turned inward to the eyot, which had done her nought but good, and which she loved; and she unbound her hair, and let it fall till the ends of the tresses mingled with the heads of the meadow- sweet, and thereafter walked quietly up into the grassy middle of the isle.

She was wont to go to a knoll there where the grass was fine, and flowery at this time with white clover and dog violet, and lie down under the shade of a big thorn with a much-twisted bole:  but to-day some thought came across her, and she turned before she came to the thorn, and went straight over the eyot (which was but a furlong over at that place) and down to the southward-looking shore thereof. There she let herself softly down into the water and thrust off without more ado, and swam on and on till she had gone a long way. Then she communed with herself, and found that she was thinking:  If I might only swim all the water and be free.

And still she swam on:  and now a light wind had been drawn up from the west, and was driving a little ripple athwart the lake, and she swam the swiftlier for it awhile, but then turned over on her back and floated southward still.  Till on a sudden, as she lay looking up toward the far-away blue sky, and she so little and low on the face of the waters, and the lake so deep beneath her, and the wind coming ever fresher from the west, and the ripple rising higher against her, a terror fell upon her, and she longed for the green earth and its well-wrought little blossoms and leaves and grass; then she turned over again and swam straight for the eyot, which now was but a little green heap far away before her.

Long she was ere she made land there, and the sun was high in the heavens when she came, all spent and weary, to the shadow of the hawthorn-tree; and she cast herself down there and fell asleep straightway.  Forsooth her swim was about as much as she had might for.

When she awoke it lacked but an hour of noon-tide, and she felt the life in her and was happy, but had no will to rise up for a while; for it was ajoy to her to turn her head this way and that to the dear and dainty flowers, that made the wide, grey, empty lake seem so far away, and no more to be dealt with than the very sky itself.

At last she arose, and when she had plucked and eaten some handfuls of the strawberries which grew plenteously on the sweet ground of the eyot, she went down to the landward-looking shore, and took the water, and swam slowly across the warm ripple till she came once more to the strand and her raiment.  She clad herself, and set her hand to her pouch and drew forth bread, and sat eating it on the bank above the smooth sand.  Then she looked around, and stood up with her face toward the house, to see if the dame would call to her.  But she saw the witch come out of the porch and stand there looking under the sharp of her hand toward her, and thereafter she went back again into the house without giving any sign.  Wherefore Birdalone deemed that she had leave that day, and that she might take yet more holiday; so she stepped lightly down from her place of vantage, turned her face toward the east, and went quietly along the very lip of the water.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_10]

CHAPTER X. BIRDALONE COMES ON NEW TIDINGS

Soon she had covered up the house from her, for on that eastern end, both a tongue of the woodland shoved out west into the meadow, and, withal, the whole body of the wood there drew down to the water, and presently cut off all the greensward save a narrow strip along by the lake, off the narrowest whereof lay the rocky eyot aforesaid, nigher unto the shore than lay Green Eyot.

Now never had Birdalone gone so far east as to be over against Rock Eyot.  In her childish days the witch had let her know that she might go where she would, but therewith had told her a tale of a huge serpent which dwelt in the dark wood over against Rock Eyot, whose wont it was to lap his folds round and round living things that went there, and devour them; and many an evil dream had that evil serpent brought to Birdalone.  In after days belike she scarce trowed in the tale, yet the terror of it abode with her.  Moreover the wildwood toward that side, as it drew toward the water, was dark and dreary and forbidding, running into black thickets standing amidst quagmires, all unlike to the sweet, clean upland ridges, oak begrown and greenswarded, of the parts which lay toward the north, and which she mostly haunted.

But this summer day, which was so bright and hot, Birdalone deemed she might harden her heart to try the adventure; and she had a mind to enter the wood thereby, and win her way up into the oakland whereas she had met Habundia, and perchance she might happen on her; for she would not dare to summon her so soon after their first meeting.  And if she met her, there would be the holiday worthily brought to an end!

On went Birdalone, and was soon at the narrowest of the greensward, and had the wood black on her left hand, for the trees of it were mostly alder.  But when she was come just over against Rock Eyot, she found a straight creek or inlet of the water across her way; and the said creek ran right up into the alder thicket; and, indeed, was much overhung by huge ancient alders, gnarled, riven, mossy, and falling low over the water.  But close on the mouth of the creek, on Birdalone's side thereof, lay a thing floating on the dull water, which she knew not how to call a boat, for such had she never seen, nor heard of, but which was indeed a boat, oarless and sailless.

She looked on it all about, and wondered; yet she saw at once that it was for wending the water, and she thought, might she but have a long pole, she might push it about the shallow parts of the lake, and belike take much fish.  She tried to shove it somewhat toward the lake, but with her little might could make nothing of the work; for the craft was heavy, like a barge, if there were nothing else that withstood her.

About this new thing she hung a long while, wondering that she had never heard thereof, or been set to toil therewith.  She noted that it was mostly pale grey of hue, as if it had been bleached by sun and water, but at the stem and stern were smears of darker colour, as though someone had been trying the tints of staining there.

Now so much did this new matter take up all her mind, that she thought no more of going up into the wood; but though she had fain abided there long to see whatever might be seen, she deemed it would go ill with her did the witch happen on her there; wherefore she turned about, and went back the way she had come, going very slowly and pondering the tidings.  And ever she called to mind what Habundia had said to her, that it was by water she must flee, and wondered if she had sent her this thing that she might escape therein; so different as her going would be thereby to swimming the lake with her wet body.  Then again she thought, that before she might let herself hope this, it were best, if she might, to find out from the witch what was the thing, and if she knew thereof.  Yet at last she called to mind how little patient of questions was her mistress, and that if she were unheedful she might come to raise an evil storm about her. Wherefore she took this rede at the last, that she would keep all hidden in her own breast till she should see Habundia again; and meanwhile she might steal down thither from time to time to see if the thing still abode there; which she might the easier do by swimming if she chose her time heedfully, and go thither from Rock Eyot, which now and again she visited.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_11]

CHAPTER XI. OF BIRDALONE'S GUILT AND THE CHASTISEMENT THEREOF

By this she was come back to the sandy bight, and the sun was westering; and she looked up toward the house and saw that it was the time of their evening meal, for the blue smoke of the cooking fire was going up into the air.  So she went thither speedily, and entered gay of seeming.  The witch looked on her doubtfully, but presently fell to speaking with her graciously as yesterday, and Birdalone was glad and easy of mind, and went about the serving of her; for always she ate after the dame; and the mistress asked her of many matters concerning the house, and the gathering of stuff.

So came the talk on the fishing of the brook that ran before their door, and how the trouts therein were but little, and not seldom none at all; and even therewith came these words into Birdalone's mouth, she scarce knew how:  My lady, why do we not fish the lake, whereas there be shoal places betwixt us and the eyots where lie many and great fish, as I have seen when I have been swimming thereover?  And now in that same creek whereas the serpent used to lurk when I was little, we have a thing come, which is made to swim on the water; and I, could I have a long pole to shove withal.

But no time she had to make an end, ere the witch-wife sprang up and turned on her with a snarl as of an evil dog, and her face changed horribly:  her teeth showed grinning, her eyes goggled in her head, her brow was all to-furrowed, and her hands clenched like iron springs.

Birdalone shuddered back from her and cringed in mere terror, but had no might to cry out.  The witch hauled her up by the hair, and dragged her head back so that her throat lay bare before her all along.  Then drew the witch a sharp knife from her girdle, and raised her hand over her, growling and snarling like a wolf.  But suddenly she dropped the knife, her hand fell to her side, and she fell in a heap on the floor and lay there hushed.

Birdalone stood gazing on her, and trembling in every limb; too confused was she to think or do aught, though some image off light through the open door passed before her:  but her feet seemed of lead, and, as in an evil dream, she had no might to move her limbs, and the minutes went by as she stood there half dead with fear.

At last, (and belike it was no long while) the witch-wife came to herself again, and sat up on the floor, and looked all about the chamber, and when her eyes fell upon Birdalone, she said in a weak voice, yet joyfully; Hah! thou art there still, my good servant! Then she said:  A sickness fell upon me suddenly, as whiles it is wont; but now am I myself again; and presently I have a word for thee.

Therewith she rose up slowly, Birdalone helping her, and sat in her big chair silent awhile, and then she spake:  My servant, thou hast for the more part served me well:  but this time thou hast done ill, whereas thou hast been spying on my ways; whereof may come heavy trouble but if we look to it.  Well is it for thee that thou hast none unto whom thou mightest babble; for then must I needs have slain thee here and now.  But for this first time I pardon thee, and thou hast escaped the wrath.

Her voice was soft and wheedling; but for Birdalone the terror had entered into her soul, and yet abode with her.

The witch-wife sat a while, and then arose and went about the chamber, and came to a certain aumbry and opened it, and drew forth a little flasket of lead and a golden cup scored over with strange signs, and laid them on the board beside her chair, wherein she now sat down again, and spake once more, still in the same soft and wheedling voice:  Yet, my servant, thy guilt would be required of me, if I let this pass as if to-day were the same as yesterday; yea, and of thee also would it be required; therefore it is a part of the pardon that thou be corrected:  and the correction must be terrible to thee, that thou mayst remember never again to thrust thyself into the jaws of death.  And what may I do to correct thee?  It shall be in a strange way, such as thou hast never dreamed of.  Yet the anguish thereof shall go to thine heart's root; but this must thou needs bear, for my good and thine, so that both we may live and be merry hereafter.  Go now, fill this cup with water from the spring and come back with it.  Birdalone took the cup with a sinking heart, and filled it, and brought it back, and stood before the witch more dead than alive.

Then the witch-wife took up the flasket and pulled out the stopple and betook it to Birdalone, and said:  Drink of this now, a little sip, no more.  And the maiden did so, and the liquor was no sooner down her gullet than the witch-wife and the chamber, and all things about her, became somewhat dim to her; but yet not so much so as that she could not see them.  But when she stretched out her arm she could see it not at all, nor her limbs nor any other part of her which her eyes might fall upon.  Then would she have uttered a lamentable wail, but the voice was sealed up in her and no sound came from her voice. Then she heard the witch-wife how she said (and yet she heard it as if her voice came from afar), Nay, thou canst not speak, and thou canst not see thyself, nor may any other, save me, and I but dimly. But this is but part of what I must lay upon thee; for next I must give thee a new shape, and that both thyself and all other may see. But, before I do that, I must speak a word to thee, which thy new shape would not suffer the sense thereof to reach to thine heart. Hearken!

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_12]

CHAPTER XII. THE WORDS OF THE WITCH-WIFE TO BIRDALONE

Said the witch-wife:  When thou comest to thyself (for it is not my will that thou shouldest never have thine own shape again), doubtless the first thing which thou shalt do with thy new-gained voice and thy new-gained wit shall be to curse me, and curse me again.  Do as thou wilt herein; but I charge thee, disobey me not, for that shall bring thee to thy bane.  For if thou do not my bidding, and if thou pry into my matters, and lay bare that which I will have hidden, then will it be imputed unto thee for guilt, and will I, will I not, I must be avenged on thee even to slaying:  and then is undone all the toil and pain I have had in rearing thee into a deft and lovely maiden.  Deem thou, then, this present anguish kind to thee, to keep thee that thou come not to nought.

Now since I have begun speaking, I will go on; for little heretofore have I spoken to thee what was in mine heart.  Well I wot that thou thinkest of me but as of an evil dream, whereof none can aught but long to awake from it.  Yet I would have thee look to this at least; that I took thee from poverty and pinching, and have reared thee as faithfully as ever mother did to child; clemming thee never, smiting thee not so oft, and but seldom cruelly.  Moreover, I have suffered thee to go whereso thou wouldest, and have compelled thee to toil for nought but what was needful for our two livelihoods.  And I have not stayed thy swimmings in the lake, nor thy wanderings in the wood, and thou hast learned bowshot there, till thou art now a past-master in the craft:  and, moreover, thou art swift-foot as the best of the deer, and mayest over-run any one of them whom thou wilt.

Soothly a merry life hast thou had as a child, and merry now would be thy life, save for thine hatred of me.  Into a lovely lily-lass hast thou grown.  That I tell thee now, though my wont has been to gird at thee for the fashion of thy body; that was but the word of the mistress to the thrall.  And now what awaiteth thee?  For thou mayst say:  I am lonely here, and there is no man to look on me.  Of what avail, therefore, is my goodliness and shapeliness?  Child, I answer thee that the time is coming when thou shalt see here a many of the fairest of men, and then shalt thou be rather rose than lily, and fully come to womanhood; and all those shall love and worship thee, and thou mayst gladden whom thou wilt, and whom thou wilt mayst sadden; and no lack soever shalt thou have of the sweetness of love, or the glory of dominion.

Think of it then!  All this is for thee if thou dwell here quietly with me, doing my will till thy womanhood hath blossomed.  Wherefore I beseech and pray thee put out of thy mind the thought of fleeing from me.  For if thou try it, one of two things shall be:  either I shall bring thee back and slay thee, or make thee live in misery of torment; or else thou wilt escape, and then what will it be?  Dost thou know how it shall go with thee, coming poor and nameless, an outcast, into the world of men?  Lust shalt thou draw unto thee, but scarce love.  I say an outcast shalt thou be, without worship or dominion; thy body shall be a prey to ribalds, and when the fine flower thereof hath faded, thou shalt find that the words of thy lovers were but mockery.  That no man shall love thee, and no woman aid thee.  Then shall Eld come to thee and find thee at home with Hell; and Death shall come and mock thee for thy life cast away for nought, for nought.  This is my word to thee:  and now I have nought to do to thee save to change thee thy skin, and therein must thou do as thou canst, but it shall be no ugly or evil shape at least.  But another time maybe I shall not be so kind as to give thee a new shape, but shall let thee wander about seen by none but me.  Then she took the cup and took water in the hollow of her hand and cast it into Birdalone's face, and muttered words withal; and presently she saw herself indeed, that she was become a milk-white hind; and she heard and saw again, but not as she, the maiden, was wont to hear and see; for both her hearing and seeing and her thought was of a beast and not of a maiden.

Said the witch-wife:  It is done now, till I give thee grace again; and now be off into the field; but if thou stray more than half a bowshot from the brook, it shall be the worse for thee.  And now the day was done and night was come.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_13]

CHAPTER XIII. BIRDALONE MEETETH THE WOOD-WOMAN AGAIN

It was fifteen days thereafter that Birdalone awoke lying in her bed on a bright morning, as if all this had been but a dream.  But the witch-wife was standing over her and crying out:  Thou art late, slug-a-bed, this fair-weather day, and the grass all spoiling for lack of the scythe.  Off! and down to the meadow with thee.

Birdalone waited not for more words, but sprang out of bed, and had her work-a-day raiment on in a twinkling, and stayed but to wash her in a pool of the brook, and then was amidst the tall grass with the swathe falling before her.  As she worked she thought, and could scarce tell whether joy at her present deliverance, or terror of the witch-wife, were the greatest.  Sore was her longing to go see her friend in the wood, but the haysel lasted more than a week, and when that was done, whether it were of set purpose or no, the dame forgat her other promise, to give Birdalone more holiday, and kept her close to her work about meadow and acre.  Otherwise her mistress nowise mishandled or threatened her, though she had gone back to the surliness and railing which was her wont.  At last, on a morning when the dame had bidden her to nought of work, Birdalone took her bow in her hand and cast her quiver on her back, and went her ways into the wood, and forgat not the tress of Habundia's hair; but she had no need to use it, for when she was come to the Oak of Tryst, straightway came Habundia forth from the thicket, and now so like to Birdalone that it was a wonder, for as her friend she bare bow and quiver, and green gown trussed up till her knees were naked.

So they kissed and embraced, and Birdalone wept upon her friend's bosom, but was ashamed of the words which would have told her of her case.  Then Habundia set her down upon the greensward, and sat down beside her, and caressed her and soothed her; then she smiled on Birdalone, and said:  Thy tale is partly told without words, and I would weep for thee if I might shed tears.  But thou mayest tell me wherefore thou didst suffer this; though forsooth I have an inkling thereof.  Hast thou happened on the witch's ferry?

Even so it was, sister, quoth Birdalone.  And therewith she plucked up heart, and told her all the tale of the vanishing of her body and the skin-changing.  And Habundia answered:  Well then, there is this to be said, that sooner or later this must have happened, for thereby lieth thy road of escape; wherefore it is better sooner than later. But tell me again:  was she fierce and rough in words with thee? for what she said to thee thou hast not yet told me.  Said Birdalone:  In her first fury, when she was like to have slain me, she had no words, nought but wolfish cries.  But thereafter she spake unto me strangely, yet neither fiercely nor roughly; nay, it seemed to me as if almost she loved me.  And more than almost she besought me rather than commanded me not to flee from her.  And wert thou beguiled by her soft speech? said Habundia.  Nowise to cast aside my hope of escape, nay, not even in that hour, said Birdalone; but amidst all the confusion and terror somewhat was I moved to compassion on her.

Spake Habundia, looking anxiously on her:  Dost thou deem that thou art somewhat cowed by what she hath done to thee?  Said Birdalone, and flushed very red:  Oh no, no!  Nought save death or bonds shall come betwixt me and my utmost striving for escape.  That is better than well, said Habundia; but again, canst thou have patience a little, and be wary and wise the while?  So meseemeth, said the maiden.  Said Habundia:  Again it is well.  Now is the summer beginning to wane, and by my rede thou shalt not try the flight until May is come again and well-nigh worn into June; for thou wilt be bigger then, little sister, and tidings are waxing that shall get matters ready for thy departure:  moreover, thou must yet learn what thou hast to do meanwhile, and thereof shall I tell thee somewhat as now.  For that boat, the thing which thou didst find, and for which thou didst suffer, is called the Sending Boat, and therein thy mistress fareth time and again, I deem to seek to some other of her kind, but I know not unto whom, or whereto.  Hast thou noted of her that whiles she goeth away privily by night and cloud?  Yea, verily, said Birdalone, and this is one of the things which heretofore hath made me most afraid.  Said Habundia:  Well now, that she wendeth somewhither in this ferry I wot; but as I wot not whither, so also I know not what she doth with the Sending Boat to make it obey her; whereas, though I know all things of the wood, I know but little of the lake.  Wherefore, though there be peril to thee therein, follow her twice or thrice when she riseth up for this faring, and note closely what is her manner of dealing with the said Sending Boat, so that thou mayst do in like wise.  Wilt thou risk the smart and the skin-changing, or even if it were the stroke of the knife, to gather this wisdom?  And thereafter thou shalt come hither and tell me how thou hast sped.  With a good heart will I, dear sister, said Birdalone.

Then Habundia kissed her and said:  It is a joy to me to see thee so valiant, but herein may I help thee somewhat; here is a gold finger- ring, see thou! fashioned as a serpent holding his tail in his mouth; whenso thou goest on this quest, set thou this same ring on the middle finger of thy left hand, and say thou above thy breath at least:

To left and right,
 Before, behind,
 Of me be sight
 As of the wind!

And nought then shall be seen of thee even by one who standeth close beside.  But wear not the ring openly save at such times, or let the witch have sight thereof ever, or she will know that thou hast met me.  Dost thou understand, and canst thou remember?

Laughed Birdalone, and took the ring and set it on her finger, and spake aloud even as Habundia had given her the words.  Then quoth Habundia, laughing:  Now have I lost my friend and sister, for thou art gone, Birdalone.  Take off the ring, sweetling, and get thee to thine hunting, for if thou come home empty-handed there will be flyting awaiting thee, or worse.

So Birdalone took off the ring and came back to sight again laughing; then the wood-woman kissed her and turned her heels to her, and was gone; but Birdalone strung her bow, and got to her woodcraft, and presently had a brace of hares, wherewith she went back home to the dame; who indeed girded at her for her sloth, and her little catch in so long a while; but there it ended.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_14]

CHAPTER XIV. OF BIRDALONE'S FISHING

Now were the days wearing toward wheat-harvest, and nought befel to tell of, save that on a morn the witch-wife called Birdalone to her, and said:  Now is little to be done till the wheat is ready for the hook, and thy days are idle; or what is that word that fell from thee that other day, that there be good swims for fish about the eyots? Canst thou swim across bearing thine angle, and back again therewith, and thy catch withal?  Yea, certes, said Birdalone gaily; with one hand I may swim gallantly, or with my legs alone, if I stir mine arms ever so little.  I will go straightway if thou wilt, lady; but give me a length of twine so that I may tie my catch about my middle when I swim back again.

Therewith she went forth lightly to fetch her angle, which was in a shed without; but just as she took it in her hand, a sudden thought came to her, so wary as she was grown.  She undid the bosom of her gown, and took forth her serpent-ring; for she bore it next to her skin, made fast to the bosom of her smock; but now she hid it carefully in the thickest of her brow-hair, which was very thick and soft.  Withal the tress of Habundia's hair she bore ever mingled with her own.

No sooner had she done it, but she was glad; for she heard the dame calling her, who, when she came to the house-door, spake and said: Now shall I fare with thee down to the water, and look to thy garments lest they be fouled by some straying beast.  And therewith she looked curiously on Birdalone, and knit her brows when she saw that the maiden changed countenance in nowise.

Down to the water went they, and the witch sat down close to where Birdalone should take the water, and watched her do off her raiment, and eyed her keenly when she was bare, but said nought.  Birdalone turned her head as she stood knee-deep, and said:  How long shall I abide, lady, if I have luck?  As long as thou wilt, said the dame: most like I shall be gone by then thou comest back, even if thou be away no long while.

Fell Birdalone to swimming then, and when she was more than half over, the witch, stirring no more than need was, got hold of her raiment, which was but the old grey coat over a smock, and ransacked it, but found nought, as well ye may wot.  And when she had done, she sat down again in heavy mood as it seemed, and watched Birdalone swimming, and when she beheld her body come forth out of the water, and pass out of sight amongst the flowers of the eyot, she arose and went her ways home.

Birdalone looked through the willow-boughs, and saw her turn away; then she fared to her fishing with a smile, and soon had plenteous catch from under the willow-boughs.  Then, whereas the day was very calm and fair, and the dame had given her holiday, she wandered about the eyot, and most in a little wood of berry-trees, as quicken and whitebeam and dog-wood, and sported with the birds, who feared her not, but came and sat on her shoulders, and crept about her feet. She went also and stood a while on the southern shore, and looked on the wide water dim in the offing under the hot-weather haze, and longed to be gone beyond it.  Then she turned away, and to the other shore, and gat her fish and strung them on the string, and made them fast to her middle, and so took the water back again to the yellow strand, where now was no one awaiting her.  But before she did on her garments, she looked on them, and saw that they lay not as she had left them, whereby she knew well that the witch-wife had handled them.

Amidst all this the day was wearing to an end, and again she saw the smoke of the cooking-fire going up into the air from the chimney of the house; and she smiled ruefully, thinking that the witch might yet find an occasion for ransacking her raiment.  But she plucked up heart, and came home with her catch, and the dame met her with a glum face, and neither praised her nor blamed her, but took the fish silently.  Such ending had that day.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_15]

CHAPTER XV. BIRDALONE WEARETH HER SERPENT-RING

After this she went once and again fishing on to Green Eyot by the bidding of the dame, who went not again to the shore with her.  These times she had half a mind to go see the Sending Boat, but durst not, lest the thing itself might have life enough to tell of her.

And now was come the time of wheat-harvest, and Birdalone must wear her days swinking in the acre-land, clad but in smock and shoes; and the toil was hard, and browned her skin and hardened her hands, but it irked her not, for the witch let her work all alone, and it was holiday unto the maiden if her mistress were not anigh, despite those words which had somewhat touched her heart that other day.

But when wheat-getting was done, there was again rest for her body, and swimming withal and fishing from the eyot by the witch's leave. And again by her own leave she went to seek Habundia in the wood, and spent a happy hour with her, and came back with a fawn which she had shot, and so but barely saved her skin from the twig-shower.  Then yet again she went into the wood on the witch's errand as well as her own, and was paid by her friend's sweet converse, and by nought else save the grudging girding of her mistress.

But on a night when September was well in, and the sky was moonless and overcast, somewhat before midnight the dame came and hung over Birdalone as she lay abed, and watched to see if she waked; forsooth the witch's coming had waked her; but even so she was wary, and lay still, nor changed her breathing.  So the witch turned away, but even therewith Birdalone made a shift to get a glimpse of her, and this she saw thereby, that the semblance of her was changed, and that she bore the self-same skin wherewith she had come to Utterhay, and which she had worn twice or thrice afterwards when she had an errand thither.

The witch now glided swiftly to the door, and out into the night. Birdalone lay still a little, lest she should fall into a trap, and then arose very quietly and did on her smock, which lay ever under her pillow with the ring sewn thereto again, and so went out adoors also, and deemed she saw the witch some way on ahead; but it was nothing for her light feet to overtake her.  So she stayed to take the ring from her smock, and set it on her finger; then in a low voice she said:

To left and right,
 Before, behind,
 Of me be sight
 As of the wind!

Then boldly she sped on, and was soon close on the heels of the witch, who made her way to the edge of the lake, and then turned east, and went even as Birdalone had gone when she came across the Sending Boat.

So fared the witch-wife straight to the creek-side, and Birdalone must needs stick close to her, or she had known nought, so black was the night amongst the alder-boughs.  But the witch-wife fumbled about a while when she was stayed by the creek, and presently drew somewhat from under her cloak, and the maiden saw that she was about striking flint upon steel, and quaked somewhat, lest her charm had played her false.  Presently the tinder quickened, and the dame had lighted a lantern, which she held up, peering all about; and full she looked on the place whereas was Birdalone, and made no show of seeing her, though well-nigh the maiden looked for it to see her drop the lantern and spring on her.

Now the witch, holding the lantern aloft, steps over the gunwale of the boat, and sits down on the thwart; and it was a near thing but that Birdalone followed her into the boat, but she feared the getting forth again, so she but hung over it as close as she might.  Then she saw the witch draw out of her girdle that sharp little knife which Birdalone had seen raised against her own throat; and then the witch bared her arm, and pricked it till the blood sprang from that barren white skin; thereat she stood up, and went to the bows of the craft and hung over them, and drew her arm to and fro over the stem to bloody it; and went thereafter to the stern, and took blood into her right hand and passed it over the place of the steerage (for there was no rudder) and came back and sat down on the thwart again; and, so far as Birdalone might see, busied herself in staunching the little wound on her arm.  Then deemed Birdalone that she knew what manner of paint was that which had made the rusty smears which she had seen on the boat by daylight.

But now as the witch sat there, a harsh voice began to stir in her throat, and then words came out of her, and she sang in a crow's croak:

The red raven-wine now
 Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
 Then wake and awake
 And the wonted way take!
 The way of the Wender forth over the flood,
 For the will of the Sender is blent with the blood.

Therewithal began the boat to stir, and anon it glided forth out of the creek into the waters of the lake, and the light of the lantern died, and it was but a minute ere Birdalone lost all sight of it. She abode a little longer, lest perchance boat and witch might come back on her hands, and then turned and went swiftly back again.  She would have drawn off her ring straightway, but the thought came on her, that she had seen the witch depart in her second semblance; how if she were abiding her at home in her wonted skin?  So she came to the house even as she was, and opened the door, and looked in, quaking; but there was no image of a child of Adam therein, and no living thing, save the cat drowsing before the fire; wherefore Birdalone took the ring from her finger and went to the hearth, and stirred up the cat with her foot till he arose and fell to rubbing himself against her legs, and she was fain of him.

Thereafter she made her ring fast to her smock again, and set the smock under her pillow as her wont was, and betook herself to bed, and fell asleep sweetly, leaving all troublous thoughts for the morrow; and that the more as she was free of the witch-wife for that night at least.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_16]

CHAPTER XVI. BIRDALONE MEETETH HABUNDIA AGAIN; AND LEARNETH HER FIRST WISDOM OF HER

When morning was, Birdalone arose, and longed sore to go into the wood to seek Habundia again, but durst not, lest the witch-wife should come to hand again earlier than might be looked for.  So she abode quiet and did what was toward near about the house.  All that day the witch came not back, nor the next; but the morrow thereafter, when Birdalone arose, she found the wonted aspect of her mistress in the wonted place, who, when she saw the maiden, greeted her, and was somewhat blithe with her; and Birdalone would have asked her leave to go to the wood, but she trusted little in her unwonted soft mood; which yet lasted so long that on the third day she herself bade Birdalone go take her pleasure in the wood, and bear back with her what of venison she might.

Forthwith went Birdalone as glad as might be, and met her friend at the Oak of Tryst, and told her closely how all had betid; and Habundia said:  Here, then, thou hast learned how to sail the lake. But hast thou learned enough to try the adventure and not to fail? Even so I deem, said Birdalone; but this I would say, that meseemeth it better that I follow the witch down to the boat one more time at least; for this first time it was dark; and moreover shall I not be surer of the spell if I hear it said oftener, lest it be not ever the same words?  What sayest thou?  She said:  Thou art right herein, and, since the adventure may not be tried till next June is at hand, there is time enough and to spare.  And now for this hour that is we need talk no more of it.  Only, my sweet, I beseech thee be wary; and above all suffer not the witch-wife to set eye or hand on the ring. Truly mine heart oft aches sorely for thy peril; for therein the image of thee abideth rather as of my daughter than my friend.  Yea, now thou laughest, but kindly, so that the sound of thy laughter is as sweet music.  But know that though thou art but a young maiden, and I in all wise like unto thee of aspect, yet have I dwelt many and many a year upon the earth, and much wisdom have learned.  Trowest thou me?

Yea, yea, said Birdalone, with all my heart.  Then she hung her head a while and kept silence, and thereafter looked up and spake:  I would ask thee a thing and crave somewhat of thee, as if thou wert verily my mother; wilt thou grant it me?  Yea, surely, child, said Habundia.  Said Birdalone:  This it is then, that thou wilt learn me of thy wisdom.  Habundia smiled full kindly on her, and said:  This of all things I would have had thee ask; and this day and now shall we begin to open the book of the earth before thee.  For therein is mine heritage and my dominion.  Sit by me, child, and hearken!

So the maiden sat down by her likeness under the oak, and began to learn her lesson.  Forsooth forgotten is the wisdom, though the tale of its learning abideth, wherefore nought may we tell thereof.

When it was done, Birdalone kissed her wood-mother and said:  This is now the best day of my life, this and the day when first I saw thee. I will come hither now many times before the day of my departure. Yea, but, sweet child, said Habundia, beware of the witch and her cruelty; I fear me she shall yet be grim toward thee.  So will I be wary, said Birdalone, but I will venture some little peril of pain but if thou forbid me, mother.  And I pray thee by thy love to forbid me not.  And this I pray thee the more, because after one of these grim times then mostly doth she meddle the less with me for a while, wherefore I shall be the freer to come hither.  Habundia kissed her and embraced her, and said:  Valiant art thou for a young maiden, my child, and I would not refrain thee more than a father would refrain his young son from the strokes of the tilt-yard.  But I pray thee to forget not my love, and my sorrow for thy grief.

Therewith they sundered, and it was drawing toward evening. Birdalone sought catch, and brought home venison to the dame, who was yet blithe with her, and spake that evening as she eyed her:  I cannot tell how it is, but thou seemest changed unto me, and lookest more towards thy womanhood than even yesterday.  I mean the face of thee, for wert thou stripped, lean enough I should see thee, doubtless.  But now look to it, I beseech thee, to be both deft and obedient, so that I may be as kind to thee as I would be, and kinder than I have been heretofore.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_17]

CHAPTER XVII. THE PASSING OF THE YEAR INTO WINTER

Wore the days now, till on a night of October, toward the end thereof, the witch went a-night-tide to the Sending Boat, and Birdalone followed her as erst.  This time the night was wild and windy, but the moon was high aloft and big, and all cloud save a few flecks was blown from off the heavens; so that the night was as light as could be; and even at the tree-hung creek it was easy to see all that was done.  And so it was that the witch did and spake in all wise as she did before.

Another time, when November was well-nigh out, the dame arose for her lake-faring; but this night the snow lay deep betwixt house and water, and Birdalone thought that it would scarce do to follow. Forsooth she knew not whether her feet would the less leave their print in the snow because they were not to be seen.  When she asked Habundia thereof, she laughed and said:  Once more thou hast been wise, my child, for though it had been no harder to put this might into thy ring, that whoso wore it should not touch the ground, yet it hath not been done.

It must be told, that in this while Birdalone went oft to the Trysting Tree, and called on her mother (as now she called her) to come to her, and ever more and more of wisdom she won thereby. Though the witch was oft surly with her, and spared not her girding, yet, the needful work done, she meddled little with her.  But on a day she straightly banned her the wood, and Birdalone went notwithstanding, and when she was there with the wood-mother nought she told her thereof, but was blithe and merry beyond her wont.  She came back home thereafter empty handed, and stepped into the chamber proudly and with bright eyes and flushed cheeks, though she looked for nought save chastisement; yea, it might be even the skin- changing.  Forsooth the witch was sitting crouched in her chair with her hands on the elbows and her head thrust forward, like a wild beast at point to spring; but when her eye fell on Birdalone, she faltered and drew back into herself again, and muttered somewhat unheard; but to Birdalone spake nought of good or bad.

Now was winter-tide upon them, when there was nought to do in field and acre, and but a little in the byre.  In years bygone, and even in the last one, the witch had not spared Birdalone toil any the more, but had made errands for her amidst the snow and biting winds, or over the lake when it was laid with ice.  But now she bade her to nought save what she had a will to; whereby she lost but little, whereas Birdalone was well willing to strive against wind and weather and the roughness of the winter earth, and overcome if she might, so that all were well done that had to be done about the stead.

Still did the witch give her hard words and rail at her for the most part, but from the teeth outward only, and because she was wont thereto.  Inwardly indeed she began to fear Birdalone, and deemed that she would one day have the mastery; and this led her into fierce and restless moods; so that she would sit staring at the maiden's beauty handling her knife withal, and scarce able to forbear her. And in such a mood she once made occasion to chastise her as her wont had been erst, and looked to see Birdalone rebel against her; but it fell out otherwise, for Birdalone submitted herself to her meekly and with a cheerful countenance.  And this also was a terror to the witch, who deemed, as indeed it was, that the purpose was growing in her thrall.  So from that time she meddled with her no more.  All this while, as may be thought, Birdalone went yet oftener to the Oak of Tryst, despite frost and snow and wind, and gat much lore of her wood-mother, and learned wisdom abundantly.  And her days were happy.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_18]

CHAPTER XVIII. OF SPRING-TIDE AND THE MIND OF BIRDALONE

Now was the winter gone and the spring-tide come again, and with the blossoming of the earth blossomed Birdalone also.  Nought sweeter of flesh might she be than erst, but there was now a new majesty grown into her beauty; her limbs were rounded, her body fulfilled, her skin sleeked and whitened; and if any mother's son had beheld her feet as they trod the meadow besprinkled with saffron and daffodil, ill had it gone with him were he gainsaid the kisses of them, though for the kissing had he fared the worse belike.

That spring-tide, amidst of April, she followed the witch-wife down to the Sending Boat for the third time; and there went everything as erst, and she deemed now that the lesson was well learned, and that she was well-nigh as wise as the witch herself therein.

But the day after she went about somewhat pensive, as though a troublous thought were on her; and when, three days thereafter, she met the wood-mother, she spake to her even as they parted, and said: Mother, much wisdom hast thou learned me, and now this at the last withal, that hitherto there has been shame in my life; and now fain were I to be done with it.  Fair child, said Habundia, little is the shame though this woman hath had the upper hand of thee and hath used thee cruelly:  how mightest thou, a child, strive with her?  But now I see and know that there is an end of that; that she feareth thee now, and will never again raise a hand against thee save thou fall wholly into her power; as thou shalt not, my child.  Be comforted then for what is gone by!  Nay, mother, said Birdalone, it is not that which troubleth me; for, as thou sayest, what else might I do? But thy wisdom which thou hast set in my heart hath learned me that for these last months I have been meeting guile with guile and lies with lies.  And now will I do so no more, lest I become a guileful woman, with nought good in me save the fairness of my body. Wherefore hearken, sweet mother!  What is done, is done; but when it cometh to the day, which is speedily drawing nigh, that I must part from thee, it may be for a long while, then will I not fare to the Sending Boat by night and cloud and with hidden head, but will walk thither in broad day, and let that befall which must befall.

Changed then Habundia's face and became haggard and woeful, and she cried out:  O if I could but weep, as ye children of Adam!  O my grief and sorrow!  Child, child! then will betide that falling into her hands which I spake of e'en now; and then shall this wretch, this servant of evil, assuredly slay thee there and then, or will keep thee to torment thee till thy life be but a slow death.  Nay, nay, do as I should do, and fare with hidden head, and my ring on thy finger. Or else, O child, how wilt thou hurt me!

Birdalone wept; but presently she fell to caressing the mother's hand, and said:  This is thy doing, wherein thou hast made me wise. Yet fear not:  for I deem that the witch-wife will not slay me, whereas she looketh to have some gain of me; moreover, in the evil of her heart is mingled some love toward me, whereof, as erst I told thee, I have a morsel of compassion.  Mother, she will not slay me; and I say that she shall not torment me, for I will compel her to slay me else.  It is my mind that she will let me go.  Said the mother:  Yea, mayhappen, yet but as a bird with a string to its leg. If it be so, said Birdalone, then let my luck prevail over her guile; as well it may be, since I have known thee, O wise mother!

The wood-wife hung her head and spake nought for a while; then she said:  I see that thou wilt have it so, and that there is something in thine heart which we, who are not children of Adam, may not understand; yet once wert thou more like unto us.  Now all I may say is, that thou must rule in this matter, and that I am sad.

Then she looked down again and presently raised a brighter face, and said:  Belike all shall be better than I thought.  Then she kissed Birdalone and they parted for that time.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_19]

CHAPTER XIX. THEY BID FAREWELL, BIRDALONE AND THE WOOD-MOTHER

Now April was gone, and May was come with the thorn a-blossoming, and there was Birdalone waxing still in loveliness.  And now the witch had left all girding at her even, and spake to her but little, save when she needs must.  But to Birdalone it seemed that she watched her exceeding closely.

Birdalone went oft to the wood, and learned yet more of lore:  but of the matter of the Departure, how it was to be gone about they spake no more, and great was the love betwixt them.

At last when May was worn nigh to June came Birdalone to the Oak of Tryst, and found the wood-mother there; and when they had talked a while, but ever from the teeth out, spake Habundia:  Though thou be now the wiser of us two maybe, yet have I wisdom to wot that this is the hour of our sundering, and that to-morrow thou wilt try the adventure of the Sending Boat:  is it not so?  Yea, mother, said Birdalone; I bid thee farewell now:  woe is me therefor!  Said Habundia:  And thou wilt deliver thyself into the hands of the witch, wilt thou, as thou saidst that other day?  Quoth Birdalone:  Is it not wisdom, dear mother, if I trust in my goodhap?  Alas, said the mother, it may be so when all is said.  But O my sad heart! and how I fear for thee!

My mother, my mother! said Birdalone, that I should make the days grievous unto thee! and thou who hast made my days so joyous!  But now canst thou not say of thy wisdom that we shall meet again?

The wood-woman sat down, and let her head fall over her knees, and was silent a long while; then she rose up and stood before Birdalone, and said:  Yea, we shall meet again, howsoever it may be.  Let us depart with that sweet word in the air between us.  Yet first thou shalt give me a tress of thine hair, as I did to thee when first we met; for by means of it may I know to-morrow how thou hast sped.

Even so did Birdalone, and this was the end of their talk, save broken words of lamentation as they said farewell.  And therewith for that while they sundered.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f1_20]

CHAPTER XX. OF BIRDALONE AND THE SENDING BOAT

Birdalone woke up in the morning, and arose and clad herself, and she saw not the witch-wife in the chamber, though her bed looked as if it had been slept in.  Birdalone accounted little thereof, whereas the dame would oft go on one errand or another much betimes in the morning.  Yet was she somewhat glad, for she was nowise wishful for a wrangle with her.  Withal, despite her valiancy, as may well be thought, she was all a-flutter with hopes and fears, and must needs refrain her body from overmuch quaking and restlessness if she might.

Now she mingled the tress of the wood-mother's hair with her own hair, but deemed it nought perilous to leave the ring yet sewn to her smock:  she set some deal of bread and flesh in her scrip, lest her voyage should be long, and then all simply stepped over the threshold of the House of her Captivity.

She went straight to the strand aforesaid, seeing nought of the witch-wife by the way; and when she came there, was about to turn straightway to her left hand down to the creek, when it came into her mind that she would first swim over to Green Eyot for this last of times.  For the eyot indeed she loved, and deemed it her own, since never had her evil dream, the witch, set foot thereon.  Moreover, she said to herself that the cool lake would allay the fever of her blood, and make her flesh firmer and less timorous for the adventure. And again, that if the witch should see her from afar, as she could scarce fail to do, she would deem the maiden was about her wonted morning swimming, and would be the less like to spy on her.

So now, when she had let her garments slip from off her on to the sand close to the water's edge, she stood a while, with her feet scarce covered by the little ripple of the bight, to be a token of safety to her mistress.  To say sooth, now it was come so nigh to the deed, she shrank aback a little, and was fain to dally with the time, and, if it might be, thrust something of no import betwixt her and the terror of the last moment.

Now she took the water, and rowed strongly with her lovely limbs till she came to the eyot, and there she went aland, and visited every place which had been kind to her; and kissed the trees and flowers that had solaced her, and once more drew the birds and rabbits to sport with her; till suddenly it came into her head that the time was wearing overfast.  Then she ran down to the water and plunged in, and swam over to the strand as fast as she might, and came aland there, thinking of nothing less than what had befallen.

For lo! when she looked around for her raiment and her scrip, it was nowhere to be seen; straightway then it came into her mind, as in one flash, that this was the witch's work; that she had divined this deed of the flight, and had watched her, and taken the occasion of her nakedness and absence that she might draw her back to the House of Captivity.  And this the more as the precious ring was sewn to Birdalone's smock, and the witch would have found it there when she handled the raiment.

Birdalone wasted no time in seeking for the lost; she looked down on to the smooth sand, and saw there footprints which were not her own, and all those went straight back home to the house.  Then she turned, and for one moment of time looked up toward the house, and saw plainly the witch come out adoors, and the sun flashed from something bright in her hand.

Then indeed she made no stay, but set off running at her swiftest along the water-side toward the creek and the Sending Boat.  As is aforesaid she was as fleet-foot as a deer, so but in a little space of time she had come to the creek, and leapt into the boat, panting and breathless.  She turned and looked hastily along the path her feet had just worn, and deemed she saw a fluttering and flashing coming along it, but some way off; yet was not sure, for her eyes were dizzy with the swiftness of her flight and the hot sun and the hurry of her heart.  Then she looked about a moment confusedly, for she called to mind that in her nakedness she had neither knife, nor scissors, nor bodkin to let her blood withal.  But even therewith close to hand she saw hanging down a stem of half-dead briar-rose with big thorns upon it; she hastily tore off a length thereof and scratched her left arm till the blood flowed, and stepped lightly first to stem and then to stern, and besmeared them therewith.  Then she sat down on the thwart and cried aloud:

The red raven-wine now
 Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
 Then wake and awake
 And the wonted way take!
 The way of the Wender forth over the flood,
 For the will of the Sender is blent with the blood.

Scarce had she time to wonder if the boat would obey her spell ere it began to stir beneath her, and then glided out into the lake and took its way over the summer ripple, going betwixt Green Eyot and the mainland, as if to weather the western ness of the eyot:  and it went not a stonecast from the shore of the said mainland.

Hither to meet it now cometh the witch, running along the bank, her skirts flying wild about her, and a heavy short-sword gleaming in her hand.  Her furious running she stayed over against the boat, and cried out in a voice broken for lack of breath:

Back over the flood
 To the house by the wood!
 Back unto thy rest
 In the alder nest!
 For the blood of the Sender lies warm on thy bow,
 And the heart of the Wender is weary as now.

But she saw that the Sending Boat heeded her words nothing, whereas it was not her blood that had awakened it, but Birdalone's.  Then cried out the witch:  O child, child! say the spell and come back to me! to me, who have reared thee and loved thee and hoped in thee!  O come back!

But how should Birdalone heed her prayer?  She saw the sax; and withal had her heart forgotten, her flesh might well remember.  She sat still, nor so much as turned her head toward the witch-wife.

Then came wild yelling words from the witch's mouth, and she cried: Go then, naked and outcast!  Go then, naked fool! and come back hither after thou hast been under the hands of the pitiless!  Ah, it had been better for thee had I slain thee!  And therewith she whirled the sax over her head and cast it at Birdalone.  But now had the boat turned its head toward the ness of Green Eyot and was swiftly departing, so that Birdalone but half heard the last words of the witch-wife, and the sax fell flashing into the water far astern.

There the witch stood tossing her arms and screaming, wordless; but no more of her saw Birdalone, for the boat came round about the ness of Green Eyot, and there lay the Great Water under the summer heavens all wide and landless before her.  And it was now noon of day.

 Here ends the First Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is called Of the House of Captivity.  And now begins the Second Part, which is called Of the Wondrous Isles.

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_01]

THE SECOND PART: OF THE WONDROUS ISLES

CHAPTER I. THE FIRST ISLE

So glided Birdalone over the lake and was come forth from the House of Captivity; it might well be that she was but swimming unto death; naked as she was, fireless, foodless, and helpless, at the mercy of mere sorcery.  Yet she called to mind the word of the wood-mother that they should meet again, and took heart thereby; and she was glad in that she had had her will, and shaken off the guile and thraldom of the witch.  Much she thought of the wood-mother, and loved her, and wondered had she yet sought into and seen her welfare by the burning of a hair of that tress of hers; and therewith she looked on that tress of Habundia's hair and kissed it.

All day the Sending Boat sped on, and she saw no land and nought to tell of.  It was but wave and sky and the familiar fowl of the lake, as coot, and mallard, and heron, and now and then a swift wood-dove going her ways from shore to shore; two gerfalcons she saw also, an osprey, and a great ern on his errand high up aloft.

Birdalone waked in her loneliness till the day was spent, and somewhat worn of the night; then she fell asleep for weariness; but so it was, that before dusk she had deemed that a blue cloud lay before her in the offing which moved not.

She slept the short night through, and was awakened by the boat smiting against something, and when her eyes opened she saw that she was come aland and that the sun was just risen.  She stood up, and for the first minute wondered where she was, and she beheld her nakedness and knew not what it meant; then she loosened her hair, and shook its abundance all about her, and thereafter she turned her eyes on this new land and saw that it was fair and goodly.  The flowery grass came down to the very water, and first was a fair meadow-land besprinkled with big ancient trees; thence arose slopes of vineyard, and orchard and garden; and, looking down on all, was a great White House, carven and glorious.  A little air of wind had awakened with the sunrise, and bore the garden sweetness down to her; and warm it was after the chill of the wide water.  No other land could she see when she looked lakeward thence.

She stepped ashore, and stood ankle-deep in the sweet grass, and looked about her for a while, and saw no shape of man astir.  She was yet weary, and stiff with abiding so long amongst the hard ribs of the boat, so she laid herself down on the grass, and its softness solaced her; and presently she fell asleep again.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_02]

CHAPTER II. BIRDALONE FALLETH IN WITH NEW FRIENDS

When she next awoke, the sun was not yet high, and the morning young, yet she stood upon her feet much refreshed by that short slumber. She turned toward the hill and the gay house, and saw one coming over the meadow to her, a woman to wit, in a shining golden gown, and as she drew nigh Birdalone could see that she was young and fair, tall, white-skinned and hazel-eyed, with long red hair dancing all about her as she tripped lightly and merrily over the greensward.

Now she comes up to Birdalone with wonder in her eyes, and greets her kindly, and asked her of her name, and Birdalone told it all simply; and the new-comer said:  What errand hast thou hither, that thou art come thus naked and alone in this ill-omened ferry?  Birdalone trembled at her words, though she spake kindly to her, and she said: It is a long story, but fate drave me thereto, and misery, and I knew not whither I was bound.  But is there no welcome for me in this lovely land?  I lack not deftness wholly; and I will be a servant of servants, and ask no better if it must be so.  Said the new-comer: Unto that mayst thou come, but sore will be thy servitude.  I fear me thy welcome here may be but evil.  Said Birdalone:  Wilt thou not tell me how so?  Quoth that lady:  We know thy ferry here, that it is the craft wherein cometh hither now and again the sister of our lady the Queen, into whose realm thou art now come, and who liveth up in the white palace yonder, and whom we serve.  And meseems thou wilt not have come hither by her leave, or thou wouldst be in other guise than this; so that belike thou wilt be the runaway of thy mistress. Wherefore I fear that thou wilt be sent back to thy said mistress after a while, and that that while will be grievous to thee, body and soul.

Birdalone's heart sank, and she was pale and trembling; but she said: O dear lady, might I then depart as I have come hither, without the wotting of this Queen! after thou hast given me a morsel of bread, for I am hungry.  Said the gold-clad one, looking on her pitifully: Nay, maiden, I cannot choose but bring thee before our mistress, whereas most like she hath already seen thee from above there.  For she is far-sighted beyond the wont of folk who be more manlike.  But as for the bread, see thou!  I have brought a manchet in my pouch, and cheese withal, as I came hurrying; for I thought, she will be hungry.  And she reached the victual out to her.  And Birdalone took it and kissed the golden lady's hands, and she might not refrain her tears, but wept as she ate.

Meanwhile the golden lady spake unto her and said:  Nevertheless, thou poor maiden, somewhat may be done for thine helping, and I will presently speak to my sisters thereon, who are, both of them, wiser than I.  Sisters by blood are we not, but by love and fellowship. And I doubt not but that as we go up into the house we shall happen upon them in the garden.  But now I look upon thee, how fair a woman art thou!

Thou art kind and friendly, said Birdalone, smiling amidst of her tears, might I know by what name to call so dear a woman?  Thou shalt call me Aurea, said the other; and my next sister is Viridis, and the third, Atra; for that is according to the hues of our raiment, and other names we have not now.  And lo! here cometh Viridis over the meadow.

Birdalone looked, and saw a woman coming toward them clad all in green, with a rose-wreath on her head.  And she drew nigh, and greeted Birdalone kindly, and she also was a very beauteous woman; not great of body, whereas Aurea was tall and big-made, though excellently shapen.  Light brown and goodly waved of hair was Viridis, her eyes brown, and rather long than great; her lips full and ruddy, her cheeks soft and sweet and smooth, and as rosy-tinted pearl; her hands small and delicate of fashion; her whole body soft- shapen as an egg; a kind, wheedling look her face bore.

When she had looked a while on Birdalone, she kissed her, and said: I would thou wert happier, for thou art beauteous, and all but the evil must love thee.  Therewith she drew a cate from her pouch, and said:  Eat somewhat, for thou wilt be hungry; and let us go meet our other sister, who is wiser than we.

So they went, all three of them, and came from off the meadow on to the garden-slopes, and at the entry thereof was come Atra to meet them; she was clad all in black, a tall, slim woman, with the grace of the willow-bough in the wind, with dark plenteous hair and grey hawk-eyes; her skin privet-white, with but little red in her cheeks. She also greeted Birdalone kindly, but sadly withal.  She gave her strawberries to eat laid on a big kale-blade; and she said:  Sisters, here are we hidden by the trees, and cannot be seen from the house; therefore we may sit here for a minute or two, while we talk together as to what may perchance be done for the helping of this unhappy maiden, who is so fair and lovely, and hath strayed into so ugly a trap.  Then she said to Birdalone:  Thou must know, poor wanderer, that this Queen, our mistress, who is sister to the Witch Under the Wood, is big and strong, well-made, and white-skinned, so that she deems herself a Queen of all beauty:  keen-eyed is she to see a fly where others would see nought smaller than a coney; fine-eared withal; wise in wizardry; not altogether dull-witted, though she be proud, and crueller than the cruellest.  But herein she faileth, that her memory is of the shortest for matters of the passing hour, albeit she remembers her spells and witch-songs over well.  But other matters will scarce abide in her head for four and twenty hours. Wherefore, sisters, if we may keep this maiden out of her sight (after she hath seen her and given doom upon her) till the dead of to-morrow night, we may perchance do some good for her; and it is in my mind that then she may do good for us also.

Now they rejoiced in this word of Atra the wise; and Atra prayed Birdalone to tell them somewhat more of her story; and she told them much; but, whyso it were, she said nought concerning the wood-wife, whose outward semblance was the same as hers.  Then they pitied her, and caressed her; but Atra said:  We must tarry here no more, but go straight up to the lady, or maybe we shall lose all.

So they went their ways and came into the pleasance, and trod the sweet greensward betwixt the garland flowers and the beauteous trees; which now indeed, though Birdalone saw them all clear and over-clear, were become nought to her.  Those three also spake gently to her, and now and then asked her somewhat, as if to show her that she was one of themselves; but she spake not, or answered at random, and to say sooth scarce heard their words:  forsooth she was now become heart- sick, and was half dead for fear; and her nakedness, which would have troubled her little across the water, was now grown a shame and a terror unto her, and every deal of her body quivered with the anguish thereof.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_03]

CHAPTER III. BIRDALONE IS BROUGHT BEFORE THE WITCH-WIFE'S SISTER

So came they at last to the very house, and whereas it stood high on the bent, a great stair or perron of stone went up to it, and was of much majesty.  They went through the porch, which was pillared and lovely, and into a great hall most nobly builded, and at the other end thereof, on a golden throne raised upon a dais, sat a big woman clad in red scarlet.  The three damsels led Birdalone to some four paces of the great lady, and then stood away from her, and left her standing there alone, the scarlet-clad woman before her; on the right and the left the tall pillars going up gleaming toward the roof, and about her feet the dark polished pavement, with the wallowing of strange beasts and great serpents and dragons all done on the coal- blue ground.

When she was so left alone, at first she tottered, and went nigh to falling; but then came back some little heart to her, as she said to herself that now she should verily die once for all, and that no long while would be the passing from life into death.  She looked up and beheld the lady-witch, that she was somewhat like to her sister, white-skinned and of plenteous golden-hair as was she, but younger of aspect, and nowise so ill-looked as that other had now become; for somewhat well-shapen of body she was; but her face forbidding; her lower lip thrust out, her cheeks flaggy and drooping, her eyes little more than half open; to be short, a face both proud, foolish, and cruel; terrible indeed, sitting in judgment in that place on a shrinking naked creature.

Now she spake; and if there were no majesty or solemnity in the voice, there was ugly glee and malice therein; but she said to those damsels:  Is this the woman that my keen eyes beheld come aland from my sister's Sending Boat e'en now?  Aurea knelt on one knee, and said:  Yea, so please you, my lady.

Then said the witch:  Ho thou!  Wilt thou plead some errand hither from my sister?  Dost thou deem me so witless as not to know that if she had sent thee hither thou wouldst not have come in this plight? Nay, I know; thou hast stolen thyself from her:  thou art a thief, and as a thief shalt thou be dealt with.

Spake Birdalone in a clear voice:  No errand do I feign from thy sister, lady:  when I could bear my life there no longer, I took occasion to flee from her:  this is all the tale.  Yet once and again it hath been in my mind that it was thy sister who stole me from them that loved me.

Hah, thrall! said the lady, thou art bold; thou art over-bold, thou naked wretch, to bandy words with me.  What heed I thy tale now thou art under my hand?  Her voice was cold rather than fierce, yet was there the poison of malice therein.  But Birdalone spake:  If I be bold, lady, it is because I see that I have come into the House of Death.  The dying may well be bold.

The House of Death! cried the stupid lady; and wilt thou call my noble house the House of Death?  Now art thou no longer bold, stripped thrall, but impudent.

Scorn rose into Birdalone's heart at this word, but she refrained her, and spake:  I meant that I have stirred the wrath in thee, and that thou wilt slay me therefor; and that it availeth not to crave mercy of thee.

Laughed the lady:  Thou art a fool, thrall, said she; if a sparrow fled hither from my sister, I should not wring its neck, but keep it for her.  So shall I do with thee.  I shall not slay thee, and so destroy my sister's chattel; nor shall I spoil thee, and spoil her possession.  I shall send thee back unto her, the stolen thrall in the stolen boat, when I have learned thee a lesson here.  Forsooth it was for that cause meseemeth that she let thee slip through her fingers, for she is wise enough to have stayed thee from this holiday had she willed it.  But she is tender-hearted, and kind, and soft, and might well deem that if thy chastisement were done to her hand here, it were better done than by her mercy.  Now, thrall, I have spoken enough to thee, or more than enough:  get thee back out of earshot!

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_04]

CHAPTER IV. OF THE WITCH'S PRISON IN THE WAILING-TOWER

Birdalone did as she was bidden, and the witch called unto her Atra, who came and stood humbly on the footpace beside her, and held converse with her mistress a while.  Then she went backward from her a little, and then came to Birdalone, and in a somewhat harsh voice bade her come with her.  Birdalone followed her, quaking, and they came out of the hall and into a long passage, which led to a wide stair winding round a newel; and all was builded exceeding fair, had Birdalone's heart suffered her eyes to see it; but her flesh was weak, and quaked before the torment to come, so that her knees well- nigh failed her.

But now Atra lays a hand kindly on her shoulder and stays her, and says:  Now meseems the walls of the Wailing-Tower, for so it hight, have no ears to hear, and we may talk together.  Wottest thou why I have brought thee hither?  Said Birdalone in a faint voice:  Hast thou been bidden to whip me?  And if I had been so bidden, dear maiden, said Atra laughing, nowise would I do it.  Hold up thine heart!  For all hath gone well so far, and now meseems betwixt us three we shall save thee.

Birdalone's spirit came back to her at that word, and she put her hands to her face and fell a-weeping.  But Atra was kind to her and made much of her; and she kissed her and wiped her tears, and Birdalone smiled again amidst her sobs, and she thanked Atra; who said to her:  First of all I must tell thee that I am taking thee to prison by the witch's bidding.  Yea, said Birdalone, and what is prison?  Said Atra:  A prison is a grim place where poor folk who have done that which pleaseth not rich folk are shut up, that they may be grieved and tormented by not being able to fare abroad, or go where they would; and by suffering whatsoever their masters may lay upon them, as darkness, and cold, and hunger, and stripes.  Somewhat so, or worse, our lady would have it for thee; but so would not we. Therefore for thee shall this prison be a place where thou shalt be safe till we may bring thee forth when the night hath worn towards its ending.  For she will have forgotten thee by to-morrow; and this she knoweth; wherefore just now, when thou stoodest out of earshot, she was bidding me, amongst other matters, to bring thee before her to-morrow morning, and tell her the tale of thee, that she might call it to mind then what she had will to this morning.

Yea, said Birdalone, but will she not remember that she hath given thee a charge concerning me?  But little thereof, said Atra, and with a few words I may easily confuse her memory so that speech thereon will fail her.  Keep up thine heart, sweetling; but let us up this stair now forthwith, for I were fain to have thee hid away in this prison, and then will I down to her and tell her that thou art lying therein in all misery and terror, lest it come into her head to send for thee ere her memory is grown dim.

Again did Birdalone take heart, and they hastened a long way up the stair, till Atra stayed at last at a door all done with iron, endlong and over-thwart.  Then she took a leash of keys from her girdle, one big and two little, and set the big one in the lock and turned it, and shoved the heavy door and entered thereby a chamber four-square and vaulted; and the vault was upheld by a pillar of red marble, wherein, somewhat higher than a man's head, were set stanchions of latten, that could be clasped and unclasped.  This chamber was in a way goodly, but yet grim to look on; for the walls were all of black ashlar stone close-jointed, and the floor black also, but of marble polished so wholly that it was as dark water, and gave back the image of Birdalone's dear feet and legs as she went thereon.  The windows were not small, and the chamber was light in every corner because of them, but they were so high up under the vaulting that none might see thereout aught save the heavens.  There was nought in the chamber save a narrow bench of oak and three stools of the same, a great and stately carven chair dight with cushions of purple and gold, and in one corner a big oaken coffer.

Now spake Atra:  This is our lady's prison, and I fear me we cannot make it soft for thee, dear stranger.  Yea, I must tell thee (and she reddened therewith) that it is part of my charge to set thee in irons.  Birdalone smiled on her, and was over weary to ask what that meant, though she knew not.  But Atra went to the big coffer and opened it and thrust in her hands, and there was a jangling therewith, and when she turned about to Birdalone again she had iron chains in her hands, and she said:  This shameth me, dear friend; yet if thou wouldst wear them it might be well, for she may have a mind to go visit her prison, and if she find thee there unshackled she shall be wroth, and oftenest her wrath hath a whip in its hand.  And these are the lightest that I might find.

Birdalone smiled again, and spake not, for she was very weary, and Atra did the irons on her wrists and her ankles; and said thereafter: Yet bear in mind that it is a friend that hath the key of these things.  And now I will go away for a little, but I shall be on thine errands; for first I shall tell the mistress that thou art lying here shackled and in all wanhope; and next, by the will and command of her, I am to see that thou be well fed and nourished to-day that thou mayst be the stronger for to-morrow.  Now if I may give thee rede, it is that thou forbear to open the coffer yonder; for ugly things shalt thou find there, and that may dishearten thee again.

Therewith she kissed her kindly on the cheek and went her ways, and the great key turned in the lock behind her.

There then was Birdalone left to herself; and she was over weary even to weep; true it is that she made a step or two towards the coffer, but reframed her, and took two of the pillows from the great chair and turned aside into the other corner, her chains jingling as she went.  There she laid herself down, and nestled into the very wall- nook, and presently fell asleep, and slumbered dreamlessly and sweetly a long while.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_05]

CHAPTER V. THEY FEAST IN THE WITCH'S PRISON

Birdalone was awakened by the sound of the key in the lock, and the door opened, and there was Atra bearing dishes and platters, and behind her Viridis with the like gear, and beakers and a flagon to boot, and both they were smiling and merry.

Birdalone's heart leapt up to meet them, and in especial was she gladdened by the coming of Viridis, who had seemed to be the kindest of them all.

Viridis spake:  Now is come the meat for the dear sister, and it is time, for surely thou art famished, and it is now long past high noon.  Do off her irons, Atra.  Said Atra:  Maybe it were well to let the fetters abide on her ankles, lest the mistress should come; but for the wrists, reach out thine hands, wayfarer.  So did Birdalone, and Atra laid her things on the ground, and unlocked the hand- shackles, and did them off:  and meanwhile Viridis spread forth the banquet, partly on the floor, and partly on that ill-omened coffer. Then she went up to Birdalone and kissed her, and said:  Now shalt thou sit in our lady's throne, and we shall serve thee, and thou shalt deem thee a great one.

Nought else would they have, and Birdalone laid her nakedness on the purple cushions, and then they fell all three to the feast.  The victual was both plenteous and dainty, of venison and fowl, and cream and fruits and sweetmeats, and good wine they had withal:  never had Birdalone feasted in like manner, and the heart came back unto her, and her cheeks grew rosy and her eyes glittered.  But she said:  How if your lady were to come upon us here, and we so merry?  Said Atra: Out of the chair must thou when thou hearest the key in the lock, and then is all well, and she would have nought against us; for she herself bade us, and me in special, to keep thee company here, and talk with thee; and Aurea also would have been here, but that she is serving the lady as now.  Hath she then some pity on me, said Birdalone, that she hath bidden thee do by me what is most to my pleasure?

Laughed Viridis thereat, and Atra said:  She hath no pity, nor ever shall have; but so hard of heart is she, that she may not deem that we could love thee, a stranger, and unhappy, who can serve us in nowise; so she feareth not the abatement of thy grief from any compassion of us.  Rather she hath sent us, and me in especial, not to comfort thee, but to grieve thee by words; for she biddeth me tell thee fair tales, forsooth, of what to-morrow shall be to thee, and the day after; and of how she shall begin on thee, and what shall follow the beginning, and what thou mayst look for after that.  For by all this she deemeth to lower thy pride and abate thy valour, and to make every moment of to-day a terror to thy flesh and thy soul, so that thereby thou mayest thole the bitterness twice over.  Such is her pity for thee!  And yet belike this cruelty hath saved thee, for but for that she had not refrained her from thee to-day, and to- morrow thou shalt be far away from her.

Meanwhile, said Viridis, in her soft sweet voice, none of all these things will we talk over with thee, but things comfortable and kind; and we will tell each to each of our story.  Will we not, Atra?  Yea, verily, said she.

Birdalone looked upon them and said:  Wondrous is your compassion and loving-kindness unto me, and scarce do I know how to bear the burden thereof.  But tell me one thing truly; will ye not suffer in my place when this witch cometh to know that ye have stolen me away from her?

Nay, said Atra, I have told thee that by to-morrow she will have altogether, or at least almost, forgotten thee and thy coming hither. Moreover, she is foreseeing, and hath come to know that if she raise a hand against any of us three, it will lead her to her bane, save it be for heavy guilt clearly proven against us.  Forsooth, in the earlier days of our captivity such a guilt we fell into, and did not wholly escape, as Viridis can bear me witness.  But we are now grown wiser, and know our mistress better, and will give her no such joy.

Viridis cast her eyes down at those words and Atra's smile, and turned red and then pale, and Birdalone looked on her wondering what ailed her; then she said:  Do ye sisters work in the field and the garden?  I mean at milking the kine and the goats, and digging the earth, and sowing and reaping, and the like.  Nay, said Atra; either our mistress or someone else who is of marvellous might, hath so ordained, that here everything waxeth of itself without tillage, or sowing or reaping, or any kind of tending; and whatso we need of other matters the mistress taketh it for us from out of her Wonder- coffer, or suffereth us to take it for ourselves.  For thou must know that this land is one of the Isles of the Lake, and is called the Isle of Increase Unsought.

Meseemeth then, said Birdalone, were the mistress of you to gainsay you the gifts of the Wonder-coffer, ye were undone.  Yea, verily, said Atra; then would be but the fruits of the earth and the wild creatures for our avail, and these, we have not learned how to turn them into dinner and supper.  And they all laughed thereat; but Birdalone said:  See ye then how I was right to offer myself unto you as a servant, for in all matters of the house and the byre and the field have I skill.  But since ye would not or could not have me, I wonder not that ye be ill at ease here, and long to be gone, for as plenteous and lovely as the isle is, and though ye live here without present mishandling or pining.  For, sooth to say, ye have over you a tyrant and a fool.

Viridis answered:  Yet is there something else, dear friend, that whets our longing to depart.  Tell her thereof, Atra.

Atra smiled and said:  Simple it is:  there are they who long for us and for whom we long, and we would be together.  Said Birdalone:  Be these kinsfolk of yours, as fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, or the like?

Reddened Viridis again; but Atra spake, and she also blushed somewhat, though she smiled:  Those whom we love, and who love us, be not queans, but carles; neither be they of our blood, but aliens, till love overcometh them and causeth them to long to be of one flesh with us; and their longing is beyond measure, and they desire our bodies, which they deem far fairer than belike they be.  And they would bed us, and beget children on us.  And all this we let them do with a good will, because we love them for their might, and their truth, and the hotness of their love toward us.

Looked up Viridis thereat, and her eyes gleamed amidst the flushing of her cheeks, and she said:  Sister, sister! even in such wise, and no other, as they desire us do we desire them; it is no mere good will toward them from us, but longing and hot love.

Now must Atra blush no less than Viridis; yet she but said:  I have told thee hereof, Birdalone, because I deem that thou hast lived simply and without the sight of men; but it is what all know in the world of the sons of Adam.  Said Birdalone:  Thou sayest sooth concerning me.  Yet about this love have I learned somewhat even ere to-day, and now, as ye speak and I, meseems the lore of it comes pouring in on me and fills my heart with its sweetness.  And O, to have such love from any, and with such love to be loved withal!

Dear sister, said little Viridis, fear not; such as thou shall not fail of the love of some man whom thou must needs love.  Is it not so, sister Atra?  Said Atra:  Yea; such love shall come unto her as surely as death.

They were silent now a little, and it was as if some sweet incense had been burned within the chamber.  For Birdalone the colour came and went in her cheeks, her flesh quaked, her heart beat quick, and she was oppressed by the sweetness of longing.  More daintily she moved her limbs, and laid foot to foot and felt the sleekness of her sides; and tender she was of her body as of that which should one day be so sorely loved.

Now she spake timidly to the others, and said:  Each one of you then has a man who loves her, and longs for her and for none else?  So it is, said Viridis.  How sweet that shall be! said Birdalone; and now all the more I wonder that ye could trouble yourselves over me, or think of me once; and the kinder I think it of you.

Said Atra smiling on her:  Nay, now must the cat be out of the bag, and I must tell thee that thou art to think of us as chapmen who with our kindness would buy something of thee, to wit, that thou wouldst do an errand for us to those three lovers of ours.  Surely, said Birdalone, it were a little payment to set against your saving of my life and my soul; and had I to go barefoot over red gleeds I would do it.  And yet, if I may go hence to your lovers, why not all three of you along with me?

Said Atra:  For this reason; thy ferry, the Sending Boat, wherein ye came hither, is even somewhat akin to thy mistress and ours; and the mistress here hath banned it against bearing us; and now, were we so much as to touch it, such sore turmoil would arise, and such hideous noise as if earth and heaven were falling together; and the lady would be on us straightway, and we should be undone; and, as thou shalt hear presently, this hath been proved.  But thou, thou art free of the said ferry.  Forsooth I wot not why thy mistress banned it not against thee; maybe because she deemed not that thou wouldst dare to use it or even go anigh it.

Birdalone considered, and thought that even so it was; that the witch deemed that she would not dare use the Sending Boat, nor know how to, even if she came upon it, and that if she did so find it, she would sicken her of the road thereto.  So now she told her friends the whole tale thereof more closely than she had afore, save again what pertained to Habundia; withal she told every word of what her mistress had said to her at that time when she changed her into a hind.  And Viridis heard and wondered, and pitied her.  But Atra sat somewhat downcast a while.  Then she said:  However this may be, we will send thee forth to-morrow in the dawn, and take the risk of what may befall thereafter; and thou shalt bear a token for each of those three that love us.  For we deem that they have not forgotten aught, but are still seeking us.

Birdalone said:  Whatsoever ye bid me; that will I do, and deem me your debtor still.  But now I pray you, pleasure a poor captive somewhat more.  Wherein? said they both; we be all ready thereto. Said the maiden:  Would ye do so much as to tell me the tale of how ye came hither, and then how it hath been with you from your first coming until now?  With a good will, said Atra; hearken!

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_06]

CHAPTER VI. ATRA TELLS OF HOW THEY THREE CAME UNTO THE ISLE OF INCREASE UNSOUGHT

We were born and bred in the land that lies south-west along this Great Water, and we waxed happily, and became fellows when we were yet but children, and thus grew up dear friends into maidenhood and womanhood.  We were wooed by many men, but our hearts turned to none of them save unto three, who were goodly, kind, and valiant; and thou mayst call them the Golden Knight, who is Aurea's man; the Green Knight, who is man of Viridis; and my man, the Black Squire.  But in this was unhap, that because of certain feuds which had endured from old time, this love was perilous unto them and us; so that we lived in doubt and unrest.

Came a day, now three years ago, when the king of the whole land brought his folk into our lakeside country, and there held a court and a mote in a fair great meadow anigh to the water.  But even as the mote was hallowed, and the Peace of God proclaimed at the blast of the war-horn, came we three woeful ladies clad in black and knelt before the lord king, and prayed him hearken us.  And he deemed that we were fair, so he had compassion on us, and raised us up, and bade us speak.

So we told our tale, how that strife and wounds and death stood betwixt us and love; and we wept, and bewailed it, that our love must be slain because men were wroth with each other and not with us.

The king looked on us kindly, and said:  Who be the swains for whom these lovely damsels make such a piece of work?  So we named them, and said that they were there in the mote; and the king knew them for valiant men who had done him good service; and he cried out their names, and bade them stand forth out of the throng.  So forth they stood, the Golden Knight, the Green Knight, and the Black Squire (and he also was now a knight); but now were they all three clad in black, and they were unarmed, save for their swords girt to their sides, without which no man amongst us may come to the mote, be he baron or earl or duke, or the very lord king himself.

So the king looked upon us and them, and laughed and said:  Fair ladies, ye have got me by the nose, so needs must my body follow.  Do ye three knights, whom I know for valiant men and true, take each his love by the hand, and let the weddings be to-morrow.  Who then were joyful but us?  But even at the word the king spake arose great turmoil in the mote, for they smote the feud and contention awake, and men thronged forward against each other, and swords were drawn and brandished.  But the king arose in his place and spake long and deftly, and waxed exceeding wroth, while none heeded him nor hearkened.  And there stood our three men, who laid no hand to hilt, but abode heart-whole by seeming amid the tumult.  And lovely they were to look on.  At last the wise men and old barons went between, and by fair words appeased the trouble, and the mote grew hushed. Then spake the king:  What is this, my thanes?  I had deemed that my foemen were far away, and that ye that here are were all friends unto me and unto each other.  But now must we try another rede.  Therewith he turned unto our men and said:  Ye champions, are ye so much in love with Love that ye will fight for him?  They all yeasaid that, and then the king said:  Then do I declare that these three will hold the field against all comers from matins till high noon, and that he who vanquisheth any one of them shall have his lady and wed her if he will, and, if he will, shall ransom her.  And this field shall be foughten after two months' frist in these fair meadows, when I return from the outermost marches of the south, whereto I am now wending. But when the battle is done, then let all men bow to the judgment of God, whether he be well content or not, and this on peril of life and limb.  And now let there be deep peace between all men meanwhile; and if any break the peace, be he high or low, rich or unrich, churl or earl, I swear it by the souls of my fathers that he shall lose nought save his life therefor.

At these words was there a rumour of yeasay, and all men were content, save we three poor maidens, into whose hearts had now entered fear of loss and death.

But our kindreds on both sides were glad and proud, and they were not so bitter against us as they had been; they put hand to pouch, and let rear for us a fair pavilion of painted timber, all hung with silk and pictured cloths and Saracen tapestry, by the very lake-side; and gay boats gaily bedight lay off the said pavilion for our pleasure; and when all was done, it yet lacked a half month of the day of battle, and thither were we brought in triumph by the kindreds on a fair day of May, and there was not a sword or a spear amongst the whole company, and peaceful and merry was all by seeming.  But we were not suffered to meet our lovers all this while, from the time when the mote was.

Now on a day came a messenger on the spur, and did us to wit that the king would be with us on the morrow, and that the day after, the fateful field should be foughten.  Then, though the coming of this day had been so longed for by us, yet now it was at hand it cast us into all unrest and trouble, so that we scarce knew whether to go, or stand, or sit, or what to do with our bodies.  Our folk, and all other men withal, were so busy making ready for the morrow of to- morrow, that they left us alone to wear through the day as we might.

Now it was afternoon, and the day hot and hazy, and we stood on the very lip of the land wearied with hope and fear, and striving to keep good countenance to each other; and there came a boat unto the shore gaily painted and gilded, and bedight with silken cloths and cushions; and the steerer thereof was a woman, not young, by seeming of fifty winters; red-haired she was, thin-lipped and narrow-eyed, flat-breasted and strait-hipped; an ungoodly woman, though her skin was white and smooth as for her age.  Hast thou ever seen such an one, guest?  Said Birdalone, smiling:  Forsooth that have I; for such an one is my mistress to behold.

Well, said Atra, this dame stretched out her hands to us, and said: Will not the pretty ladies, the dear ladies, who have nought on hand this afternoon, come into my boat and look on the face of the water, so calm and fair as it is, and let their lovely hands go over the gunwale and play with the ripple, and so beguile this heavy time for a two hours; and then give a little gift of a piece or two of silver to a poor carline, who loveth all fair ladies and bright warriors, and who needeth a little livelihood?

Now the woman seemed nought lovely unto us, and to me forsooth she seemed hateful; but we looked on each other, and we found that we were utterly weary of going up and down on the meadow, and lying about in the pavilion, and it seemed as if this would give us a little rest; withal we saw not that the woman could do us any hurt, whereas we were three, and strong enough as women go; nor were we mariners so evil but that we might sail or steer a boat at a pinch. So we stepped into the boat straightway, and the woman sat aft and paddled deftly with the steering oar, and we glided away from the land.

Soon we were come so far that we could but just see our pavilion through the haze, which had somewhat thickened, and we said to the woman that she should go about and make for the shore, and that then we would go to and fro a while along by our stead.  She nodded yeasay, and began by seeming to dight the craft for return.  But therewith the haze was grown suddenly into a low cloud, which came down upon us from the south-west in the arms of a cold breeze, that grew stronger every minute, so no wonder it was though the steerer might not keep head to wind; and then who was afraid and ashamed save ourselves?

But the woman said, and there seemed to be a mock in her voice:  Ill luck, pretty ladies!  Now is there nought for it but to drive, if we would not drown.  But belike this duskiness will clear presently, and then at least we shall know whither we be going; and we may either turn back, or seek some other shelter, for I know the lake well; I know, I know.

We were too terror-stricken to speak, for we felt that still the wind grew stronger, and the lake began to rise into waves, and the craft to wallow; but well-nigh therewith was the dusk and the mist gone; the sky was bright blue overhead, and the westering sun shone cloudless; but on no land it shone, or on aught save the blue waters and the white wave-crests.

Then wept Aurea, and this Viridis here, but as to me, I grew wroth and cried out to the steerer:  Accursed carline! thou hast betrayed us; never now may we get back to our pavilion till the fight is foughten, and our lovers will deem that we have forsaken them, and we are shamed for ever.  Well, well, said the carline, what remedy save patience for the winds and waves?  And she laughed mockingly.  Quoth I:  There is this remedy, that we three arise and lay hands on thee, and cast thee outboard, save thou straightway turn the boat's head and back to the main.  Forsooth I doubt not but that as thou hast raised this foul wind against us, thou canst raise a fair wind for us.

Hearken to the lovely lady! quoth the carline, how she deemeth me to be none other than the great God himself, to hold the winds in the hollow of my hand, and still the waves with a word!  What! am I wrought somewhat after his image, kind ladies?  And she grinned horribly therewith.  Then she said again:  As to thy remedy, sweetling, meseemeth it nought.  For how shall ye sail this stormy water when your captain is gone, and ye but holiday sailors belike?

As she spake, a great wave came up from the windward, and brake over us, and half filled the craft, and lifted her bows up towering, and then down we went into the trough; and I sat cowed and quaking, and spake never another word.

Now began the sun to sink, and the wind abated, and the sea went down, but the boat sped on as swift as ever over the landless waters.

Now the sun was down, and dusk was at hand, and the carline spake, and drew a bright-gleaming sax from under her raiment:  Damsels, I warn you that now it were best that ye obey me in all things; for though ye be three and I one, yet whereas I have here an edge-friend, I may take the life of any one of you, or of all three, as simply as I could cut a lamb's throat.  Moreover it will serve you better in the house whereto ye are wending, that I make a good tale of you rather than a bad.  For the mistress of that house is of all might; and I must say it of her, though she is my very sister, yet she is not so sweet-tempered and kind of heart as I am, but somewhat rough and unyielding of mood, so that it is best to please her.  Wherefore, maidens, I rede you be sage.

Our unhappy hearts were now so sunken in wan-hope, that we had no word wherewith to answer her, and she spake:  Now obey ye my bidding and eat and drink, that ye may come hale and sound to your journey's end, for I would not give starvelings to my dear sister.  Therewith she brought forth victual for us, and that nought evil, of flesh and bread, and cheese and cakes, and good wine withal; and we were hunger-weary as well as sorrow-weary; and hunger did at that moment overcome sorrow, so we ate and drank, and, would we, would we not, something of heart came back to us thereby.  Then again spake the carline:  Now my will is that ye sleep; and ye have cushions and cloths enough to dight you a fair bed; and this bidding is easy for you to obey.  Forsooth, so weary were we with sorrow, and our hunger was now quenched, that we laid us down and slept at once, and forgat our troubles.

When we awoke it was after the first dawn, and we were come aland even where thou didst this morning, guest.  And thou mayst deem it wondrous, but so it was, that close to where our boat took land lay the ferry which brought thee hither.

Now the carline bade us get ashore, and we did so, and found the land wondrous fair, little as that solaced us then.  But she said unto us: Hearken! now are ye come home; and long shall ye dwell here, for never shall ye depart hence save by the will of my sister and me, wherefore, once more, I rede you be good, for it will be better for you.  Go forth now unto yonder house, and on the way ye shall meet the Queen of this land, and ye have nought to do but to say to her that ye are the Gift; and then shall she see to your matter.

Therewith she gat into her own craft, the Sending Boat, and therein did the deed and spake the words ye wot of, and was gone north-away; and when we turned to seek for our boat wherein we had come hither, it was gone.

We stood miserably for a while on the lip of the land, and then I said that we might as well go meet our fate as die there of grief and hunger.  So we went, and came into those fair gardens, and as we went slowly up toward the house came on us a woman clad in red scarlet and grandly dight.  A big woman she was, and like to her that beguiled us, but far younger and fairer of favour, foolish and proud of visage.  She stared on us, and seemed half afeard of us at first, but asked us what we were, and I answered that we were the Gift.  The Gift? said she, what meaneth that?  Will ye obey me in all things? If ye gainsay it, ye will perish, unless ye can eat grass; for on this isle everything cometh from my hand.

What might we do?  We all knelt down before her, and swore to do her will.  Then she said, after she had stared on us a while:  Now I know:  ye are they of whom my sister spake, that she would fetch me a gift of a leash of damsels for my service.  Now I take the Gift and thank her good heart.  But if ye would do my will, then . . .  But she broke off here and stared at us a long while, and then she said: Now I know; she bade me treat you well, and hold my hand from you, or evil would come of it, belike at last my bane.  So go ye home to the house, and I will give you meat and drink, and show you my stores and the Wonder-coffer, and ye shall serve me in honour.

Even so did we; and we ate and drank and rested, and nought we lacked, save leave to depart home to our lovers, and some mistress better than this stupid and proud lump of flesh.  But the next morning when we came before the lady, she knew nought of what we were; and again we had to tell her that we were the Gift, and again she glared at us balefully, and again she called to mind her sister and her rede concerning us.  And this went on for many days, till at last she got to know what we were; and she followed her sister's rede in that she never mishandled us, though we could see that it irked her to forbear, nor did she speak to us more roughly than her fool's wont was; and we had in our hands all that was needed for our sustenance, and lived easily enough.

Now our coming hither betid three years ago, and a month thereafter comes thy witch hither in her ferry, and she greeted us when we met, and asked us, grinning, had she not been kind to win us such good days?  Yea, and over kind, said she, ye would deem me, knew ye what would have betid you save for my good word.  Forsooth we deemed it no kind deed to steal us from our lovers; but we kept good tongues in our heads, for thralls must needs kiss the rod.

She went away in two days, but came again many times thereafter, till we won the secret of the Sending Boat, and her spell therewith; but we knew not that was banned against us.  Wherefore on a day in the grey of the morning, when we had been on this isle somewhat less than a year, we went down to it and stepped in, and reddened stem and stern and said the spell-words.  But straightway arose an hideous braying and clatter, and thunder came therewith, and trembling of the earth, and the waters of the lake arose in huge waves; nor might we move from our seats in the boat till the two witches came running down to us, and haled us out ashore, and had us up into the house, and into this very prison-chamber, wherein we are now sitting so merry.  And here we bore what was laid upon us, whereof, dear guest, we shall tell thee nought.  But this came of it, that never thereafter durst we try the adventure of the Sending Boat, but have lived on in lazy sorrow and shameful ease, till thou, dear guest and sister, wert sent hither by heaven for our helping.

Now what became of the king's court, and the hazelled field of our champions, we wot not, or whether they be yet alive we cannot tell thee; but if they be alive, it is to them that we would have thee do our errand, and thereof will we tell thee closely to-morrow.  And so, sweetling, an end of my tale.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_07]

CHAPTER VII. THE THREE DAMSELS TAKE BIRDALONE OUT OF THE WITCH'S PRISON

Birdalone thanked Atra much for her tale, and strange it was to her to hear of such new things and the deeds of folk; but the dealing of the witches with those three was familiar to her and was of her world.

Now they talked merrily, till there came a footstep to the door and one without knocked.  Viridis paled thereat, and a pang of fear smote Birdalone, and she swiftly got from out the chair and sat down on a stool; but when Atra opened, it was but Aurea come from her service to bid Atra take her place.  So she went, and again was there pleasant converse betwixt Aurea and the other twain; and certain matters did Aurea tell Birdalone which had been left untold by Atra. And chiefly, when Birdalone asked if any other folk had come into the isle while they dwelt there, she said yea; once had come a knight with a lady, his love, fleeing from war and mishap, and these had the witch overcome by wizardry, and destroyed them miserably:  and that again another had strayed thither, and him also the witch undid, because he would not do her will and lie in her bed.  Withal had come drifting there a young damsel, a castaway of the winds and waves; her the witch kept as a thrall, and after a while took to mishandling her so sorely, that at last, what for shame and what for weariness of life, she cast herself into the water and was drowned.  None of these folk might the damsels help so as to do them any good, though they tried it, and went nigh to suffer therefor themselves.

Now the day wore, and in a while Atra came back, and Viridis must serve.  At last the dusk and the dark was come.  Then said Atra:  Now must we twain begone to wait upon our lady, as the wont is:  and that is now for our good hap, for if we be with her all three, and especially, to say sooth, if I be with her, we may well keep her from visiting thee here; since belike she shall yet dimly remember that thou art in her prison.  Therefore thou must forgive it if I shackle thy wrists again.  And now if thou wilt follow my rede, thou shalt try to sleep some deal, and it were well if thou might'st sleep till we come for thee in the grey dawn.

Therewith they left her there, and she nestled in the corner once more, and there did verily fall asleep, and slept till the key in the lock and the opening door awakened her, and Atra came stealing soft- footed into the prison.  Eager she was and panting, and she kneeled before Birdalone and unlocked her leg-shackles, and then stood up and did the like by the irons on her wrists.  Then she said:  Look up, dear friend, to thy prison windows, and behold the dawn beginning to break on the day of thy deliverance, and ours maybe.  But come now at once:  and again, wilt thou pardon me, that we clothe thee not here for thy journey?  For from our own bodies must we clothe thee, and if by any hap our lady were to see any one of us more or less unclad, it might draw her on to see what was toward, and we might yet be found out, for our undoing.

Therewith she took her hand, and led her forth of the prison, and locked the door behind her; and then downstairs they went, and out-a- doors by a little wicket at the stair-end.  The dawn drew on apace now, and Birdalone saw at once the other twain lurking in the wall- nook hard by.  No word was spoken between them, and with noiseless feet they went forth into the orchard, where the blackbirds and thrushes were beginning their first morning song, and ere they came out on to the meadow the full choir of them was a-singing.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_08]

CHAPTER VIII. IN WHAT WISE BIRDALONE WAS CLAD, AND HOW SHE WENT HER WAYS FROM THE ISLE OF INCREASE UNSOUGHT

When they were all clear of the orchard trees the three damsels kept Birdalone between them closely, so that her white body should not be seen if the lady were awake and looking forth.  Thus they brought her to where a few thorn-bushes made a cover for them close to the water's edge, some twenty yards from the Sending Boat.  There they stood together, and Atra said:

Now, dear guest, and dearest messenger, it is our matter to clothe thee from our very bodies; and do thou, Viridis, begin.

Viridis came forward blushing, as her wont was, and took off her green gown and laid it on the grass; then she set her hand to her smock, and did it off, and stood naked, knee set to knee, and swaying like the willow branch; and then was seen all the dainty fashion of her body, and how lovely of hue and sweet of flesh she was.

But she said:  Dear sister Birdalone, here is my smock, which I lend thee, but as to my love, I give it thee therewith; therefore grudge it not, though thou give me back the linen, for happy will be the day to me when I have it again; for now none may do it on me save the Green Knight, my own love.  Therewith she gave her the smock, and kissed her, and Birdalone did it on, and felt the valianter and mightier when she had a garment upon her.

Then Aurea did off her golden gown, and stood in smock alone, so that her naked arms shone more precious than the golden sleeves that had covered them.  And she spake:  Birdalone, dear messenger, take now my golden gown, and send it back to me when thou hast found the man unto whom it is due; and think meanwhile that, when thou wearest it, thou wearest my love, and that when thou pullest it off, thou art clad with my love instead of it.

So Birdalone did on the gown, and became to look on as the daintiest of the queens of the earth; and she turned her head about to look on her gold-clad flanks, and wondered.

Thereafter Atra knit up her skirts into her girdle, and then did off her shoon, so that her slim feet shone like pearls on the green grass; and she said:

Birdalone, sweet friend! wilt thou be my messenger to bear these shoon to my Black Squire, and meanwhile put my love for thee under thy feet, to speed thee and to bear thee up?  Wherefore be good to me.

Birdalone then shod herself, and though pity it were to hide her feet from the eyes of Earth, yet felt she the stouter-hearted thereby, and her cheeks flushed and her eyes brightened.

Thereafter Aurea gave her withal a golden collar for the neck, and Viridis a girdle of silver well-wrought, and Atra a gold finger-ring set with a sapphire stone; and all these she did on her; but yet she knew that they were tokens to be delivered to the three lovers according as was due.

Then spake Atra:  Lo, sister, we pray thee to bear these lendings on thy body in such wise that when thou comest to the mainland they may be seen by knights seeking adventures, and that thou mayst answer to any who may challenge thee thereof and say that thou bearest this raiment and these jewels from Aurea and Viridis and Atra to Baudoin the Golden Knight, and to Hugh the Green Knight, and to Arthur the Black Squire.  And if thou deem that thou hast found these, then shall they tell thee a token, such as we shall tell thee, that they be truly these and none other; and thereafter, when thou art made sure, they shall take of thee the raiment, the gems, and the Sending Boat, and come hither if they may.  And God look to the rest!  But as for the token to be told aforesaid, we have determined that each of us shall tell thee privily what question thou shalt ask for her, and what answer thou must look for.

When she had done speaking, each came up to Birdalone and spake something into her ear amidst blushes enough forsooth.  And what they said will be seen hereafter.  Then again said Atra:  Now by this errand shall we be well paid for the care we have had of thee.  It may be, forsooth, that thou shalt not find our speech-friends; for they may be dead, or they may deem us untrue, and may have forsaken us and their land; and in any such case thou art free of our errand; but whatsoever may betide us, God speed thee!

Then Viridis drew forth a basket from under a bush, and said:  We know not how long thy voyage may be, but some little provision for the way we may at least give thee:  now wilt thou bear this aboard thyself; for we dare not touch thy craft, nay, nor come nigh it, no one of us.  And she set down the basket and cast her arms about her, and kissed her and wept over her; and the other twain, they also kissed her lovingly.  Birdalone wept even as Viridis, and said:  May ye do well, who have been so kind to me; but now am I both so glad and so sorry, that the voice of me will not make due words for me.  O farewell!

Therewith she took up her basket, and turned and went speedily to the Sending Boat; and they beheld her how she stepped aboard and bared her arm, and drew blood from it with the pin of her girdle-buckle, and therewith reddened stem and stern; and a pang of fear smote into their hearts lest their lady had banned it for Birdalone as for them. But Birdalone sat down on the thwart, and turned her face south, and spake:

 The red raven-wine now
 Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
 Awake then, awake!
 And the southward way take:
 The way of the Wender forth over the flood,
 For the will of the Sender is blent with the blood.

No cloud barred the gateway of the sun as she spoke; no wave rose upon the bosom of the lake; no clatter nor tumult was there; but the Sending Boat stirred, and then shot out swiftly into the wide water; and the sun arose as they looked, and his path of light flashed on Birdalone's golden gown for a moment, and then it grew grey again, and presently she was gone from before their eyes.

So they turned up into the orchard:  and now was Viridis of good cheer, and Aurea no less; but Atra lagged behind, and as she went, some passion took her, she knew not wherefore; her bosom swelled, her shoulders heaved therewith, and she wept.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_09]

CHAPTER IX. HOW BIRDALONE CAME TO THE ISLE OF THE YOUNG AND THE OLD

All went well with Birdalone when she had left the Isle of Increase Unsought, much as it had on her first voyage, save that now she was both clad and victualled, and her heart, if yet it harboured fear, was also full of new and strange hope; and oft, even as she sat there amidst the waste of waters, she wondered what new longing this was which wrought so sweet a pain in her, that it made her cheeks burn, and her eyes dim, and her hands and her limbs restless.  And then would she set her mind to her friends and their errand, and would hope and pray for them; but again would she fall to picture to herself what manner of men they were who were so sore longed for by those three beauteous women; and she deemed that since they were thus desired, they must be fairer even than her friends of the isle; and again the nameless longing overtook her, and held her till it wearied her into sleep.

When she awoke again the boat had stayed, and she was come aland; but the dawn was not yet come, and the night was moonless, yet was there light enough to see, from the water and the stars, that the bows of the boat were lying safe on a little sandy beach.  So she stepped out and looked around, and deemed she could see great trees before her, and imagined also dark masses of she knew not what.  So she walked warily up the said strand till she came on to soft grass, and smelled the scent of the clover as her foot-soles crushed it.  There she sat down, and presently lay along and went to sleep.

After a while she awoke, and felt happy and well at ease, and had no will to move:  the sun was shining brightly, but had not been up long:  the song of birds was all about her, but amidst it she deemed she heard some speech of man, though it were not like to what she had heard in her life before.  So she raised herself on her elbow, and looked up and saw a new thing, and sat up now, and beheld and wondered.

For there stood before her, gazing wide-eyed on her, two little children, some three winters of age, a man and a woman as it seemed. The man-child with light and fine white-golden hair, falling straight down and square over his brow, and blue-grey eyes which were both kind and merry, and shyly seeking as it were.  Plump and rosy he was, sturdy and stout-limbed.  No less fair was the woman; her hair golden-brown, as oft it is with children who grow up dark-haired, and curling in fair little rings all over her head; her eyes were big and dark grey; she was thinner than the lad, and somewhat taller.

These two babes had between them a milk-white she-goat, and had been playing with her, and now she turned her head to this and that one of them, bleating, as if to crave more of the game; but they had no eyes for her, but stood staring with might and main on the new-comer and her shining golden gown.

Birdalone laughed with joy when she saw the little ones, and a dim memory of the days of Utterhay passed before her:  she stretched out a hand to them, and spake softly and caressingly, and the little lad came forward smiling, and took her hand, and made as if he would help her up for courtesy's sake.  She laughed on him, and arose; and when she stood up, tall and golden, he seemed somewhat afeard of so big a creature, but stood his ground valiantly.  Then she stooped down to him and kissed him, and he naysaid her not, but seemed rather glad when it was over; but when Birdalone went to the little maid, and kissed her, the child clung to her as if she were her mother, and babbled to her.

Then comes the lad to her, and takes her hand, and would draw her away, and speaks to her in his prattle, and she understood him to mean that she should come with him to see the father.  So she went, wondering what should next betide; and the little maiden went on the other side of her, holding by a fold of her skirt.  Forsooth the goat followed bleating, not well pleased to be forgotten.

Now had Birdalone time to look about her, though the two babes fell to prattling with her in their way, and she thought it sweet to look down on the two little faces that looked up to her so pleased and merry.

She was in a grassy plain, somewhat over rough and broken to be called a meadow, and not enough be-timbered to be called a wood; it rose up a little and slowly as they left the water, but scarce so much as one might call it a hill.  Straight before her on the way that they were going went up into the air great masses of grey stone builded by man's hand, but looking, even from this way off, ragged and ruinous.  It may well be thought that Birdalone wondered what things might lie betwixt the trees and the towers.

Now as they went they came on other goats, who seemed tame, and these joined them to their fellow, and suffered the younglings to play with them.  Moreover there were rabbits great plenty scuttling in and out of the brakes and the rough ground upon the way, and the younglings beheld them, and the little lad said, after his fashion:  Why do the rabbits run away from us, and the goats follow us?  Now, sooth to say, Birdalone scarce knew why, and had no word ready for the child; but she said at last:  Mayhappen they will come to me; so it was once when I dwelt away from here.  Shall I go fetch thee one?  The little ones yeasaid that, though somewhat shyly and doubtfully.  Then said Birdalone:  Do ye, sweetlings, abide me here, and go not away.  They nodded their heads thereat, and Birdalone kilted her skirts and went her ways to some broken bushed ground, where was a many rabbits playing about; but she went not out of eye-shot of the babes.  Before she was well-nigh to the little beasts, she fell to talking to them in a low sweet voice, as had been her wont when she was little; and when they heard it, those who had not scuttled away at first glance of her, fell to creeping little short creeps one to the other, as their manner is when they be alone together and merry; and they suffered her to come quite amongst them, and crept about her feet while she stood, still talking unto them.  Then she stooped down and took up one in her arms and caressed it, and then laid him down and took up another, and so with three or four of them; and she fell to pushing them, and rolling them over with her foot; then she turned a little away from them toward the children, and then a little more, and the rabbits fell to following her, and she turned and took up one in her arms, and went straight on toward the children, but turning and talking to the rabbits now and again.

As to the babes, she saw the goats, of whom were now a dozen, or thereabouts, standing together in a kind of ring, and the little ones going from one to the other playing with them happily.  But presently the lad turned and saw her coming with her tail of little beasts, and he cried out a great Oh and ran toward her straightway, and the maiden after him; and he held out his arms to have the rabbit she bore, and she gave it to him smiling, and said:  Lo now! here be pretty playmates; but look to it that ye be soft and kind with them, for they are but feeble people.  So the younglings fell to sporting with their new friends, and for a little forgat both goats and golden lady; but the goats drew nigh, and stood about them bleating, nor durst they run at the rabbits to butt them, because of Birdalone and the little ones.

There then stood the slim maiden, tall and gleaming above her little flock; and her heart was full of mirth and rest, and the fear was all forgotten.  But as she looked up toward the grey walls, lo, new tidings to hand!  For she saw an old man with a long white beard slowly coming toward them:  she started not, but abode his coming quietly, and as he drew nigh she could see of him that he was big and stark, and, old as he was, not yet bowed with his many years.  He stood looking on this Queen and her court silently a while, and then he spake:  Such a sight I looked not to see on this Isle of the Young and the Old.  She said:  But meseemeth it is full meet that these younglings should sport with the creatures.  He smiled and said: Such a voice I looked not to hear on the Isle of the Young and the Old.

Birdalone became somewhat troubled, and said:  Am I welcome here? for if I be not, I will pray thy leave to depart.  He said:  Thou art as welcome as the very spring, my child; and if thou have a mind to abide here, who shall naysay thee?  For surely thou art young; nay, in regard to me thou art scarce older than babes.  All blessings be with thee.  But though thou art true and kind, as is clear to be seen by thy playing with these children and the landward beasts in peace and love, yet it may be so that thou hast brought hither somewhat less than peace.  And he smiled upon her strangely.

She looked somewhat scared at his last words, and said:  But how so? If I might I would bear nought but peace and happiness to any place. The old carle laughed outright now, and said:  How so, dear child? because ladies so sweet and lovesome as thou be sent by love, and love rendeth apart that which was joined together.

She wondered at his word, and was bewildered by it, but she held her peace; and he said:  Now we may talk hereof later on; but the matter to hand now is the quenching of thine hunger; for I will not ask thee whereby thou camest, since by water thou needs must have come. Wherefore now I bid thee to our house, and these little ones shall go with us, and the three of these horned folk whom we are wont to tether amidst the wrack and ruin of what once was fair; the rest have our leave to depart, and these nibblers also; for we have a potherb garden by our house, and are fain to keep the increase of the same for ourselves.  Birdalone laughed, and shook her skirts at the coneys, and they all scuttled away after the manner of their kind. Thereat the little lad looked downcast and well-nigh tearful, but the maid stamped her foot, and roared well-favouredly.

Birdalone did her best to solace her, and plucked a bough from a hawthorn bush far above the little ones' reach whereon was yet some belated blossom, and gave it to her and stilled her.  But the old man picked out his milch-goats from the flock (whereof was the white), and drave them before him, while the two babes went on still beside Birdalone, the little carle holding her hand and playing with the fingers thereof; the maiden sometimes hanging on to her gown, sometimes going loose and sporting about beside her.

So came they to where the ground became smoother, and there was a fair piece of greensward in a nook made by those great walls and towers, which sheltered it from the north.  The said walls seemed to be the remnant of what had once been a great house and castle; and up aloft, where was now no stair to come at them, were chimneys and hearths here and there, and windows with fair seats in them, and arched doors and carven pillars, and many things beautiful, but now was all ruined and broken, and the house was roofless and floorless: withal it was overgrown with ash-trees and quicken-beam, and other berry-trees and key-trees, which had many years ago seeded in the rent walls, and now grew there great and flourishing.  But in the innermost nook of this mighty remnant, and using for its lowly walls two sides of the ancient ashlar ones, stood a cot builded not over trimly of small wood, and now much overgrown with roses and woodbine. In front of it was a piece of garden ground, wherein waxed potherbs, and a little deal of wheat; and therein was a goodly row of bee- skeps; and all without it was the pleasant greensward aforesaid, wherein stood three great ancient oaks, and divers thorns, which also were ancient after their kind.

The elder led his guest into the cot, which had but simple plenishing of stools and benches, and a table unartful, and then went to tether his goats in the ruined hall of the house, and the children must needs with him, though Birdalone had been glad of one of them at least; but there was no nay, but that they must go see their dear white goat in her stall.  Howsoever all three came back again presently, the old carle with a courteous word in his mouth, and he took Birdalone's hand, and kissed it and bade her welcome to his house, as though he had been a great lord at home in his own castle. Therewith must the little ones also kiss her hand and be courteous; and Birdalone suffered it, laughing, and then caught them up in her arms, and clipped and kissed them well-favouredly; wherewith belike they were not over-well pleased, though the boy endured it kindly. Thereafter the elder set forth his banquet, which was simple enough: upland cheer of cream and honey, and rough bread; but sweet it was to Birdalone to eat it with good welcome, and the courtesy of the old man.

When they were done, they went out-a-doors, and Birdalone and the old man laid them down under an oak-tree, and the children sported about anigh them.  Then spake Birdalone:  Old man, thou hast been kind unto me; but now wouldest thou tell me about thee, what thou art, and what are these walls about us here?  Said he:  I doubt if I may do so, this day at least.  But belike thou shalt abide with us, and then some day the word may come into my mouth.  She held her peace, and into her mind it came that it would be sweet to dwell there, and watch those fair children waxing, and the lad growing up and loving her; yea, even she fell to telling up the years which would make him a man, and tried to see herself, how she would look, when the years were worn thereto.  Then she reddened at the untold thought, and looked down and was silent.  But the elder looked on her anxiously, and said:  It will be no such hard life for thee, for I have still some work in me, and thou mayst do something in spite of thy slender and delicate fashion.  She laughed merrily, and said:  Forsooth, good sire, I might do somewhat more than something; for I am deft in all such work as here ye need; so fear not but I should earn my livelihood, and that with joy.  Merry days shall we have then, said he.

But therewith her eye caught the gleam of her golden sleeve, and she thought of Aurea, and her heart smote her for her errand; then she laid her hand on her girdle and called to mind little Viridis, and the glitter of the ring on her finger brought the image of Atra before her; then she rose up and said:  Thou art kind, father, but I may not; I have an errand; this day must I depart from thee.  He said:  Thou hast broken my heart; if I were not so old, I would weep. And he hung adown his head.

She stood before him abashed, as if she had done him a wrong.  At last he looked up and said:  Must it be to-day?  Wilt thou not abide with us night-long, and go thy ways in the early morning?

Now she scarce knew how to gainsay him, so wretched as the old carle looked; so it came to this, that she yeasaid the abiding till to- morrow.  Then suddenly he became gay and merry, and he kissed her hand, and fell to much speaking, telling tales of little import concerning his earlier days.  But when she asked him again of how he came there, and what meant the great ruined house, then he became foolish and wandering, and might scarce answer her; whereas otherwise he was a well-spoken old carle of many words, and those of the grandest.

Then changed his mood again, and he fell to bewailing her departure, and how that henceforth he should have none to speak to him with understanding.  Then she smiled on him and said:  But yonder babes will grow up; month by month they will be better fellows unto thee. Fair child, he said, thou dost not know.  My days to come are but few, so that I should see but little of their waxing in any case. But furthermore, wax they will not; such as they be now, such shall they be till I at least see the last of them and the earth.

Birdalone wondered at this word, and the place seemed changed to her, yea, was grown somewhat dreary; but she said to the carle:  And thou, dost thou change in any wise, since these change not?  He laughed somewhat grimly, and said:  The old that be here change from old to dead; how could I change to better?  Yea, the first thing I had to do here was to bury an old man.  Quoth she:  And were there any children here then?  Yea, said he; these same, or I can see no difference in them.  Said Birdalone:  And how long ago is that?  And how camest thou hither?  His face became foolish, and he gibbered rather than spake:  No, I wot not; no, no, no, not a whit, a whit.  But presently after was he himself again, and telling her a tale of a great lady of the earl-folk, a baron's dame, and how dear he was unto her.  He lay yet on the grass, and she stood before him, and presently he put forth a hand to her gown-hem and drew her to him thereby, and fell to caressing her feet; and Birdalone was ashamed thereat, and a little angry.  He was nought abashed, but sat up and said:  Well, since thou must needs depart to-morrow, be we merry to-day.  And I pray thee talk much with me, fair child, for sweet and sweet is thy voice to hearken.  Then he arose and said:  Now will I fetch thee somewhat to eke the joy of us both.  And he turned therewith and went into the house.

Birdalone stood there, and was now perplexed and downhearted; for now the look of the elder scarce liked her, and the children began to seem to her as images, or at the best not more to her than the rabbits or the goats; and she rued her word that she would abide there the night through.  For she said to herself:  I fear some trap or guile; is the witch behind this also? for the old man is yet stark, and though he be foolish at whiles, yet may wizardry have learned him some guile.

With that cometh out the carle again, bearing a little keg and a mazer roughly wrought; and he came to Birdalone, and sat down, and bade her sit by him, and said to her:  Maybe I shall hear more of thy sweet voice when thy sweet lips have been in the cup.  Therewith he poured forth into the mazer, and handed it to Birdalone, and lo! it was clear and good mead.  She sipped thereof daintily, and, to say sooth, was well-pleased therewith, and it stirred the heart in her. But then she gave back the cup to the elder, and would no more of it. As for him, he drank what was left in the cup, looking over the rim thereof meanwhile; and then filled himself another, and another, and yet more.  But whereas it might have been looked for that his tongue should be loosened by the good mead into foolishness and gibbering, he became rather few-spoken, and more courteous and stately even than he had been at the first.  But in the end, forsooth, he was forgetting Birdalone, what she was, and he fell a-talking, always with much pomp and state, as if to barons and earls, and great ladies; till suddenly his head fell back, he turned over on his face, and all wit was gone from him.

At first, then, Birdalone was afraid that he was dead, or nigh unto death, and she knelt down and raised his head, and fetched water and cast it over his face.  But when she saw that he was breathing not so ill, and that the colour was little changed in his lips and cheeks, she knew that it was but the might of the mead that had overcome him. Wherefore she laid him so that he was easy, and then stood up and looked about her, and saw the children playing together a little way off; and nought else anigh her, save the birds in the brake, or flying on their errands eagerly from place to place.  Then, as it were, without her will being told them, her limbs and her feet turned her about to the shore where lay the Sending Boat, and she went speedily but quietly thitherward, her heart beating quick, for fear lest something should yet stay her, and her eyes glancing from brake to bush, as if she looked to see some enemy, old or new, come out thence.

So now her will was clear enough to her feet, and they brought her down to the water-side and the long strand, past which the wide water lay windless and gleaming in the hot afternoon.  Then lightly she stepped aboard, and awoke the Sending Boat with blood-offering, and it obeyed her, and sped swiftly on the way to the southward.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_10]

CHAPTER X. BIRDALONE COMES TO THE ISLE OF THE QUEENS

Birdalone awoke the next morning while the boat was yet speeding over the water, and the sun was up:  but she was hard on the land, which sat low and green, like a meadow exceeding fair, on the bosom of the water, and many goodly trees were sprinkled about the greenland.  But from amidst the trees, no great way from the water's edge, rose a great house, white and fair, as if it were new-builded, and all glorious with pinnacles, and tabernacles set with imagery.

Presently the boat's bows ran into the reed and rush at the brim of the water, and Birdalone stepped ashore without more ado, and the scent of the meadow-sweet amongst which she landed brought back unto her the image of Green Eyot that while agone.

But now when she was ashore the dread took hold of her again, and her knees trembled under her, so that she might scarce stand, so fearful was she of walking into some trap; especially when she beheld that goodly house, lest therein awaited her some proud and cruel lady, and no kind damsels to deliver her.

She looked about her, and saw in all the fair meadow neither man nor woman, nor draught-beast nor milch-beast, nought but the little creatures of the brake and the bent-grass, which were but as the blossoms thereof; and the birds running in the herbage or singing amidst the tree-boughs.

Then she thought that she must needs go forward, or belike her errand would not speed; that the Sending Boat might not obey her, unless she saw through the adventure to the end; so she went on toward the house quaking.

Soon was she at the porch of the white palace, and had seen no man nor heard any voice of men; much she marvelled, despite her dread, at the beauty of the said house, and the newness thereof; for it was as one flower arisen out of the earth, and every part of it made the beauty of the other parts more excellent; and so new it was, that it would have seemed as if the masons thereof had but struck their scaffold yesterday, save that under the very feet of the walls the sweet garden flowers grew all uncrushed.

Now comes Birdalone through the porch unto the screens of the great hall; and she stopped a little to recover her breath, that she might be the quieter and calmer amongst the great folk and mighty whom she looked to find therein.  So she gathered heart; but one thing daunted her, to wit, that she heard no sound come from that great and goodly hall, so that she doubted if it were perchance left desert by them who had been its lords.

She raised her hand to the door of the screen, and it opened easily before her, and she entered, and there indeed she saw new tidings. For the boards end-long and over-thwart were set, and thereat were sitting a many folk, and their hands were reached out to knife and to dish, and to platter and cup; but such a hush there was within, that the song of the garden birds without sounded to her as loud as they were the voices of the children of Adam.

Next she saw that all that company, from the great folk on the dais down to those who stood about the hall to do the service, were women, one and all; not one carle might she see from where she stood: lovely were they many of them, and none less than comely; their cheeks were bright, and their eyes gleamed, and their hair flowed down fair of fashion.  And she stood, and durst not move a long while, but expected when someone would speak a word, and all should turn their heads toward the new-comer.  But none moved nor spake. And the fear increased in her amidst that hush, and weighed so heavy on her heart, that at last she might endure it no longer, but fell swooning to the floor.

When she came to herself; and the swoon-dreams had left her, she saw by the changing of the sun through the hall-windows, that she had lain there long, more nearly two hours than one; and at first she covered her face with her hands as she crouched there, that she might not see the sight of the silent hall, for yet was it as hushed as before.  Then slowly she arose, and the sound of her raiment and her stirring feet was loud in her ears.  But when she was upright on her feet, she hardened her heart, and went forth into the hall, and no less was her wonder than erst.  For when she came close to those ladies as they sat at table, and her raiment brushed the raiment of the serving-women as she passed by, then saw she how no breath came from any of these, and that they neither spake nor moved, because they were dead.

At first, then, she thought to flee away at once, but again she had mind of her errand, and so went up the hall, and so forth on to the dais; and there again, close by the high table, she saw new tidings. For there was set a bier, covered with gold and pall, and on it was laid a tall man, a king, belted and crowned; and beside the said bier, by the head of the king, knelt a queen of exceeding goodly body, clad all in raiment of pearl and bawdekin; and her hands were clasped together, and her mouth was drawn, and her brow knit with the anguish of her grief.  But athwart the king's breast lay a naked sword all bloody; and this Birdalone noted, that whereas the lady was of skin and hue as if she were alive, the king was yellow as wax, and his cheeks were shrunken, and his eyes had been closed by the wakers of the dead.

Long Birdalone looked and wondered; and now if her fear were less, her sorrow was more for all that folk sitting there dead in their ancient state and pomp.  And was not the thought clean out of her head, that yet they might awake and challenge her, and that she might be made one of that silent company.  Withal she felt her head beginning to fail her, and she feared that she might swoon again and never waken more, but lie for ever beside that image of the dead king.

So then she refrained her both of fear and sorrow, and walked speedily down the hall, looking neither to the right nor left:  and she came forth into the pleasance, but stayed there nought, so nigh it seemed to that hushed company.  Thence came she forth into the open meadow, and sweet and dear seemed its hot sunshine and noisy birds and rustling leaves.  Nevertheless, so great was the tumult of her spirits, that once more she grew faint, and felt that she might scarce go further.  So she dragged herself into the shade of a thorn- tree, and let her body sink unto the ground, and lay there long unwitting.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_11]

CHAPTER XI. AND NOW SHE COMES TO THE ISLE OF THE KINGS

When Birdalone came to herself it was drawing toward the glooming, and she rose up hastily, and went down to the Sending Boat, for she would not for aught abide the night in that fearful isle, lest the flock of the hall should come alive and walk in the dusk and the dark.  She stepped aboard lightly, and yielded her blood to the pride of that ferry, and it awoke and bore her forth, and she went through the night till she fell asleep.

When she awoke it was broad day and the sun just arising, and lo! before her, some half mile off, an isle rugged and rocky, and going up steep from the shore; and then, held as it were by the fangs of the rocks and pikes of the higher land, was a castle, white, high, and hugely builded, though, because of the rock-land belike, it spread not much abroad.  Like to the lovely house of yesterday, it seemed new-builded; and, little as Birdalone knew of such matters, her heart told her that this new house was fashioned for battle.

She was downcast when she saw the isle so rugged and forbidding, but when the boat came aland in a stony bight, whence the ground went up somewhat steeply toward the heights, she went ashore straightway, and toiled up toward the white battlement.  Presently she found herself in a strait and rugged path betwixt two walls of rock, so that she lost sight of the castle a while, till she came out on to a level place which looked down from aloft on to the blue water, but all over against her close at hand were the great towers and walls.  She was worn by the rough road, and over helpless she felt her, and all too little to deal with that huge morsel of the world; and her valiancy gave way, and her trust in her errand.  She sat down on a stone and wept abundantly.

After a while she was amended, and she looked up and saw the huge hold, and said:  Yea, but if it were less by the half than it is, it would still be big enough to cow me.  Yet she stood not up.  Then she put forth a foot of her, and said aloud:  Sorely hath this rough road tried Atra's shoon and their goodly window-work; if they are to be known I must be speedy on my journey or go barefoot.

As she spoke she stood up, and the sound of her own voice frighted her, though nought noiseless was the place; for the wind was there, and beat to and fro the castle and the rock, and ran baffled into every corner of that market-place of nothing.  For in that garth was neither knight nor squire nor sergeant; no spear-head glittered from the wall, no gleam of helm showed from the war-swales; no porter was at the gate; the drawbridge over the deep ghyll was down, the portcullis was up, and the great door cast wide open.

Birdalone steeled her heart and went forward swiftly, and over the bridge, and entered the basecourt, and came without more ado to the door of the great hall, and opened it easily, as with the door of yesterday, looking to find another show like unto that one; and even so it fell out.

Forsooth the hall was nought light and lovely, and gay with gold and bright colours, as that other, but beset with huge round pillars that bore aloft a wide vault of stone, and of stone were the tables; and the hallings that hung on the wall were terrible pictures of battle and death, and the fall of cities, and towers a-tumbling and houses a-flaming.

None the less there also were the shapes of folk that moved not nor spake, though not so thronged was that hall as the other one; and it seemed as if men were sitting there at a council rather than a feast. Close by Birdalone's right hand as she entered were standing in a row along the screen big men-at-arms all weaponed, and their faces hidden by their sallets; and down below the dais on either side of the high table was again a throng of all-armed men; and at the high-table itself; and looking down the hall, sat three crowned kings, each with his drawn sword lying across his knees, and three long-hoary wise men stood before them at the nether side of the board.

Birdalone looked on it all, striving with her fear:  but yet more there was, for she deemed that needs must she go through the hall up to the dais, lest the Sending Boat deny its obedience.  Up toward the dais she went then, passing by weaponed men who sat as if abiding the council's end at the end-long tables.  And now, though no shape of man there spake or breathed, yet sound lacked not; for within the hall went the wind as without, and beat about from wall to wall, and drave clang and clash from the weapons hung up, and waved the arras, and fared moaning in the nooks, and hummed in the vault above.

Came she up to the dais then, and stood beside one of the wise men, and looked on the kings, and saw the mightiness which had been in them, and quaked before them.  Then she turned from them and looked down to the floor, and lo! there, just below the dais, lay a woman on a golden bier; exceeding fair had she been, with long yellow hair streaming down from her head; but now waxen white she was, with ashen lips and sunken cheeks.  Clad was she in raiment of purple and pall, but the bosom of her was bared on one side, and therein was the road whereby the steel had fared which had been her bane.

Now when Birdalone had gazed thereon a while, she deemed that if she tarried there long amidst those fierce men by the dead woman, she should lose her wit full soon, so sore the fear, held back, beset her now.  Wherefore she turned and went hastily down the hall, and out-a- doors, and over the bridge, and ran fleet-foot down the rocky way whereby she had come, till she could run no further, and lay down under a great stone breathless and fordone; yet her heart upheld her and suffered her not to swoon, belike because she had given her limbs such hard work to do.

There she lay awake and troubled for an hour or more, and then she fell asleep, and slept till the day was worn toward sunset, and nought meddled with her.  She arose and went to her ship somewhat downhearted, wondering how many such terrors should befall her; nay, whether the Sending Boat would so lead her that henceforth she should happen on no children of Adam but such as were dead images of the living.  Had all the world died since she left the Isle of the Young and the Old?

Howsoever, she had nought to do save to board her ferry, and content its greedy soul with her blood, and drive it with the spell-words. And thereafter, when it was speeding on, and the twilight dusking apace, she looked aback, and seemed to see the far-off woodland in the northern ort, and the oak-clad ridge, where she had met her wood- mother; and then it was as if Habundia were saying to her:  Meet again we shall.  And therewith straightway became life sweeter unto her.

Deepened then the dusk, and became night, and she floated on through it, and was asleep alone on the bosom of the water.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f2_12]

CHAPTER XII. OF BIRDALONE, HOW SHE CAME UNTO THE ISLE OF NOTHING

Long before sunrise, in the very morn-dusk, she awoke and found that her ferry had taken land again.  Little might she see what the said land was like; so she sat patiently and abode the day in the boat; but when day was come, little more was to see than erst.  For flat was the isle, and scarce raised above the wash of the leeward ripple on a fair day; nor was it either timbered or bushed or grassed, and, so far as Birdalone might see, no one foot of it differed in aught from another.  Natheless she deemed that she was bound to go ashore and seek out the adventure, or spoil her errand else.

Out of the boat she stepped then, and found the earth all paved of a middling gravel, and nought at all growing there, not even the smallest of herbs; and she stooped down and searched the gravel, and found neither worm nor beetle therein, nay nor any one of the sharp and slimy creatures which are wont in such ground.

A little further she went, and yet a little further, and no change there was in the land; and yet she went on and found nothing; and she wended her ways southward by the sun, and the day was windless.

At last she had gone a long way and had no sight of water south of the isle, nor had she seen any hill, nay, not so much as an ant-heap, whence she might look further around; and it seemed to her that she might go on for ever, and reach the heart of Nowhither at last. Wherefore she thought she would turn back and depart this ugly isle, and that no other adventure abided her therein.  And by now it was high noon; and she turned about and took a few steps on the backward road.

But even therewith it seemed as if the sun, which heretofore had been shining brightly in the heavens, went out as a burnt-down candle, and all was become dull grey over head, as all under foot was a dull dun. But Birdalone deemed she could follow a straight course back again, and so walked on sturdily.  Hour after hour she went and stayed not, but saw before her no glimpse of the northern shore, and no change in the aspect of the ground about her.

It had so happened that a little before she had turned to go back, she had eaten her dinner of a piece of bread and a morsel of cheese, and now as she stooped and peered on the ground, looking for some sign of the way, as her foot-prints going south, and had her eyes low anigh the earth, she saw something white at her feet in the gathering dusk (for the day was wearing), and she put her hand to it and lifted it, and found it a crumb of bread, and knew that it must have come from her dinner of' seven hours ago, whereas till that time her bread had lain unbroken in her scrip.  Fear and anguish smote her therewith, for she saw that in that dull land, every piece whereof was like every other piece, she must have gone about in a ring, and come back again to where she first turned to make for the northern shore.

Yet would she not cast aside all hope, but clad herself in her valiancy.  Forsooth she knew it availed nought to try to move on in the twilight; so she laid herself down on that waste, and made up her mind to sleep if she might, and abide the new day there, and then to strive with the way once more, for belike, she thought, it may be fair to-morrow, and the sun shining.  And as she was very weary with tramping the waste all day, she fell asleep at once, and slept the short night through.

But when she awoke, and saw what the new day was, her heart fell indeed, for now was she encompassed and shut in with a thick dark mist (though it seemed to be broad day), so that had there been aught to see she would not have seen it her own length away from her.  So there she stood, hanging her head, and striving to think; but the master-thought of death drawing nigh scattered all other thoughts, or made them dim and feeble.

Long she stood there; but suddenly something came into her mind.  She set her hand to the fair-broidered pouch which hung from Viridis' loin-girdle, and drew out thence flint and steel and tinder, which matters, forsooth, had served her before in the boat to make fire withal.  Then she set her hand to her head, and drew forth the tress of hair which Habundia had given her, and which was coiled up in the crown of her own abundant locks which decked her so gloriously; she drew two hairs from the said tress, and held them between her lips while she did up the tress in its place again, and then, pale and trembling, fell to striking a light, and when she had the tinder burning, she cried out:

O wood-mother, wood-mother!  How then may we meet again as thou didst promise me, if I die here in this empty waste?  O wood-mother, if thou mightest but come hither for my deliverance!

Then she burned the hairs one after another, and stood waiting, but nought befell a great while, and her heart sickened, and there she stood like a stone.

But in awhile, lo! there came as it were a shadow amidst the mist, or rather lying thereon, faint and colourless, and it was of the shape of the wood-mother, with girt-up gown and bow in hand.  Birdalone cried aloud with joy, and hastened toward the semblance, but came to it no nigher, and still she went, and the semblance still escaped her, and she followed on and on; and this lasted long, and faster and faster must she follow lest it vanish, and she gathered her skirts into her girdle, and fell to running fleet-foot after the fleeing shadow, which she loved dearly even amidst the jaws of death; and all her fleetness of foot had Birdalone to put forth in following up the chase; but even to die in the pain would she not miss that dear shadow.

But suddenly, as she ran, the mist was all gone from before her, the sun shone hot and cloudless; there was no shadow or shape of Habundia there, nought but the blue lake and the ugly lip of that hideous desert, with the Sending Boat lying a half score yards from her feet; and behind her stood up, as it were a wall, the mist from out of which she had come.

Forsooth Birdalone was too breathless to cry out her joy, but her heart went nigh to breaking therewith, and lovely indeed to her was the rippled water and the blue sky; and she knew that her wood-mother had sped a sending to her help, and she fell a-weeping where she stood, for love of her wise mother, and for longing to behold her: she stretched out her arms to the north quarter, and said blessings on her in a voice faint for weariness.  Then she laid her down on the desert, and rested her with sleep, despite the hot sun, and when she awoke, some three hours thereafter, all was as before, save that the sky had now some light-flying clouds, and still was the wall of mist behind her.  Wherefore she deemed she had yet time, and the blue rippling water wooed her much-besweated limbs; so she did off her raiment and took the water, and became happy and unweary therein. Then she landed and stood in the sun to dry her, and so, strengthened with that refreshing, clad her, and went aboard and did the due rites, and sped over the waters, and had soon lost sight of that ugly blotch on the fair face of the Great Water.

Here ends the Second Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is called Of the Wondrous Isles, and begins the Third Part of the said tale, which is called Of the Castle of the Quest.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_01]

THE THIRD PART: OF THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

CHAPTER I. BIRDALONE COMES TO THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

Empty was the day to Birdalone save for her thoughts, and she slept not a good while of the night.  When she awoke in the morning there was no land before her, and she began to fear somewhat that so it might be many days, and that she might have to fare the water landless, and perchance till she starved for hunger; for now was there but little victual left of that which the kind Viridis had given her.  So she wore the day somewhat uneasily, and by then night fell had eaten but little; yet was that little the last crumb and gobbet of her store.  Wherefore it is no wonder though she were dismayed when she awoke early on the morrow, and beheld nought before her save the landless water.

But about noon she deemed she saw a little cloud in the offing that moved not as the other clouds, and she watched it closely at first, and it changed not any the more, and she grew weary of watching it and strove to sleep, turning her head to the after part of her ferry; and thus betwixt sleeping and waking she wore away three hours:  then she stood up and looked ahead, and lo, the white cloud had taken shape, and was a white castle far away (for the day was exceeding clear), sitting, as it seemed, on the very face of the water.  The boat sped on swiftly thitherward, so that it was not right long ere Birdalone beheld the green shore on either side of the said castle, and at last, three hours before sunset, she was drawing nigh thereto, and beheld it all clearly, what it was.

It was brand-new, and was fair enough, builded part of stone and lime, part of framed work, but was but middling big.  As she drew nigher yet, she saw that there were folk on the walls of it, and they seemed to see her, for a horn was winded from the battlement, and folk were running together to somewhither.  And now was Birdalone come so near, that she saw the water-gate of the castle, and folk coming out thereby on to the landing-place; and she saw presently, that a very tall man with grizzled hair stood foremost of them, and he waved his hand to her, and spake something, but the wind bore the words away from her; yet she seemed to know that this folk would do her to wit that they would have none of her; and her heart died within her, so faint and hungry as she was.

Howsoever the ferry sped on its way swiftly, and in a minute or two had stayed itself at the landing-stair, whereabout were gathered a score of men, some armed some unarmed, and they seemed for the more part to be grey-headed and past middle-age.

Birdalone stood up in her craft, and the aforesaid tall grey man, who was unarmed, but clad in knightly raiment, stood on the stair and spake unto her, and said:  Lady, this is an house where women enter never since first the roof was done thereon, which forsooth was but a year ago.  We will pray thee therefore to turn thy boat's head away, and seek some other lodging by the water, either eastward or westward.

Little knew Birdalone of worldly courtesy, or she had made him a sharp answer belike; but she only looked on him ruefully, and said: Good warrior, I am come a long way, and may not turn back from mine errand; and I am now lacking victual and hungry, and if ye help me not, it is like that I shall die.  Much lieth on mine errand, if ye knew it.  She was weeping-ripe, but refrained her tears, though her lip quivered.  She stretched out her hands to the greybeard, and he looked on her and found her exceeding fair; and he deemed her to be guileless, both because of her simple speech and sweet voice, and the goodliness of her face and eyes.  But he said:  Lady, thine errand hath nought to do with it, it is thy womanhood that bars our door. For all we are bound by oath not to suffer a woman to abide in this castle till our lords take the bann off, and bid us open to women. She smiled faintly, and said:  If I might but see thy lords then, since thou art not master here.  He said:  They are away, and will not be back till to-morrow morning; and I wot not the hour of their return.  And yet, said he, I would we might help thee somewhat.  O I pray thee, I pray thee! she said, or mine errand will come to nought after all.

Therewith came another man down the stair, and stood by the old knight and plucked his sleeve, and fell to talk with him softly. This man was by his habit a religious, and was a younger man than the others, it might be of five and thirty winters, and he was fair of favour.  While they spake together Birdalone sat her down again, and was well-nigh spent.

At last the old man spake:  Damsel, he said, we deem we may suffer thee to enter the castle since thy need is so great, and have a meal's meat at our hands, and yet save our oath, if thou depart thence by the landward gate before sunset.  Will this serve thee? Fair sir, said Birdalone, it will save my life and mine errand; I may say no more words for my faintness, else would I thank thee.

She stood up on her feet, and the old man-at-arms reached out his hand to her, and she took it and came her ways up the stair, but found herself but feeble.  But the priest (forsooth he was chaplain of the castle) helped her on the other side.  But when she stood on the level stones by the water-gate, she turned to the old man and said:  One thing I will ask of thee, Is this place one of the Wondrous Isles?  The elder shook his head.  We know not the Wondrous Isles, said he; this castle is builded on the mainland.  Her face flushed for joy at the word, and she said:  One thing I will crave of thee, to wit, that thou wilt leave my barge lying here untouched till thy masters come back, and wilt give command that none meddle therewith.

He would have answered, but the priest brake in, and said:  This will he do, lady, and he is the castellan, and moreover he will swear to obey thee herein.  And therewith he drew forth a cross with God nailed thereon, and the castellan swore on it with a good will.

Then the priest drew Birdalone on, and between them they brought her into the great hall, and set her down in a chair and propped her with cushions.  And when she was thus at rest, she began to weep somewhat, and the castellan and the priest stood by and comforted her; for themseemed, despite her grief, that she had brought the sun into their house.

Next were victual brought unto her of broth and venison, and good wine and cates and strawberries; and she was not so famished but she might eat and drink with a good will.  But when she was done, and had rested a little, the castellan stood up and said:  Lady, the sun is gone off the western windows now, and I must save mine oath; but ere thou depart, I were fain to hear thy voice giving me pardon for my evil cheer and the thrusting of thee forth.  And therewith he put one knee to the ground, and took her hand and kissed it.  But Birdalone was grown merry again, and she laughed and said:  What pardon thou canst have of me, kind knight, thou hast; but now methinks thou makest overmuch of me, because I am the only woman who hath come into thy castle.  I am but a simple maiden, though mine errand be not little.

Forsooth she wondered that the stark and gruff old man was so changed to her in little space; for nought she knew as yet how the sight of her cast a hot gleed of love into the hearts of them who beheld her.

Now Birdalone arose; but the castellan knelt at her feet, and kissed her hand again, and again, and yet again.  Then he said:  Thou art gracious indeed.  But methinks the father here will lead thee out-a- gates; for he may show thee a lair, wherein thou shalt be safe enough to-night; and to-morrow may bring new tidings.

So the priest made obeisance to her and led her down the hall, and the castellan's eyes were following them till the screen hid them. The priest left her in the hall-porch a while, and went into the buttery, and came back with a basket of meat and drink, and they went forth at the great gate together, and there was the last of the sun before them.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_02]

CHAPTER II. OF BIRDALONE, AND HOW SHE RESTED THE NIGHT THROUGH IN A BOWER WITHOUT THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

On a fair smooth road went they amidst of a goodly meadow-land, wherein were little copses here and there.  When they were fairly out of the gate, the priest reached for Birdalone's hand, and she let him take it and lead her along thereby, thinking no evil; but he might scarce speak for a while, so great was the stir in his heart at the touch of her bare flesh.  But Birdalone spake and said:  Thou art kind, father, to lead me on my way thus.

He answered in a husky voice with his eyes cast down, and forsooth set on the feet of her:  It is not far that I am leading thee; there is a broken cot by the copse at the turn of the road yonder, where thou mayst abide to-night; it is better lodging than none, evil as it is for such an one as thou.  Birdalone laughed:  Worse have I had, said she, than would be the copse without the cot.  And she thought withal of the prison in the Isle of Increase Unsought.

Her voice seemed so cheery and friendly to the priest, that he shook off somewhat the moodiness of his desire, and looked up and said:  I shall tell thee, lady, that I suppose thou hast more errand with my lords than to crave lodging of them despite the custom of the castle. Nay, I have an inkling of what thine errand may be, whereof more anon; but now shall I tell thee what is best for thee to do so as to have speech of them the soonest.  They have gone forth with some of our lads to gather venison, or it may be beeves and muttons for our victualling, and somewhat of battle may they have had on the way, for ill neighbours have we.  But if they come back unfoughten they will be wending this road, and must needs pass by thy copse-side; and if thou be sleeping the noise of them will full surely awaken thee. Then all thou hast to do is to come forth and stand in the way before them, that they may see thee; and when once they have seen thee, how may they pass thee by unspoken with?

I thank thee heartily for thy rede, said Birdalone; but I would ask thee two things:  first, what is the name of the castle behind us? and second, why have ye the custom of shutting the door upon women? Said the priest:  The castle is called in this country-side, the White Ward by the Water; but within there we call it the Castle of the Quest; and thus is it called because my lords are seeking their loves whom they have lost; and they have sworn an oath that no woman shall enter therein till their own loves have trodden its floors.

Rose the heart of Birdalone at that word, and she deemed indeed that she was come thither whereas her she-friends would have had her.  The priest beheld her and saw how her beauty was eked by that gladness, and he scarce knew how to contain himself; and might speak no word awhile; then he said:  Hearken further concerning thy matter; if my lords be tarried, and come not by matin-song, then I doubt not but the castellan will send folk to see to thee.  He looked down therewith and said:  I will come to thee myself; and will bring thee men-at-arms, if need be.  But sometime to-morrow morning my lords will come, save mischief hath betid, which God forbid.  And he crossed himself; then he looked up and full in her face, and said: But keep thine heart up; for whatsoever may betide, thou shalt not be left uncared for.

Said Birdalone:  I see of thee that thou art become my good friend, and it rejoiceth my heart; I shall be well at ease to-night in thy cot, and to-morrow morn I shall be valiant to do thy bidding.

The sweetness of her speech so overcame him, that he but looked confusedly on her, as if he scarce heard her; and they went on together without more words, till he said:  Here are we at the cot, and I will show thee thy chamber.  So he led her to a little thatched bower, built with walls of wattle-work daubed with clay, which stood without the remnant of the cot:  it was clean and dry, for the roof was weather-tight; but there was nought in it at all save a heap of bracken in a corner.

There stood the priest, still holding Birdalone's hand, and spake not, but looked about, yet always covertly on Birdalone; but in a while he let go her hand, and seemed to wake up, and said:  This it is; a sorry place enough, were it even for a gangrel body.  Even so am I, quoth she laughing; and thou mayest look to it, that herein I shall rest full happily.  Then he gave her a horn, drawing it from out of the basket of victual, which he now set down on the ground; and he said:  If thou shouldst deem thee hard bestead, then wind this horn, and we shall know its voice up there and come to help thee. Now I give thee good-night.

She thanked him sweetly, and he went slowly out of the bower, but was scarce gone ere he came back again, and said:  One thing I may perchance tell thee without drawing thine anger on my head; to wit, that I it was who said to the castellan that he should take thee in. Wilt thou say aught to this?  She said:  I will thank thee again and again; for it was the saving of my life and mine errand.  And clearer is it now than ever that thou art a good friend unto me.

As she looked on him and caressed him with kind eyes, she saw that his brow was knit, and his face troubled, and she said to him:  What ails thee? art thou wroth with me in any wise?  O no, said he; how should I be wroth with thee!  But there is a thing I would ask of thee.  Yea, and what? said she.  He said:  Nay, I may not, I may not. It shall be for to-morrow, or another day.  He spake it looking down, and in a broken voice; and she wondered somewhat at him, but not much, deeming that he was troubled by something which had nought to do with her, and which he might refrain from thinking of, even before a stranger.

But presently he caught her hand and kissed it, and bade her good- night again, and then went hastily out of the bower; and when he was well without, he muttered, but not so as she might hear him:  Durst I have asked her, she would have suffered me to kiss her cheek.  Alas! fool that I was!  Birdalone turned then to her bracken bed, and found it sweet and clean; and she was at rest and peace in her mind, albeit her body was exceeding weary.  She felt happy in the little lonely cot, and her heart had gone out to the sweet meadow-land, and she loved it after all the trouble of the water; and herseemed that even now, in the dusk a-growing into dark, it loved and caressed her.  So she laid her down, nor unclad herself at all, lest she should have to arise on a sudden, and show those tokens of the three damsels on her body.

A little while she lay there happily, hearkening the voices of the nightingales in the brake, and then she fell into a dreamless sleep, unbroken till the short night passed into day.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_03]

CHAPTER III. HOW BIRDALONE DIGHT HER FOR MEETING THE CHAMPIONS OF THE QUEST

It was the birds beginning their first song once more that awakened Birdalone before the sun was up; but she had no will to stir a while, whereas she felt so happy and restful; and that all the more when she remembered where she was, and told herself that her errand was now like to be accomplished; and she thought of her friends whom she had left on the Isle of Increase Unsought, and blessed them for their kindness, and the love of them was sweet to her heart, and amidst such thoughts she fell asleep again.

When she awoke thereafter there was a flood of sunshine lying on the meadows, and she sprang up in haste lest she had overslept herself, but when she was come out of the bower, she soon saw that the sunbeams lay low on the land, and that it was yet the first hour of the sun; so she turned about, and went through the copse to the other side, and lo! a little clear stream running before her.  So she spake to herself softly and said:  Fie on it!  I was weary with the boat and my hunger last night, and I went to bed unwashen; and this morn I am weary for the foulness of my unwashen body.  Unseemly it were to me to show myself sluttish before these lords; let me find time for a bath at least.

Therewith she went swiftly down to the water, undoing her girdle and laces by the way.  She came to the stream and found it running between blue-flowering mouse-ear and rushes, into a pool which deepened from a sandy shallow:  so anon her borrowed raiment was lying on the grassy lip of the water, and she was swimming and disporting her in the pool, with her hair loose and wavering over her white back like some tress of the water-weed.  Therein she durst not tarry long, but came hurrying out on to the grass, and clad herself in haste.  But she covered not her shoulders with the golden gown, nor laced it over her bosom, so that Viridis' smock might be the plainer to see:  which smock was noteworthy, for the breast thereof was broidered with green boughs, whence brake forth little flames of fire, and all so dainty-wrought as if the faery had done it.

Withal she gathered up the gown into her girdle, and let the skirt- hem clear her ankles, so that Atra's shoon might be seen at once; and they were daintily dight with window-work and broidery of gold and green stones, and blue.  And forsooth it was little likely that any man should stand before her a minute ere his eyes would seek to her feet and ankles, so clean and kindly as they were fashioned.

Therewith she set her hands to her head, and trussed up her hair, and bound it closely to her head, so that it might hide no whit of her borrowed attire.

There she stood, with Aurea's collar lying on her dear neck, and Viridis' girdle about her shapen loins, and Atra's ring on her lovesome finger.  And she hearkened a while and heard no sound of coming men; and there came into her heart a gentle fear, which grieved her not.  Over the water before her hung an eglantine bush, with its many roses either budding or but just out.  Birdalone stole thither softly, and said, smiling:  Nay, if I have nothing that is mine on my body, I will take this of the maiden's bath and make it mine.  And therewith she plucked a spray of the bush and turned it into a garland for her head; and then when she had stood shyly a while in that same place, she turned and went swiftly to her place beside her night-harbour, and stood there hearkening with that sweet fear growing upon her, her colour coming and going, and her heart beating fast.

Now the thought of that kind priest who had led her to the bower last night came into her mind, and she wondered why he had been so troubled.  And she thought, would those others be so kind to her, or would they deem her an impudent wench or a foolish, or pass her by?

Forsooth if any had passed her by it had been not that he should miss seeing her beauty, but that he should fear it, and deem her some goddess of the Gentiles of old time come before him for his ensnaring.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_04]

CHAPTER IV. AND NOW SHE MEETS THE CHAMPIONS

Now, as she stood hearkening, she deemed she heard something that was not so loud as the song of the blackbird in the brake, but further off and longer voiced:  and again she hearkened heedfully, and the sound came again, and she deemed now that it was the voice of an horn.  But the third time of her hearing it she knew that it was nought less; and at last it grew nigher, and there was mingled with it the sound of men shouting and the lowing of neat.

Then she stepped down to the very edge of the way, and now she saw the riding-reek go up into the clear air, and she said:  Now are they coming without fail, and I must pluck up a heart; for surely these dear friends of my friends shall neither harm a poor maiden nor scorn her.

Soon came the leading beasts from out of the dust-cloud, and behind them was the glitter of spear-heads; and then presently was a herd of neat shambling and jostling along the road, and after them a score or so of spearmen in jack and sallet, who, forsooth, turned to look on Birdalone as they passed by, and spake here and there a word or two, laughing and pointing to her, but stayed not; and all went on straight to the castle.

Thereafter was a void, and then came riding leisurely another score of weaponed men, whereof some in white armour; and amongst them were five sumpter horses laden with carcasses of venison.  And all these also went by and stayed not, though the most of them gazed on Birdalone hard enough.

Last of all came three knights riding, one with a gold surcoat over his armour, and thereon a cleft heart of red; the second with a green surcoat, and on the same a chief of silver with green boughs thereon, their ends a-flaming; but the third bore a black surcoat besprinkled with silver tears.  And all these three rode bare-headed, save that the Black Knight bore an oak-wreath on the head.

Now did Birdalone take to her valiancy, and she stepped out into the road till she was but a ten paces from those men, who reined up when they beheld her; and she said in a clear voice:  Abide, warriors! for if ye be what I deem you, I have an errand unto you.

Scarce were the words out of her mouth, ere all three had leapt off their horses, and the Golden Knight came up to her, and laid his hand upon her side, and spake eagerly and said:  Where is she, whence thou gattest this gown of good web?  And thou, said she, art thou Baudoin the Golden Knight?  But he set his hand to the collar on her neck, and touched her skin withal, and said:  This, was she alive when thou camest by it?  She said:  If thou be Baudoin the Golden Knight, I have an errand to thee.  I am he, said the knight; O tell me, tell me, is she dead?  Said Birdalone:  Aurea was alive when last I saw her, and mine errand is from her to thee, if thou be verily her lover.  Now with this word I pray thee to be content a while, said she, smiling kindly upon him, for needs must I do mine errand in such wise as I was bidden.  And thou seest also that thy friends would have a word of me.

Forsooth, they were thrusting in on her, and the Green Knight gat a hold of her left wrist in his left hand, and his right was on her shoulder, and his bright face close to her bosom whereon lay Viridis' smock; and thereat she shrank aback somewhat, but said:  Sir, it is sooth that the smock is for thee when thou hast answered me a question or two.  Meanwhile I pray thee forbear a little; for, as I trow, all is well, and thou shalt see my dear friend Viridis again.

He withdrew him a little, flushed and shamefaced.  He was a young man exceeding beauteous, clear-skinned and grey-eyed, with curly golden hair, and he bore his armour as though it were silken cloth. Birdalone looked upon him kindly though shyly, and was glad to the heart's root that Viridis had so lovely a man to her darling.  As for the Golden Knight, as Birdalone might see now, he stood a little aloof; he was a very goodly man of some five and thirty winters; tall he was, broad-shouldered and thin-flanked, black-haired, with somewhat heavy eyebrows, and fierce hawk-eyes; a man terrible of aspect, when one first beheld him.

Now when the Black Squire had hearkened Birdalone's word concerning Viridis, he threw himself down on the ground before her, and fell to kissing her feet; or, if you will, Atra's shoon which covered them. When she drew back a little, he rose on one knee and looked up at her with an eager face, and she said:  To thee also I have an errand from Atra, thy speech-friend, if thou be Arthur the Black Squire.  He spake not, but still gazed on her till she reddened.  She knew not whether to deem him less goodly than the other twain.  He also was a young man of not over five and twenty years, slim and lithe, with much brown hair; his face tanned so dark that his eyes gleamed light from amidst it; his chin was round and cloven, his mouth and nose excellently fashioned; little hair he had upon his face, his cheeks were somewhat more hollow than round.  Birdalone noted of his bare hands, which were as brown as his face, that they were very trim and shapely.

Now he rose to his feet, and the three stood together and gazed on her; as how might they do otherwise?  Birdalone hung her head, and knew not what next to do or say.  But she thought within herself, would these three men have been as kind to her as her three friends of the Isle, had she happened on them in like case as she was that time?  And she settled with herself that they would have been no less kind.

Now spake the Golden Knight, and said:  Will the kind maiden do her errand to us here and now? for we be eager and worn with trouble. Birdalone looked adown and was somewhat confused.  Fair sirs, said she, I will do your will herein.

But the Black Squire looked on her and saw that she was troubled, and he said:  Your pardon, fair fellows, but is it not so that we have an house somewhat anigh, not ill purveyed of many things?  By your leave I would entreat this kind and dear lady to honour us so much as to enter the Castle of the Quest with us, and abide there so long as she will; and therein may she tell us all her errand at her leisure; and already we may see and know, that it may not be aught save a joyous one.

Then spake the Golden Knight, and said:  I will ask the lady to pardon me, and will now join my prayer to thine, brother, that she come home with us.  Lady, he said, wilt thou not pardon me, that in the eager desire to hear tidings of my speech-friend I forgat all else.

And therewithal he knelt before her, and took her hand and kissed it; and for all his fierce eyes and his warrior's mien, she deemed him kind and friendly.  Then needs must the Green Knight kneel and kiss also, though he had no pardon to crave; but a fair sweet lad she thought him, and again her heart swelled with joy to think that her friend Viridis had so dear a speech-friend to long for her.

Then came the turn of the Black Squire, and by then were the two others turned away a little toward their horses; and he knelt down on both knees before Birdalone and took her right arm above the wrist, and looked at the hand and kissed it as if it were a relic, but stood not up; and she stood bending over him, and a new sweetness entered into her, the like of which she had never felt.  But as for the Black Squire, it seemed that one hand would not suffice him, and he took her left hand and fell to kissing it, and then both the hands together all over the backs of them, and then the palms thereof, and he buried his face in the two palms, and held them to his cheeks; and the dear hands suffered it all, and consented to the embracing of his cheeks.  But Birdalone deemed that this was the kindest and sweetest of the three kind warriors, and sorry she was when he let go her hands and stood up.

His face was flushed, but his speech calm, as he spake so that the other knights might hear him:  Now will we straight to the castle, lady, and we will ask thee which of us three thou wilt honour by riding his horse there; shall it be Baudoin's bright bay, or Hugh's dapple-grey, or my red roan?  And therewith he took her by the hand and led her toward the horses.  But she laughed, and turning a little, pointed to the castle, and said:  Nay, sweet lords, but I will fare afoot, such a little way as it is, and I all unwont to the saddle.

Spake the Green Knight:  If that be so, lady, then shall we three walk afoot with thee.  Nay, nay, she said; I have nought to carry but myself; but ye have your byrnies and your other armour, which were heavy for you to drag on afoot, even a little way.  Moreover, I were fain to see you mount your horses, and ride and run about the meadow with tossing manes and flashing swords, while I trudge quietly toward the gate; for such things, and so beauteous, are all new unto me, as ye shall learn presently when I tell you my story.  Do so much to pleasure me, kind knights.

The tall Baudoin nodded to her, smiling kindly, as much as to say that he thought well of her desire.  But the Green Knight ran to his horse with a glad shout, and anon was in the saddle with his bright sword in his fist; then he spurred, and went a-gallop hither and thither over the mead, making his horse turn short and bound, and playing many tricks of the tilt-yard, and crying, A Hugh, A Hugh, for the Green Gown!  The Golden Knight was slower and more staid, but in manywise he showed his war-deftness, riding after Hugh as if he would fall on him, and staying his way just as it became perilous; and he cried, Baudoin, Baudoin, for Gold-sleeves!  And all this seemed to Birdalone both terrible and lovely.

But for the Black Squire, he was slow to let loose Birdalone's hand; but thereafter he was speedy to vault into his saddle, and he made courses over the meadow, but ever came back to Birdalone as she went her ways, riding round and round her, and tossing his sword into the air the while and catching it as it fell.  And no less lovely did this seem to Birdalone, and she smiled on him and waved her hand to him.

Going slowly in this wise, she came at last to the castle gate; and now had all those three out-gone her and stood afoot in the wicket to welcome her, and the Golden Knight, who was the oldest of the three, was the speaker of the welcome.

Over the threshold of the Castle of the Quest went Birdalone's feet then, and she was grown so happy as she had never deemed she should be all her life long.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_05]

CHAPTER V. BIRDALONE HAS TRUE TOKENS FROM THE CHAMPIONS OF THE QUEST

Now they brought Birdalone into a very fair chamber, where was presently everything she might need, save a tiring woman, which, forsooth, was no lack unto her, since never had she had any to help her array her body.  So she did what she might to make herself the trimmer; and in a while came two fair swains of service, who brought her in all honour into the great hall, where were the three lords abiding her.  There were they served well and plenteously, and fair was the converse between them; and in especial was the talk of Arthur the Black Squire goodly and wise and cheery, and well-measured; and the Green Knight's speech merry and kind, as of an happy child; and the Golden Knight spake ever free and kindly, though not of many words was he.  And who was happy if Birdalone were not?

But when they had eaten and washed their hands, then spake the Golden Knight:  Dear maiden, now are we ready to hear the innermost of thine errand, all we together, if thou wilt.

Birdalone smiled and reddened withal, as she said:  Fair lords, I doubt not but ye are even they unto whom I was sent, but they who sent me, and who saved me from death and worse, bade me do mine errand in such a way, that I should speak with each one of you privily, and that for a token each should tell me a thing known but to him and his love, and to me unto whom she hath told it.  Now am I all ready to do mine errand thus, and no other wise.

Laughed they now, and were merry, and the Green Knight blushed like a maiden; forsooth like to his very speech-friend Viridis.  But the Black Squire said:  Fair fellows, get we all into the pleasance this fair morn, and sit there on the grass, and our sweet lady shall take us one after other into the plashed alley, and have the tokens of us.

Even so they did, and went into the pleasance, which was a goodly little garth south of the castle, grassed, and set thick with roses and lilies and gillyflowers, and other fragrant flowers.  There then they sat on the daisied greensward, the three lords together, and Birdalone over against them, and they three watched her beauty and loveliness and wondered thereat.

But she said:  Now it comes to the very point of mine errand; wherefore I bid thee, Baudoin the Golden Knight, to come apart with me and answer to my questions, so that I may know surely that I am doing mine errand aright.

Therewith she arose to her feet, and he also, and he led her into the plashed alley, out of earshot of the other twain, who lay upon the grass biding their turn with but little patience.

But when those two were in the deep shade of the alley, Birdalone said:  Thou must know, Sir Golden Knight, that the three lovers of you three were good to me in my need, and clad my nakedness from their very bodies, but this raiment they lent me, and gave it not; for they bade me give it up piece by piece each unto the one who had given it to his love, whom I should know by the token that he should tell truly the tale of its giving.  Now, fair sir, I know well, for I have been told, what was the tale of thy giving this golden gown to Aurea, and that same tale shalt thou now tell me, and if thou tell it aright, then is the gown thine.  Begin, then, without more tarrying.

Lady, said the knight, thus it was:  Aurea, my sweetling, abode with an ancient dame, a kinswoman of hers, who was but scantly kind to her; and on a day when we had met privily, and were talking together, my love lamented the niggard ways of her said kinswoman, and told how she had no goodly gown to make her fair when feasts were toward; but I laughed at her, and told her that so clad as she was (and her attire was verily but simple) she was fairer than any other; and then, as ye may wot, there was kissing and clipping between us; but at last, as from the first I meant it, I promised her I would purvey her such a gown as no lady should go with a better in all the country-side; but I said that in return I must have the gown she went in then, which had so long embraced her body and been strained so close to her body and her sides, and was as it were a part of her. That she promised me with kisses, and I went away as merry as a bird. Straightway thereafter I did do make this very gown, which thou bearest, dear maiden, and on the appointed day she came out to me unto the same place clad as she was before; but the new gown I had with me.  Hard by our trysting-place was a hazel-copse thick enow, for it was midsummer, and she said she would go thereinto and shift gowns, and bear me out thence the gift of the old clout (so she called it, laughing merrily).  But I said:  Nay, I would go into the copse with her to guard her from evil things, beasts or men; and withal to see her do off the old gown, that I might know before I wedded her whatlike stuffing and padding went to make the grace of her flanks and her hips.  And again was she merry, and she said: Come, then, thou Thomas unbelieving, and see the side of me.  So we went into that cover together, and she did off her gown before mine eyes, and stood there in her white coat with her arms bare, and her shoulders and bosom little covered, and she was as lovely as a woman of the faery.  Then I made no prayer unto her for leave, but took my arms about her, and kissed her arms and shoulders and bosom all she would suffer me, for I was mad with love of her naked flesh.  Then she did on this golden gown, and departed when she had given me the old clout aforesaid, and I went away with it, scarce feeling the ground beneath my feet; and I set the dear gown in a fair little coffer, and here in this castle I have it now, and many times I take it forth and kiss it and lay my head upon it.  Now this is a simple tale, lady, and I am ashamed that I have made it so long for thee. And yet I know not; for thou seemest to me so kind and loving and true, that I am fain that thou shouldest know how sorely I love thy friend and mine.

Birdalone deemed Baudoin a good man indeed, and the tears came into her eyes as she answered and said:  True is thy tale, dear friend, and I have deemed it rather short than long.  I see well that thou art Aurea's very lover; and it joys me to think that thou, O terrible champion, art yet so tender and true.  Now is the golden gown thine, but I will pray thee to lend it me a little longer.  But this jewel shalt thou have from my neck here and now; and thou knowest whence it came, thine Aurea's neck forsooth.

Therewith she betook it him, and he held it in his hand doubtfully a while, and then he said:  Dear maiden, I thank thee, but I will take this collar, and lay it in my casket, and be glad thereof; and that the more, as, now I look on thee, I see nought missing from the loveliness of thine own neck.

Go to thy fellows now, said Birdalone, and send me the Green Knight, the goodly lad.  So went he, and presently came Hugh thither merry and smiling, and said:  Thou hast been long about the first token, sweet mistress; I fear me I shall make no such goodly story as hath Baudoin.  And yet, said she, Viridis' tale was the longest of all.  I doubt thou mayst fail in the token.  And she laughed; and he no less, and took her by the shoulders, and kissed her cheek frankly, and in such wise that she feared him nought, and said:  Now that is to pay thee for thy gibe; what wouldst thou have of me?  Said Birdalone:  I would have thee tell me how it was that Viridis came by the smock with the green boughs aflame, which now I bear upon me.

Hearken, darling lady, said he:  On a day Viridis and I were alone in the meadow, and so happy, that we might find nought to do save to fall into strife together; and I said it to her, that she loved me not as well as I loved her; which, by the way, was no less than a lie, for of all things living she is the most loving, and when we be together she knoweth not how to make enough of me.  Well, we fell to wrangling after the manner of lovers, till I, having nothing else to say, bade her remember that since we had first come to love each other, I had given her many things, and she had given me nothing. Lo, then! my dear, what an ill-conditioned lad was I.  But, little as I meant it, she took it all amiss, and leapt up, and fell to running back home over the meadow; thou mayst think how easily I caught up with her, and how little loth she was to be dragged back by the shoulders.  So when we were sitting again under the thorn-bush, we had well-nigh done our wrangle; but she unlaced her gown and drew down a corner thereof, to show me her shoulder, how I had hurt it e'en now; and forsooth some little mark there was on the rose-leaf skin; and that made good time for kissing again, as ye may well wot. Then she said unto me:  And how may I, a poor damsel, give thee gifts, and my kindred all greedy about me?  Yet would I give thee a gift, such as I may, if I but knew what thou wouldst take.  Now my heart was afire with that kissing of her shoulder, and I said that I would have that very same smock from her body, which then she bore, and that thereof I should deem that I had a rich gift indeed.  What! said she, and wouldst thou have it here and now?  And indeed I think she would have done it off her that minute had I pressed her, but I lacked the boldness thereto; and I said:  Nay, but would she bring it unto me the next time we met; and forsooth she brought it folded in a piece of green silk, and dearly have I loved it and kissed it sithence.  But as for thy smock, I had it fairly wrought and embroidered with the flaming green branches, as thou seest it, and I gave it to her; but not on the day when she gave me the gift; for the new one was long about doing.  Now this is all the tale, and how Viridis might eke it into a long one, I wot not.  But let it be, and tell me, have I won thy smock, or lost it?

Birdalone laughed on him and said:  Well, at least thou shalt have it as a gift; and thou mayst call it given either by Viridis or me, which thou wilt.  But with it goes another gift; which thou mayst have at once since thou must lend me the smock a little longer.  And therewith she betook him her girdle, and he kissed it, but said: Nay, fair lady, this befitteth well the loveliness of thy body that thou shouldst wear it; and well it befitteth the truth and love of thy soul toward it for me; I pray thee to keep it.  Nevertheless, she said, I will not have it, for it goeth with mine errand that thou take it of me.  Now I bid thee depart, and send hither thy fellow, the Black Squire.

Went he then, and anon comes the Black Squire, and now that he was alone with Birdalone this first time, he seemed moody and downcast, all unlike the two others.  He stood a little aloof from Birdalone, and said:  What wouldst thou ask of me?  Her heart was somewhat chilled by his moodiness, for erst had she deemed him the kindest of the three; but she said:  It is of mine errand to ask of thee concerning this foot-gear which Atra lent me until I give it unto thee, if thou be verily her lover.  Said he:  I was verily her lover. Birdalone said:  Then canst thou tell me the manner of thy giving these fair shoon unto Atra?

He said:  Even so; we were walking together in this country-side and came to a ford of the river, and it was somewhat deep and took me to over the knee, so I bore her over in my arms; then we went on a little further till we must cross the river back again in another place, and there the ford was shallower, and, the day being hot, Atra must needs wade it on her own feet.  So she did off hosen and shoon, and I led her by the hand, and it took her but up to mid-leg.  But when we came up out of the water and were on the grass again, I craved the gift of her foot-gear for the love of her, and she gave it straightway, and fared home barefoot, for it was over the meads we were wending in early summer, and the grass was thick and soft.  But thereafter I did do make the fair shoon which thou hast on thy feet, and gave them to her.  And, for a further token that my tale is true, I shall tell thee that the name of the first ford we waded that day is the Grey-nag's Wade, and the second is called Goat Ford.  This is all my tale, lady; is the token true?

True it is, squire, said Birdalone, and was silent awhile, and he also.  Then she looked on him friendly, and said:  Thou art out of heart as now, my friend.  Fear not, for thou shalt without doubt see thy speech-friend again.  Moreover here is a ring which she set upon my finger, bidding me give it thee.  And she held it out unto him.

He took the ring, and said:  Yea, it is best that I have it of thee, lest unluck come thereof.  She saw trouble in his face, but knew not what to say to cheer him, and they stood silently facing one another for awhile.  Then he said:  Let us back to our fellows, and talk it over, what is now to be done.

So they went their ways to where lay the other two upon the green grass, and the Black Squire lay down beside them; but Birdalone stood before them and spake unto the three.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_06]

CHAPTER VI. HOW THE CHAMPIONS WOULD DO BIRDALONE TO BE CLAD ANEW IN THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

Lords, she said, now is it clear by the tokens that mine errand is to you and none other; now therefore am I to tell you what to do to come unto your speech-friends and deliver them and bring them back hither. For this is their case, that they are in captivity in a wonder-isle of this great water, and it is called the Isle of Increase Unsought.

Spake the Golden Knight:  Fair lady, we have heard before that our friends fared hence, or rather were taken hence over the water.  And that is the cause why we builded this castle on the water's edge, on the very stead where was raised the pavilion, the house made for the ladies to abide therein the battle of the Champions.  Since that time, moreover, many a barge and keel have we thrust out into the water, that we might accomplish the Quest whereunto we were vowed; but ever one way went our seafaring, that when we were come so far out into the water as to lose sight of land, came upon us mist, rose against us dusk and darkness; and then a fierce driving wind that drave us back to this shore.  It is but six days ago since we tried this adventure for the last time, and belike the same shall befall us the next time we try it.  Wherefore I must ask thee, lady, dost thou know any way whereby we may come to the said isle?  For if thou dost, full surely we will try it, whatsoever may be the risk thereby to our bodies or our souls.

Full surely I do, said Birdalone; else how had I come from thence hither mine own self?  And therewith she told them of the Sending Boat, what it was, and how she had come all the way by means thereof from the Isle of Increase Unsought; and they all hearkened her heedfully, and wondered both at the sorcery, and the valiant heart of her who had driven it as she would in despite of the evil.  But in the end she spake and said:  Lords, ye have now heard some deal of my story, even that which concerns you thereof; and which must needs be told at once:  wherefore doubtless ye shall fare unto your speech- friends by this ferry in the very wise that I shall show you; unless perchance ye deem that I have been lying and making light tales to you, as, sooth to say, I deem ye think it not.

Spake the Golden Knight:  Damsel, in all wise we trow in thee and thy tale.  And God forbid that we should tarry!  Go we hence this very day.

Yea, but hearken, said the Black Squire:  Is it not a part of this damsel's errand that she should deliver to us the raiment of our friends, which now she beareth on her own body, that we may bear it back unto them?

Sooth is that, said Birdalone, and ye may well wot that this may be nought but needful, whereas the said ladies be all beset by sorceries.

See ye then, fellows, said the Black Squire, it may not be to-day nor yet to-morrow that we may take the road.  For ye wot that there is no woman's gear in all the castle, and we must needs send otherwhere to seek it.

Look thou, maiden, said the Golden Knight, laughing, how duly this young knight thinketh of thee; whereas I, who am his elder, and should be wiser than he, am but heedless of thee.  I pray thy pardon.

Moreover, said the Black Squire, there may well be wisdom in abiding; for it is to be thought that our dear loves considered this, and knew what the time of tarrying should be, and have so dight their matter as to fit in therewith; and I may not deem it of them that they would have us array this our dear sister and theirs in unseemly wise.  Nay, for that would be an ill beginning of this deal of the Quest.

Now all yeasaid this gladly; and the Green Knight said:  It were not so ill done that we should see more of our sister here ere we depart, and hear more of her tale; for meseemeth she began it erewhile but half-way.  And he turned to Birdalone, and took her hand and caressed it.

Birdalone smiled on them somewhat shyly, and thanked them; but bade them spend as little time as might be on her arrayal.  For, said she, though those ladies may well have reckoned on the time of the arrayal of my body, yet surely also they shall have reckoned with the eager fire of love in the hearts of you, and the haste it shall breed therein.

Well pleased were they with that word of hers, but none the less sent two sergeants and a squire with led horses unto the cheaping-town, a goodly and great town hight Greenford, which was some twenty miles thence, with the errand to bring back with them a good shaper and embroideress, and sewing-women, and cloth and silk and linen, and all things needful.

As for jewels, each one of them was fain to give her something which he prized, and fair and rich were the gifts, though they had not been made for women.  As a fair SS collar of gold, which the Golden Knight gave her, and a girdle of broad golden plates, wrought beauteously, which was the gift of the Black Squire.  Albeit he did not offer to clasp it round her loins, as she deemed he would; for when the Green Knight brought his gift, a great gold ring, very ancient of fashion, he would have her turn back the sleeve from her fore-arm, that he might set his dwarf-wrought gold upon the bare flesh; neither did he refrain him from kissing it withal.

But the messengers came back with their work-women and stuffs early on the morrow; and now was changed all the manner of the womanless castle, and men were full merry therein.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_07]

CHAPTER VII. OF BIRDALONE, HOW SHE TOLD THE CHAMPIONS ALL HER TALE

It was a matter of eight days, the making of all Birdalone's raiment, and meanwhile she was ever with the three Champions, either all three together, or one or other of them.  And as to their manners with her, ever was the Golden Knight of somewhat sober demeanour, as if he were an older man than he verily was.  The Green Knight was for ever praising Birdalone's beauty to her face, and seemed to find it no easy matter to keep his eyes off her, and somewhat he wearied her with kisses and caresses; but a gay and sportive lad he was; and when she rebuked him for his overmuch fondness, as now and again she did, he would laugh at himself along with her; and in sooth she deemed him heart-whole, and of all truth to Viridis, and oft he would talk of her to Birdalone, and praise her darling beauty to her, and tell of his longing for his love aloof.  Only, quoth he, here art thou, my sister, dwelling amongst us, and shedding thy fragrance on us, and showing to us, wilt thou, wilt thou not, as do the flowers, all the grace and loveliness of thee; and thou so tender of heart withal, that thou must not blame me overmuch if whiles I forget that thou art my sister, and that my love is, woe's me! far away.  So thou wilt pardon me, wilt thou not?  Yea, verily, said she, with a whole heart. Yet thou needest not reach out for my hand; thou hast had enough of it this morning.  And she hid it, laughing, in the folds of her gown; and he laughed also, and said:  Of a truth thou art good in all wise, and a young fool am I; but Viridis shall make me wiser, when we come together again.  Sawest thou ever so fair a damsel?  Never, she said, and surely there is none fairer in all the world.  So hold thee aloof now for a while, and think of her.

As for the Black Squire, hight Arthur, Birdalone was troubled for him, and he made her somewhat sad.  True it is that he came not before her again so moody and downcast as when he was giving her the token; yet she deemed that he enforced himself to seem of good cheer. Furthermore, though he sought her company ever, and that lonely with him, and would talk with her almost as one man with another, though with a certain tenderness in his voice, and looking earnestly on her the while, yet never would he take her hand, or touch her in any wise.  And true it is that she longed for the touch of his hand.

On the third day of her sojourn in the Castle of the Quest, Birdalone took heart at the much egging of her friends, as they sat all together in the meadow without the castle, to tell them all the story of her; she hid none, save concerning the wood-mother, for she deemed that her sweet friend would love her the better if she babbled not of her.

So the Champions hearkened her telling the tale in her clear lovely voice, and great was their love and pity for the poor lonely maiden. And in especial clear it was to see that they were sore moved when she told how she first came on the Sending Boat, and how the witch- wife tormented her innocent body for that guilt.  Then Baudoin laid his hand upon her head, and spake:  Poor child, much indeed hast thou suffered! and now I will say it, that it was for us and our loves that thou hast borne all this anguish of captivity and toil and stripes.

But Hugh leaned over to her, as she sat with her head hanging down, and kissed her cheek, and said:  Yea! and I was not there to smite the head off that accursed one; and I knew nought of thee and thine anguish, as I took my light pleasure about these free meadows.  And he turned very red, and went nigh to weep.

Arthur sat still with his eyes bent down on the ground, and he said nothing; and Birdalone glanced on him wistfully ere she went on with her tale.  And she went on and told closely all that had happened unto her in the crossing of the water and on the Isle of Increase Unsought, and the other Wonder Isles; and she deemed it not too much that she should tell it twice over, nor they that twice over they should hearken it.

That same evening as Birdalone walked by herself in the castle pleasance, she saw Arthur peering about as if he were seeking someone; so she stood forth, and asked him was he seeking aught; and he said:  Thee was I seeking.  But she durst not ask him what he would, but stood silent and trembling before him, till he took her hand, and spake not loud but eagerly.

After what thou hast told us to-day, I seem to know thee what thou art; and I tell thee that it is a pain and grief to me to leave thee, yea to leave thee were it but for a minute.  O I pray thee pity me for the sundering.  And therewith he turned about and hastened into the castle.  But Birdalone stood there with her heart beating fast and her flesh quivering, and a strange sweetness of joy took hold of her.  But she said to herself that it was no wonder though she felt so happy, seeing that she had found out that, despite her fears, this one of her friends loved her no less well than the others.  And then she spake it in a soft voice that she would indeed pity him for the sundering, yea, and herself also.

Nevertheless, when they met thereafter, his demeanour to her was none otherwise than it had been; but she no longer heeded this since now she trowed in him.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_08]

CHAPTER VIII. IN THE MEANWHILE OF THE DEPARTING OF THE CHAMPIONS, THEY WOULD PLEASURE BIRDALONE WITH FEATS OF ARMS AND GAMES OF PROWESS

Passed the days now speedily, and the three Champions did what they might for the solace of Birdalone.  For they and their household showed her of arms, and they tilted together courteously; and the sergeants stood forth, and shot in the bow before her, till she herself by their bidding took the bow in hand, and shot straighter and well-nigh as hard as the best man there, whereat they marvelled, and praised her much.

Then the young men ran afoot before her for the prize of a belt and knife, and forsooth she wotted well that were she to run against them with trussed-up skirts she would bear off the prize; but she had no heart thereto, for amidst them all, and her new friendships, she had grown shamefast, and might play the wood-maiden no longer.  Yet twice the Champions fared further afield with her to show her some woodcraft; yet were not very free to go far, because of the ill neighbours whereof the chaplain had told her that first night of her coming.

And in all these pastimes, whatso they were, Birdalone bore herself well and merrily, and put from her the sorrow of the sundering, and the peril of her dear friends which grew now so near at hand.

The chaplain aforesaid, who hight Leonard, she fell in with not seldom; and he was ever meek and humble before her; and ever withal was sorrow easy to be seen in his countenance, and trouble withal; and she knew not how to help him, save by being courteous and kind with him whenso they met; but none the more might he pluck up cheerful countenance in answer to her kindness.

With Sir Aymeris, the grizzle-haired castellan, she foregathered also oft enough, and could not forbear some merry gibes with him concerning their first meeting, and how that she had been a burden and a terror to him; and these mocks she made him because she saw it liked him not ill to be mocked in friendly fashion; though forsooth betwixt the laughter he looked on her somewhat ruefully.  And ever, ere he parted from her, he made occasion to kiss her hands; and she suffered it smiling, and was debonair to him; whereas she saw that he was of good will to her.  In such wise then wore the hours and the days.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_09]

CHAPTER IX. BIRDALONE COMETH BEFORE THE CHAMPIONS IN HER NEW ARRAY

Now the time was come when Birdalone had all her gear ready, and the women were to abide in the castle as her serving-damsels while the Champions were away.

So now in the summer eve, an hour before sunset, Birdalone did on the richest of her new raiment, and came into the hall where sat the Three together, and Sir Aymeris with them.  She was so clad, that she had on a green gown with broidered sleeves, and thereover a white cote-hardie welted with gold, and gold-embroidered; on her feet were gold shoon of window-work, pearled and gemmed; and on her head a rose garland; on her neck she bore the Golden Knight's collar; her loins were girt with the Black Squire's girdle; and on her wrist was the Green Knight's ancient gold ring; and she carried in her arms Aurea's gown and Viridis' shift and Atra's shoon.

Rather sunrise than sunset it seemed, as verily Birdalone she came into the hall with bright eager eyes, and flushed cheeks, and countenance smiling with love.  The men stood up all, and would come down from the dais to meet her; but she bade them go back, and sit each in his place till she stood before them.

Up the hall then she walked, and every step of hers seemed lovelier than the last, till she came to them and gave unto each his keepsake, and said:  Champions, now is mine errand all done, save that to- morrow I must show you the manner of the Sending Boat.  Now there is nought save the darkness of the coming night to hinder you from this last deal of your Quest; and it is I that have brought you to this, and have done this good unto you, if no more good I do in the world. Wherefore I pray you to love me ever, and bear me ever in your minds.

They gazed on her, and were overcome by her loveliness and grace, and by the kindness and valiancy of her heart.  Next arose the Golden Knight, Baudoin to wit, and took a cross from his breast, and held it up, and spake:  Maiden, thou sayest well, and never shall we forget thee, or cease to love thee; and here I swear by God upon the Tree, that it shall be a light thing for me to die for thee, if in any need I find thee.  Brethren, will ye not swear the same?  And this is but thy due, maiden, for I declare unto thee, that when thou didst enter the hall e'en now, it was as if the very sun of heaven was coming in unto us.

Thereon the other two took the Rood and swore upon it:  and Hugh was hushed and meek and sad-faced after he had sworn; but Arthur the Black Squire bowed down his head and wept, and his fellows marvelled nought thereat, neither did Birdalone; and all her body yearned toward him to solace him.

Now turned Sir Baudoin to the castellan and said:  Sir Aymeris, I will now swear thee to guard this lady as the apple of thine eye whiles we three be away, and therein to spare neither thyself nor others.  For thou seest well what grief it would be to us if she came to any harm.

And to me also, said the castellan.  And therewith he swore upon the Rood, and then came round the table, and knelt before Birdalone, and kissed her hands.

Thereafter were they all silent a space; and then came Birdalone to the inner side of the table and sat betwixt Baudoin and Hugh.  But the Black Squire took up the word and spake:  Birdalone, sweet child, one thing is to be said, to wit, that it were well that thou keep within walls while we be away; or at least that thou go but a little beyond the castle, and never but within a half bowshot, save thou be well accompanied.  For there be men of violence dwelling no great way off, reivers and rovers, who would be well pleased to take from us anything which we deem dear; besides others who would think the lifting of such a jewel good hap indeed.  Sir Aymeris, have a care of the Red Knight; and if thou mightest come by a few more stout lads, to wage them, it were well.

Birdalone heeded not what the castellan answered, such a shaft of joy went to her heart when she heard that friend speak her own name in such wise as he had never done erst, and that before them all.  She but murmured some yeasay to that which Arthur had spoken unto her, and then she held her peace for the sweetness of that moment.

So there they sat and talked a while in dear and pleasant converse; and Hugh fell to asking her of her life in the House under the Wood, and she answered all frankly and simply, and the more she told the dearer she seemed to them.

Thus drew night in, till folk came flockmeal into the hall; for needs must be feast and banquet for triumph of the furtherance of the Quest; and the most of men were merry; but somewhat sober were all the three Champions, so that whoso ran might read it in their faces. As for Birdalone, she showed cheerful to all that folk which loved her and praised her; but inwardly sorrow had come home to her heart.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f3_10]

CHAPTER X. THE CHAMPIONS GO THEIR WAYS IN THE SENDING BOAT

When the sun was arisen on the morrow the three Champions went down to the landing-place, and there was none with them; for they had given command that no man should pry into their doings.  Thither to them cometh Birdalone, clad no more in her gay attire, but in a strait black coat and with unshod feet; and she looked no sorrier than she was.

By Birdalone's rede the Champions bore down in their own hands the victual and weapons and armour that they needed for the voyage; for she knew not but that the Sending Boat might take it amiss that any should touch her save the senders.  And when they had done lading her, then all four stood together by the water's edge, and Birdalone spake to her friends, and again bade them beware of the wiles of the Isle of Nothing; and again she told them of the woful images of the Isle of Kings and the Isle of Queens, and the strange folk of the Isle of the Young and the Old.  Then she said:  Now when ye come to the Isle of Increase Unsought, what think ye to do?  Said the Green Knight:  If I might rule, we should go straight up to the witch sitting in her hall, as thou toldest us, my dear, and then and there smite the head from off her.  His eyes flashed and his brow knitted, and so fierce he looked that Birdalone shrank back from him; but the Black Squire smiled and said:  It may come to the smiting off of heads in the end; yet must we so fashion our carving, that it avail us for the freeing of our friends; else may the witch die, and the secret of the prison-house die with her.  How sayest thou, dear Birdalone?

She reddened at the caress of his voice, and answered:  By my rede ye shall seek and find your speech-friends ere ye make open war upon the witch; else may her malice destroy them ere ye undo her.  Her face flushed yet more as she spake again:  But concerning all things, I deem that Atra may give you the best rede, when ye have met the loves; for that she knoweth more of the isle and its guiles than the others.

Quoth Baudoin:  Herein is wisdom, sweet maiden, for as guileless as thou mayst be; and so far as we may we shall follow thy rede; but all lieth in the fathom of the coming time.  And now this moment is the moment of sundering and farewell.

Came he then to Birdalone and took his two hands about her head, and lifted her face unto him, and kissed it kindly, as a father might kiss a daughter, and said:  Farewell, dear child, and take heed to the word that Arthur spake yesterday, and go not from the castle even a little way save with good and sure company.

Then came Hugh to her, and took her hand somewhat timidly; but she put up her face to him in simple wise, and he kissed either cheek of her, and said no more than:  Farewell, Birdalone!

Lastly came Arthur, and stood before her a little; and then he knelt down on the stones before her and kissed her feet many times, and she shuddered and caught her breath as they felt his kisses; but neither he nor she spake a word, and he stood up and turned away at once toward the Sending Boat, and boarded her first of the three; and the others followed straightway.

Thereafter the Champions bared each an arm, and let blood flow thence into a bowl, and reddened stem and stern of their barge, and then all three spake the spell together thus, as Birdalone had taught them:

The red raven-wine now
 Hast thou drunk, stern and bow:
 Wake then, and awake,
 And the northern way take!
 The way of the Wenders forth over the flood,
 For the will of the Senders is blent with the blood.

Went all as before thereafter, that the Sending Boat stirred under them, and then turned about and pointed her bows to the northward, and sped swiftly over the waters.  It was a fair sunny day, with no cloud, nought save the summer haze lying on the lake far away. Birdalone stood watching the speeding of the boat, till she could see it no longer, not even as a fleck on the face of the waters.  Then she turned away and went toward her chamber, saying to herself that the sundering was easier to bear than she had deemed it would be, and that she had a many things to do that day.  But when she came into her chamber, and shut the door, she looked about her on the things which had grown so familiar to her in these few latter days, and she stood watching the bright sunshine that streamed across the floor and lay warm upon her feet; then she took three steps toward the window, and saw the lake lying all a-glitter under the sun, and her heart failed her withal, and she had no might so much as to think about her sorrow and caress it, but fell down where she was swooning on to the floor, and lay there, while all the house began to stir about her.

Here ends the Third Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is called Of the Castle of the Quest, and begins the fourth Part of the said tale, which is called Of the Days of Abiding.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_01]

THE FOURTH PART: OF THE DAYS OF ABIDING

CHAPTER I. OF BIRDALONE'S GRIEF; AND OF LEONARD THE CHAPLAIN

Now came Birdalone to herself, and that was but little joy unto her, and she yet lay still on the floor for a while, for she loathed the hour that was to come.  Then the life stirred in her, and whereas she would not that her women should find her there, she stood up, and clad herself somewhat more seemly; yet she did on her black raiment; and determined in her mind that nought would she wear save black unadorned while her friends were away.

She betook her now to the chamber where her women were gathered together, and watched them working a while, but spake nought.  Then she went her ways into the pleasance, and paced the plashed alley up and down, letting the tears run down from her as they would.  Then she turned back into the castle, and went out-a-gates and walked over the meadow a little, and might well have gone further than wisdom would.  But the castellan espied her from a window, and came hurrying out after her, and with many prayers for pardon, brought her back again, babbling to her by the way; but not a word might he get from her; and when he came into the hall with her, and, after his wont, knelt down to kiss her hands, she caught them away from him peevishly, and was sorry for it thereafter.

Long she sat in the hall, scarce moving, till she heard one entering from the screen, and lo it was Leonard the chaplain.  He came her way, and showed her rueful countenance; and pity of him smote her, and she remembered therewith how they first went out of gates together; and at the thought thereof her tears brake forth again, but she made him a sign with her hand to sit down beside her, and he did so; and when she might for her weeping, she looked kindly on him, and he fell to talk, making as if he noted not her tears and sorrow; but she answered him little, for she had shame to begin the talk concerning the Champions and their Quest, and their departure; yet might she not bring her tongue to make any speech else.  But presently he took up the word, and asked her how long a while she deemed they would be away, and she answered, smiling on him for thanks, and having reckoned the days on her fingers:  If all go better than well, they may be back in ten days' time.  Said the chaplain:  There be longer whiles of waiting in most men's lives. Yea, she said, but this is the delay at the best; it may be far longer; for how may we tell what haps may be?

Yea, said Leonard, shall we then call it twenty days, or thirty? Forsooth, that may be long for thee; though there be some who must needs endure hope deferred a deal longer.  But it may run out longer than even thirty days, thy waiting-tide.

She answered not, and he said:  Whenso the time hangs heavy on hand with thee, if thou hast will to fare abroad out of the castle, I shall be ever at hand to guide thee.  Indeed, I wot that the castellan will be loth to let thee go; but he is old and straitlaced: and yet withal he wotteth, as do we all, that there is now little peril or none were we to fare a five miles or more, whereas we are as good as at peace for the last five days with all save the Red Knight, and of him we wot that he is gone into another land with as many of his folk as be not needed for the warding of his hold.

I thank thee, said Birdalone, but it is like to be my will not to fare out-a-gates till the Champions come back home.  I was glad e'en now when the castellan fetched me in again:  to say sooth, fear of peril had just entered my heart when he came up with me.

The priest seemed somewhat chapfallen at her answer.  He spake little more, and presently he stood up, made his obeisance, and departed.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_02]

CHAPTER II. BIRDALONE LEARNETH LORE OF THE PRIEST.  TEN DAYS OF WAITING WEAR

Wore that day and the next, and Birdalone fell to talking with her women, whereof were five now left; and four of them were young, the eldest scarce of thirty summers, and the fifth was a woman of sixty, both wise and kind.  All these told her somewhat of their own lives when she asked them; and some withal told of folk whom they had known or heard tell of.  And well pleased was Birdalone to hear thereof, and learn more of the ways of the world, and quick-witted she was at the lesson, so that she needed not to ask many questions.

Furthermore, she took to her broidering again, and fell to doing a goodly pair of shoon for Atra, since she had worn those borrowed ones somewhat hardly.  And the women wondered at her needlework, so marvellous fine as it was, and how that in little space of time were come flowers and trees, and birds and beasts, all lovely; and they said that the faery must have learned her that craft.  But she laughed and reddened, and thought of the wood-mother; and, sitting there within the four walls, she longed for the oak-glades, and the wood-lawns, and for the sight of the beasts that dwelt therein.

Again she fell in with Leonard the priest, and he asked her could she read in a book, and when she said nay, he offered to teach her that lore, and she yeasaid that joyously; and thenceforth would she have him with her every day a good while; and an apt scholar she was, and he no ill master, and she learned her A B C speedily.

Now it was the ninth day since the Champions were gone, and all that time she had not been out-a-gates; and after the first two days, had enforced herself to fill up her time with her work as aforesaid:  but this last day she might do but little, for she could not but take it for sure that the morrow would be the day of return; nay, even she deemed that they might come in the night-tide; so that when she went to bed, though she was weary, she would wake if she might, so that it was nigh dawn ere she fell asleep.

Some three hours after she woke up, and heard a sound of folk stirring in the house, and the clashing of weapons; and the heart leapt in her, and she said:  They are come, they are come! Nevertheless she durst not get out of bed, lest her hope had beguiled her; and she lay awake another hour, and no tidings came to her; and then she wept herself to sleep; and when she awoke once more, she found that she must have wept sleeping, for the pillow beside her face was all wet with the tears.

The sun was high now, and his beams were cast back from the ripple of the lake, and shone wavering on the wall of the chamber, the window whereof gave on to the water.  Then came a hand on the latch of the door, and she started, and her heart grieved her; but it was one of the women who opened, and came in, and Birdalone rose up sitting in her bed, and said faintly, for she could scarce speak:  Is any tiding toward, Catherine?  The maid said:  Yes, my lady; for early after sunrise came weaponed men to the gate, and would sell us beeves; and my lord, Sir Aymeris, must needs go forth and chaffer with them, though belike they had been lifting what was neither ours, nor theirs, nor the neighbours'.  Maybe Sir Aymeris looked to buy tidings from them as well as beef.  Anyhow they departed when they had gotten their money and drunk a cup.  And now it is said that the Red Knight hath been hurt in some fray, and keepeth his bed; wherefore the land shall have peace of him awhile.  Said Birdalone:  I thank thee, good Catherine; I shall lie a little longer; depart now.

The woman went her ways; and when she was gone, Birdalone wept and sobbed, and writhed upon her bed, and found no solace to her grief. But she arose and paced the chamber, and sithence looked out of the window over the empty water, and wept again.  Then she said:  Yet they may come ere noon, or it may be ere evening, or perchance to- morrow morning.  And she stayed her weeping, and was calmer.  But still she walked the floor, and whiles looked out of window, and whiles she looked on her limbs, and felt the sleekness of her sides, and she said:  O my body! how thou longest!

But at last she clad herself in haste, and went stealthily from the chamber, as if she feared to meet anyone; and she stole up to the tower-top that was nighest, and looked through the door on to the leads, and saw no one there; so she went out, and stood by the battlement, and gazed long over the water, but saw neither boat nor burning mountain coming towards her.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_03]

CHAPTER III. NOW WOULD BIRDALONE RIDE ABROAD

After a while she came down again, and went to the women, and sat working with them a while, and so wore away two hours.  Then she sent for the priest and had her lesson of him; and when she had been at it another two hours, she bade him begin and learn her writing; and nought loth he was thereto; forsooth he had been longing to pray her to suffer him learn her, but durst not.  For in such teaching needs must he sit full nigh to her, and watch her hands, and her fingers striving to shape the letters; nay, whiles must he touch her hand with his, and hold it.  Wherefore now he promised himself a taste of Paradise.  Withal he was full meet to learn her, whereas he was one of the best of scribes, and a fair-writer full handy.

So they fell to the lesson, and she became eager thereover, and learned fast, and clave to the work, while his soul was tormented with longing for her.  And thus wore a three hours, and then suddenly she looked up wearily from her work, and her trouble was awake, and the longing for her speech-friend, and she gave the priest leave for that day, but suffered him to kiss her hand for wages.

Then she hurried up to the tower-top, when the afternoon was wearing into evening; and abode there a long while looking over the waters, till it began to dusk, and then came down miserably and went to her women.

The next day was like unto this; nought betid, and she wore the hours whiles going up to the tower-top and looking over the lake, whiles broidering amidst her maids, whiles learning her clerk's work with Sir Leonard, but ever eating her heart out with her longing.

On the third of these days she called the castellan to her for a talk, and asked him what he thought of it, this delay of his lords' return.  Quoth the greyhead:  My lady, we may not wonder if they be tarried for a few days; for this is an adventure on which they have gone, and many haps betide in such tales.  Now I beseech thee torment not thyself; for the time is not yet come for thee even to doubt that they have miscarried.

His words solaced her much for that time, whereas she saw that he spake but the sooth; so she thanked him, and smiled upon him kindly; and he was ravished thereat, and was for kneeling before her at once and kissing her hands after his wont; but she smiled again and refrained him, and said:  Nay, not yet, fair friend; that is for the departure, and I have yet a word to say unto thee:  to wit, that I long to go out-a-gates, and it will solace me and give me patience to abide the coming of my friends.  For thou must know, Sir Aymeris, that I was reared amidst the woods and the meadows, with the burning of the sun, and the buffets of the wind; and now for lack of some deal of that am I waxing white and faint.  And thou wouldst not have me falling sick on thine hands now, wouldst thou?

Nay, surely, lady, said Sir Aymeris; this very day I will ride out with thee; and two score or more of weaponed men shall ride with us for fear of mishaps.  Said Birdalone, knitting her brows:  Nay, knight, I need not thy men-at-arms; I would fain go free and alone. For hast thou not heard how that the Red Knight is hurt and keepeth his bed?  So what peril is there?  Said Sir Aymeris:  Yea, lady; but the Red Knight is not the only foe, though he be the worst:  but it may well be that the story is but feigned, for the said enemy hath many wiles.  And look you, kind lady, it is most like that by now he hath heard how in my poor castle is kept a jewel, a pearl of great price, that hath not its like in the world, and will encompass the stealing of it if he may.

Laughed Birdalone, and said:  But how if the said jewel hath a will, and legs and feet thereto, and is ready to take the peril on her, and will wend out-a-gates if she will?  What wilt thou do then, lord? Then, said the castellan, I shall fetch thee back, and, though it be a grief to me, shall have thee borne back perforce if nought else may do.  For so the oath sworn to my lords compelleth me.

Again laughed Birdalone, and said:  Hearken, whereto cometh all this kneeling and hand-kissing!  But bear in mind, fair lord, how once on a time thou wouldst have me out-a-gates, would I, would I not, and now, will I, will I not, thou wouldst keep me within; so have times changed, and mayhappen they may change yet again.  But tell me, am I mistress over my women to bid them what I will?  Certes, said he, and over all of us.  Said she:  If then I bade them, some two or three, come with me into the meadows and woods a half day's journey for our disport, how then?  For that once, said Sir Aymeris, I should bid them disobey their lady.  Said Birdalone:  And how if they disobeyed thee, and obeyed me?  Quoth Sir Aymeris:  If they bring thee back safe, they may chance to sing to the twiggen fiddle-bow, that they may be warned from such folly; but if they come back without thee, by All-hallows the wind of wrath shall sweep their heads off them!

Birdalone flushed red at his word, and was silent a while; then she said, making cheerful countenance again:  Thou art a hard master, lord castellan; but I must needs obey thee.  Therefore I will take thy bidding, and ride abroad in such wise that I shall scare the land with an army, since no otherwise may I look on the summer land.  But to-day I will not go, nor to-morrow belike; but some day soon.  And in good sooth I thank thee for thy heedful care of me, and wish I were better worth it.  Nay, nay, thou shalt not kneel to me, but I to thee:  for thou art verily the master.

Therewith she rose from beside him, and knelt down before him and took his hand and kissed it, and went her ways, leaving him ravished with love of her.  But now she had no scorn of him, but deemed, as was true, that he was both valiant and trusty and kind, and she thanked him in her heart as well as in words.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_04]

CHAPTER IV. OF BIRDALONE'S FARING ABROAD

Indeed Birdalone longed on any terms to be out-a-gates and to have some joy of the summer; for now she began to see that she might have to abide some while ere her friends should come to her in the Castle of the Quest; and she was angry with herself that her longing was thus wasting her, and she rebuked herself and said:  Where is now that Birdalone who let but few days go by without some joyance of the earth and its creatures? she who bore lightly the toil of a thrall, and gibes and mocking and stripes?  Surely this is grievous folly, that I should be worsened since I have come to be the friend of gentle ladies, and noble champions, and mighty warriors.  Had it not been better to have abided under the witch-wife's hand?  For not every day nor most days did she torment me.  But now for many days there has been pain and grief and heart-sickness hour by hour; and every hour have I dreaded the coming of the next hour, till I know not how to bear it.

So she strove with herself, and became of better heart, and set herself strongly to the learning of the clerkly lore; she gathered her wits together, and no longer looked for every day and every hour to bring about the return of the Champions, nor blamed the day and the hour because they failed therein, and in all wise she strove to get through the day unworn by vain longing.

Wherefore, on a day when three whole weeks were gone since the day of departure, she was glad when the castellan came to her and said: Lady, these two days I have had men out to spy the land, and their word goes that nought is stirring which a score of us well-armed might have cause to fear; wherefore to-morrow, if it be thy will, we shall bring thee out-a-gates, and so please thee, shall be in no haste to come back, but may lie out in the wildwood one night, and come back at our leisure on the morrow of to-morrow.  How sayest thou of thy pleasure herein?

She thanked him, and yeasaid it eagerly, and next morning they set forth; and Birdalone had with her three of the women, and they had sumpter-beasts with them, and tents for Birdalone and her maids.

So they rode by pleasant ways and fair meadows, and the weather was good, for it was now the first days of July, and all was as lovely as might be; and for that while Birdalone cast off all her cares, and was merry, and of many words and sweet; and all the folk rejoiced thereat, for all loved her in the Castle of the Quest, besides those one or two that loved her overmuch.

Rode they thus a twelve miles or more, and then they came, as their purpose was, to the beginning of a woodland plenteous of venison, and they hunted here, and Birdalone took her part therein, and all praised her woodcraft; albeit because of her went a head or two free that had fallen else, whereas of the carle hunters were some who deemed the body of her better worth looking on than the quarry.

Howsoever, they slew of hind and roe and other wood-cattle what they would, some deal for their supper in the wilderness, some to bear home to the castle.  But when night was nigh at hand they made stay in a fair wood-lawn about which ran a clear stream, whereby they pitched the ladies' tent; and Birdalone and hers went down into the water and washed the weariness off them; and her ladies wondered at the deftness of Birdalone's swimming; for they bathed in a pool somewhat great into which the stream widened, so that there was space enough for her therein.

By then they were washen and clad goodly in raiment which they had brought on the sumpters, the men had lighted fires and were cooking the venison, and anon there was supper and banquet in the wildwood, with drinking of wine and pleasant talk and the telling of tales and singing of minstrelsy; and so at last, when night was well worn, and out in the open meadows the eastern sky was waxing grey, then Birdalone and her ladies went to bed in their fair tents, and the men-at-arms lay down on the greensward under the bare heaven.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_05]

CHAPTER V. SIR AYMERIS SHOWETH BIRDALONE THE MOUNTAINS AFAR OFF

When it was morning and they arose, the day was as fair as yesterday, and folk were even as joyous as they had been then, all but Birdalone, and she was silent and downcast, even when she came forth from the fresh water into the sweetness of the midsummer wood.  She had dreamed in the night that she was all alone in the Castle of the Quest, and that her old mistress came to her from out of the Sending Boat to fetch her away, and brought her aboard, and stripped her of her rich garments and sat facing her, drawing ugsome grimaces at her; and she thought she knew that her friends were all dead and gone, and she had none to pity or defend her.  Then somehow were they two, the witch and she, amidmost of the Isle of Nothing, and the witch drew close anigh her, and was just going to whisper into her ear something of measureless horror, when she awoke; and the sun was bright outside the shaded whiteness of her tent; the shadows of the leaves were dancing on the ground of it; the morning wind was rustling the tree- boughs, and the ripple of the stream was tinkling hard by.  At first was Birdalone joyous that what she had awakened from was but a dream; but presently she felt the burden of her longing, and she said to herself that when they came back to the castle they should find tidings, and that she should know either that her friends were indeed dead, or that they were come back again alive and well.  And then she thought within herself, suppose the three Champions and their loves were dead and gone, how would she do with those that were left her, as Sir Aymeris, and Leonard the priest, and her women? and her soul turned with loathing from a life so empty as that would be; and yet she blamed herself that she was so little friendly to these lesser friends, whom forsooth she loved because of her love for the greater ones.  So, as abovesaid, she was troubled and silent amongst the joy of the others.

That saw Sir Aymeris the castellan; and when they had broken fast and were getting to horse, he came to her and said:  Lady, the day is yet young, and if we fetch a compass by a way that I wot of we shall see places new to thee, and mayhappen somewhat wonderful, and yet come home timely to the castle.  Wilt thou?

Birdalone was still somewhat distraught, but she knew not how to naysay him, though at heart she would liefer have gone back to the castle by the shortest way.  So folk brought her her palfrey, and they rode their ways, the castellan ever by her side.  And by fair ways indeed they went, and so joyous was all about them, that little by little Birdalone's gladness came back to her, and she made the most of it to be as merry of seeming as she might be.

Now they rode fair and softly by thicket and copse and glade of the woodland, following up the stream aforesaid for the more part, till at last the trees failed them suddenly, and they came forth on to a wide green plain, all unbuilded, so far as their eyes could see, and beyond it the ridges of the hills and blue mountains rising high beyond them.

When Birdalone's eyes beheld this new thing, of a sudden all care left her, and she dropped her rein, and smote her palms together, and cried out:  Oh! but thou art beautiful, O earth, thou art beautiful! Then she sat gazing on it, while the greyhead turned and smiled on her, well pleased of her pleasure.

After a while she said:  And might we go nigher?  Yea, certes, said he, yet I doubt if thou wilt like it the better, the nigher thou art. Ah! she said, but if I were only amidst it, and a part of it, as once I was of the woodland!

So thitherward they rode over the unharvested mead, and saw hart and hind thereon, and wild kine, and of smaller deer great plenty, but of tame beasts none; and the hills were before them like a wall.  But as they drew nigher, they saw where the said wall of the hills was cloven by a valley narrow and steep-sided, that went right athwart the lie of the hills; the said valley was but little grassed, and the bare rocks were crow-black.  When they had gone a little further, they could see that the ground near the foot of the hills rose in little knolls and ridges, but these were lower and fewer about the entry into that valley.  Also presently they came upon a stream which ran out of the said valley, and Sir Aymeris said that this was the water whereby they had lain last night; albeit here it was little indeed.

Now when they had ridden some five miles over the plain, they came amongst those knolls at the mouth of the valley, and Sir Aymeris led Birdalone up to the top of one of the highest of them, and thence they could look into that dale and see how it winded away up toward the mountains, like to a dismal street; for not only was it but little grassed, but withal there was neither tree nor bush therein. Moreover, scattered all about the bottom of the dale were great stones, which looked as if they had once been set in some kind of order; and that the more whereas they were not black like the rocks of the dale-side, but pale grey of hue, so that they looked even as huge sheep of the giants feeding down the dale.

Then spake Birdalone:  Verily, sir knight, thou saidst but sooth that I should see things new and strange.  But shall we go a little way into this valley to-day?  Nay, lady, said Sir Aymeris, nor to-morrow, nor any day uncompelled; neither shall we go nigher unto it than now we be.  Wherefore not? said Birdalone, for meseemeth it is as the gate of the mountains; and fain were I in the mountains.

Lady, said the castellan, overmuch perilous it were to ride the valley, which, as thou sayest, is the very gate of the mountains. For the said dale, which hight the Black Valley of the Greywethers, hath a bad name for the haunting of unmanlike wights, against which even our men-at-arms might make no defence.  And if any might escape them, and win through the gates and up into the mountains, I wot not if suchlike devils and things unkent be there in the mountain-land, but of a sooth there be fierce and wild men, like enough to devils, who know no peace, and slay whatsoever cometh unto them, but if they themselves be slain of them.

Well, said Birdalone, then to-day, at least, we go not into the dale; but knowest thou any tales of these wild places?  Many have I heard, said he, but I am an ill minstrel and should spoil them in the telling.  Ask them of Sir Leonard our priest, he knoweth of them better than others, and hath a tongue duly shapen for telling them.

Birdalone answered nought thereto; she but turned her horse's head and rode down the knoll; and so they came unto their company, and all went their ways toward the Castle of the Quest.

Nought befell them on their way home; but the nigher they came to the castle the more pensive waxed Birdalone, and, though she hid it, when they were come to the gate she scarce had her wit; for it was as if she thought to have one rushing out and crying:  Tidings, tidings! they are come.

Nowise it so befell; they were no more come than was the Day of Doom. And a little after they were within gates; it was night, and Birdalone crept wearily up to her chamber, and gat to bed, and so tired was she that she fell asleep at once and dreamed not.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_06]

CHAPTER VI. BIRDALONE HEARETH TELL TALES OF THE BLACK VALLEY OF THE GREYWETHERS

On the morrow was Birdalone heavier of heart than ever yet, and wearier for tidings; and she wondered how she could have been so joyous that day in the wildwood.  Yet she thought much of the Valley of the Greywethers, and that solaced her somewhat after a while, so sore she longed to go thither; and, as 'tis said, one nail knocks out the other.  So that morning, when she had had her lesson of priest Leonard, she spake thereof to him, and told him what Sir Aymeris had said concerning his knowledge thereof; and she asked him what he knew.

I have been there, said he.  She started at that word and said:  Did aught of evil befall thee?

Nay, said he, but a great fear and dread hung about me; and 'tis said that they try their luck overmuch who go thither twice.

Birdalone said:  Tell me now of the tales that be told of that valley.  Quoth Leonard:  They be many; but the main of them is this: that those Greywethers be giants of yore agone, or landwights, carles, and queans, who have been turned into stone by I wot not what deed; but that whiles they come alive again, and can walk and talk as erst they did; and that if any man may be so bold as to abide the time of their awakening, and in the first moment of their change may frame words that crave the fulfilment of his desire, and if therewith he be both wise and constant, then shall he have his desire fulfilled of these wights, and bear his life back again from out the dale.  And thus must he speak and no otherwise:  O Earth, thou and thy first children, I crave of you such and such a thing, whatsoever it may be. And if he speak more than this, then is he undone.  He shall answer no question of them; and if they threaten him he shall not pray them mercy, nor quail before their uplifted weapons; nor, to be short, shall he heed them more than if they still were stones unchanged. Moreover, when he hath said his say, then shall these wights throng about him and offer him gold and gems, and all the wealth of the earth; and if that be not enough, they shall bring him the goodliest of women, with nought lacking in her shape, but lacking all raiment, so that he shall see her as she is verily shapen.  But whoso shall take any one of all these gifts is lost for ever, and shall become one of that Stony People; and whoso naysayeth them all until the cock crow, and abideth steady by his one craving, shall win fulfilment thereof, and, as some say, all those gifts aforesaid; for that the Stony People may not abide the day to take them back again.

He was silent therewith, and nought spake Birdalone, but looked down on the ground, and longing encompassed her soul.  Then the priest spake again:  This were a fair adventure, lady, for a hapless one, but for the happy it were a fool's errand.  She answered not, and they parted for that time.

But the next week, there being yet no tidings come to hand, Birdalone prayed the castellan to take her out-a-gates again, that she might once more behold the mountains, and the gates thereof; and he yeasaid her asking, and went with her, well accompanied, as before; but this time, by Birdalone's will, they rode straight to the plain aforesaid, and again she looked into that dale of the Greywethers from the knoll.  Somewhat belated they were, so that they might not get back to the castle before dusk, wherefore again they lay out in the wildwood, but there lacked somewhat of the triumph and joyance which they had had that other day.  They came back to the castle on the morrow somewhat after noon, and found no news there; nor, to say sooth, did Birdalone look for any; and her heart was heavy.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_07]

CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE BEGUILETH THE PRIEST TO HELP HER TO OUTGOING

Now had the time so worn that the season was in the first days of August, and weariness and heartsickness increased on Birdalone again, and she began to look pined and pale.  Yet when she spake of the tarrying of the Champions both to the castellan and Sir Leonard the priest (who was the wiser man of the two), each said the same thing, to wit, that it was no marvel if they were not yet come, seeing whatlike the adventure was; and neither of those two seemed in anywise to have lost hope.

Thrice in these last days did Birdalone go out-a-gates with Sir Aymeris and his company; and the last of the three times the journey was to the knoll that looked into the Black Valley; but now was Birdalone's pleasure of the sight of it afar off marred by her longing to be amidst thereof; yet she did not show that she was irked by the refraining of her desire to enter therein, and they turned, and came home safely to the castle.

On the morrow she sat with Sir Leonard the priest over the writing lesson, and she let it be long, and oft he touched her hand, so that the sweetness of unfulfilled desire went deep to his heart.

At last Birdalone looked up and said:  Friend, I would ask thee if thou seest any peril in my entering the Black Valley of the Greywethers by daylight if I leave it by daylight?  Alone? quoth he. Yea, she said, alone.  He pondered a little, and then said:  Sooth to say I deem the peril little in the valley itself, if thou be not overcome by terror there.  Yea, for my part I am not all so sure that thou shalt see the wonder of the Stony Folk coming alive; for 'tis not said that they quicken save on certain nights, and chiefly on Midsummer Night; unless it be that the trier of the adventure is some one fated above others thereto; as forsooth thou mayst be.  And as for peril of evil men, there are few who be like to be as venturesome as thou or I.  They durst not enter that black street, save sore need compel them.  But forsooth, going thither, and coming back again, some peril there may be therein.  And yet for weeks past there has been no word of any unpeace; and the Red Knight it is said for certain is not riding.

Birdalone was silent a while; then she said:  Fair and kind friend, I am eating my heart out in longing for the coming back of my friends, and it is like, that unless I take to some remedy, I shall fall sick thereby, and then when they come back there shall be in me but sorry cheer for them.  Now the remedy I know, and it is that I betake me alone to this adventure of the Black Valley; for meseemeth that I shall gain health and strength by my going thither.  Wherefore, to be short, if thou wilt help me, I will go to-morrow.  What sayest thou, wilt thou help me?

He turned very red and spake:  Lady, why shouldest thou go, as thy name is, birdalone?  Thou hast called me just now thy kind friend, so kind as it was of thee; now therefore why should not thy friend go with thee?

Kindly indeed she smiled on him, but shook her head:  I call thee trusty and dear friend again, said she; but what I would do I must do myself.  Moreover to what end shouldst thou go?  If I fall in with ghosts, a score of men would help me nought; and if I happen on weaponed men who would do me scathe, of what avail were one man against them?  And look thou, Sir Leonard, there is this avail in thine abiding behind; if I come not back in two days' space, or three at the most, thou wilt wot that I have fared amiss, and then mayst thou let it be known whither I went, and men will seek me and deliver me maybe.

Therewith she stayed her words suddenly, and turned very pale, and laid her hand on her bosom, and said faintly:  But O my heart, my heart!  If they should come while I am away!  And she seemed like to swoon.

Leonard was afraid thereat, and knew not what to do; but presently the colour came into her face again, and in a little while she smiled, and said:  Seest thou not, friend, how weak I am gotten to be, and that I must now beyond doubt have the remedy?  Wilt thou not help me do it?

Yea verily, said he; but in what wise wilt thou have it?  He spake as a man distraught and redeless; but she smiled on him pleasantly, and said:  Now by this time shouldst thou have devised what was to do, and spared me the pain thereof.  Two things I need of thee:  the first and most, to be put out of the castle privily betimes in the morning when nought is stirring; the second, to have my palfrey awaiting me somewhat anigh the gate, so that I may not have to go afoot:  for I am become soft and feeble with all this house-life.

Leonard seemed to wake up with that word, and said:  I have the key of the priest's door of the chapel, and the postern beyond it; that shall be thine out-gate, lady.  I will come and scratch at thy chamber-door much betimes, and I will see to it that thy palfrey is bestowed in the bower wherein thou didst rest the first night thou camest amongst us.  She said:  I trust thee, friend.  And she thanked him sweetly, and then rose up and fell to pacing the hall up and down.  Leonard hung about watching her a while, she nought forbidding him, for her thoughts were elsewhere, and she had forgotten him; and at last he went his ways to set about doing what she would.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_08]

CHAPTER VIII. BIRDALONE FARES ON HER ADVENTURE

Dawn was but just beginning when Birdalone awoke, and though she had not heard Leonard at the door, she sprang out of bed and clad herself, doing on her black gown; and she had a scrip with some bread therein, and a sharp knife at her girdle.  Then even as she had done she heard the priest's nail on the door, and she turned thereto; but as she went, her eye caught her bow and quiver of arrows where they hung on the wall, so she took the bow in her hand and slung the quiver over her shoulder ere she opened the door and found Leonard standing there.  Neither of them spake aught, but they stole downstairs, and so to the chapel and out by the priest's door and the postern in the wall-nook, and were presently out in the fresh morning air; and Birdalone was joyous and lightfoot, and scarce felt the earth beneath her soles for pleasure of her hope, whereas she deemed she had a thing to crave of the Stony Folk, if they should come alive before her.  Fain were she, if she might withal, to give a joy to some other; so that when they were gone but a little way from the castle she reached out her hand to Leonard and took his, and said: Hand in hand we walked when first I went this way, and I deemed thee kind and friendly then, and even so hast thou been sithence.

He was dumbfoundered at first for joy of the touch of her hand and the sweetness of her words; but presently he spake to her confused and stammering, and praised her that she had thought to take her bow and arrows; for, said he, that they might stand her in stead for defence or for getting of food, or for an excuse for wending the woods.  She nodded yeasay unto him, and bade him again to bide three days for her, and if she came not again in that time, to make a clean breast of it to Sir Aymeris.

Yea, said the priest, and then . . .  Why, what then?  He can but shove me out by the shoulders, and then I can seek to the little house of canons that is at Gate Cross on the road to Greenford.

Ah, my friend! said Birdalone, how we women think of nothing at all but ourselves!  And wilt thou be thrust out of thine home for helping me herein?  Why did I not look to my palfrey myself?  And the keys I might have stolen from thee, always with thy good will.  But now I see that I have done thee a hurt.

Said Sir Leonard:  Lady, a priest hath a home wheresoever is an house of religion.  There is no harm done, save Sir Aymeris bethink him of hanging me over the battlements; as I doubt he will not with a priest.  Moreover, I pray thee believe, that wert thou gone from the castle, house and home were none for me there.  And he looked upon her piteously, as if he were beseeching.

But she knew not what to say, and hung her head adown; and presently they were come to the bower in the copse, which this time was a stable for Birdalone's palfrey instead of a chamber for herself.  So Leonard went in and fetched out the comely beast; and Birdalone stood with him just in the cover of the copse waiting to put her foot in the stirrup; but she might not but abide to look upon the priest, who stood there as if he were striving with his words.

So she said:  Now is need of haste to be gone.  Yet one word, my friend:  Is there aught betwixt us wherein I have done thee wrong? If so it be, I pray thee to say out what it is; for it may be (though I think it not) thou shalt not see me again from henceforth.

He caught his breath, as if he had much ado to refrain the sobbing; but he mastered it, and said:  Lady and dear friend, if I see thee not again, I heed not what shall befall me.  Thou hast done me no wrong.  There is this only betwixt us, that I love thee, and thou lovest not me.

She looked on him sweetly and pitifully, and said:  I may not choose but understand thy word, to wit, that thy love for me is the desire of a man toward a woman; and that is unhappy; for I love thee indeed, but not as a woman loveth a man.  It is best to say thus much to thee downright.  But I feel in my heart that when I have said it, it is as much as to say that I cannot help thee, and therefore am I sorry indeed.

He stood before her abashed, but he said at last:  Now art thou so sweet, and so kind, and so true, that I must perforce love thee yet more; and this maketh me bold to say that thou mayst help me a little, or so meseemeth.  How so? said Birdalone.  Quoth he:  If thou wouldst suffer me to kiss thy face this once.  She shook her head, and spake:  How may it avail thee, when it is for once, and once only, as forsooth it must be?  Yet it is thy choice, not mine, and I will not naysay thee.

And therewith she put up her face to him, and he kissed her cheek without touching her otherwise, and then he kissed her mouth; and she knew that he was both timorous and sad, and she was ashamed to look on him, or to speak to him any more, lest she should behold him ashamed; so she but said:  Farewell, friend, till to-morrow at least.

And therewith her foot was in the stirrup, and anon she sat in the saddle, and her palfrey was ambling briskly on the way she would.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_09]

CHAPTER IX. BIRDALONE COMES TO THE BLACK VALLEY

Little is to tell of Birdalone's journey unto the knoll above the Black Valley of the Greywethers.  It was about noon when she came there, and had met but few folk on the way, and those few were husbandmen, or carlines, or maidens wending afield betimes not far from the Castle of the Quest.

Now she sat on her horse and looked down into the dale and its stony people once more, and saw nought stirring save three ravens who, not far off, were flapping about from stone to stone of the Greywethers, and croaking loud to each other as if some tidings were toward.  She watched their play for a little, and then gat off her horse, and sat down on the grass of the knoll, and drew forth her victual, and ate and drank; for she deemed it happier to eat and drink there than in the very jaws of the Black Valley.

Soon was her dinner done, and then she got to her saddle again, and rode slowly down to the little stream, and along it toward the valley and the gates of the mountains, which she had been fain to pass through; but now, as had happed with her that morning when she was boun for the Sending Boat, somewhat she hung back from the adventure, and when she lacked but some five score yards from the very dale itself, she lighted down again, and let her way-beast bite the grass, while she sat down and watched the rippling water.

In a while she drew off shoon and hosen, and stood in the shallow ripple, and bathed her hands and face withal, and stooped up-stream and drank from the hollow of her hands, and so stepped ashore and was waxen hardier; then she strung her bow and looked to the shafts in her quiver, and did on her foot-gear, and mounted once more, and so rode a brisk amble right on into the dale, and was soon come amongst the Greywethers; and she saw that they were a many, and that all the bottom of the dale was besprinkled with them on either side of the stream, and some stood in the very stream itself, the ground whereof was black even as the rest of the valley, although the water ran over it as clear as glass.

As for the dale, now she was fairly within it, she could see but a little way up it, for it winded much, and at first away from her left hand, and the sides of it went up in somewhat steep screes on either side, which were topped with mere upright staves and burgs of black rock; and these were specially big and outthrusting on the right hand of her; and but a furlong ahead of where she was, one of these burgs thrust out past the scree and came down sheer into the dale, and straitened it so much that there was but little way save by the stream itself, which ran swift indeed, but not deep, even there where it was straitened by the sheer rocks.

But up the dale would she go, whatever was before her; and now she told herself her very purpose, as forsooth she scarce had heretofore; to wit, that she would abide in the dale the night over and see what should betide, and if those wights should chance to come alive, then she looked to have valiance enough to face them and crave the fulfilment of her desire.

So she took the water and rode the stream till she was past the said sheer rock, and then the valley widened again, and presently was wider than it was in the beginning; and here again were the Greywethers grown many more and closer together, and, as she deemed, were set in rings round about one very big one, which, forsooth, was somewhat in the shape of a man sitting down with his hands laid on his knees.

Birdalone reined up for a minute, and looked about her, and then went up on to the grass, and rode straight to the said big stone, and there lighted down from off her horse again, and stood by the stone and pondered.  Presently she deemed that she saw something dark moving just beyond the stone, but if it were so, it was gone in a twinkling; nevertheless she stood affrighted, and stared before her long, and saw no more, but yet for a while durst not move hand nor foot.

At last her courage came again, and she thought:  Yet how if this great chieftain be inwardly stirring and will come awake?  Shall I say the word now, lest hereafter it be of no avail?  Therewith she stretched out her right hand and laid it on the stone, and spake aloud:  O Earth, thou and thy first children, I crave of you that he may come back now at once and loving me.  And her voice sounded strange and unkent to her in that solitude, and she rued it that she had spoken.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_10]

CHAPTER X. HOW BIRDALONE FELL IN WITH A MAN IN THE BLACK VALLEY OF THE GREYWETHERS

Came new tidings therewithal; for the moment after she had spoken, a tall man drew out from behind the big stone, and stood before her; and at first it was in her mind that this was the very chieftain come alive for her, and for terror she was like to swoon this time; but he spake nought a while, but looked on her eagerly and curiously.

She came to herself presently, so much that she could see him clearly, and was now growing more shamefast than afraid, when she saw beyond doubt that the man was of the sons of Adam; but what with her shame that was now, and her fear that had been, she yet had no might to move, but stood there pale and trembling like a leaf, and might scarce keep her feet.

Now the new-comer bowed before her smiling, and said:  I ask thy pardon, fair damsel (or indeed I should say fairest damsel), that I have scared thee.  But sooth to say I beheld thee coming riding, and even from a little aloof I could see that nought which might befall could ever make it up to me for not seeing thee close at hand and hearing thee speak.  Wherefore I hid myself behind the king's stone here; and no harm is done thereby I trow; for now I see that the colour is coming into thy cheeks again, and thy fear is gone.  And as for me, thou hast not fled away from me, as thou wouldst have done had I not hidden and come on thee suddenly; and then thou being horsed and I unhorsed, thou wouldst have escaped me, whereas now thou art within reach of my hand.  Then he smiled, and said:  Furthermore, thou hast told so little of thy secret to this stony king here, that I am little the wiser for thy word, and thou the little more betrayed.  Only this I will say, that if He loveth thee not, He is more of a fool than I be.

He reached out his hand to hers, but she drew it aback, and grew yet more ashamed, and could find no word for him.  His voice was soft and full, and he spake deftly, but she was not content with it for its kindness, as she had been with all the other men whom she had met since she left the House under the Wood, and she durst not trust her hand to him.

As for his aspect, she saw that he was tall and well-knit, and goodly of fashion; dark-haired, with long hazel eyes, smooth-cheeked and bright-skinned; his nose long, and a little bent over at the end, and coming down close to his lips, which were full and red; his face was hairless save for a little lip-beard.  He was so clad, that he had no helm on his head, but a little hat with a broad gold piece in the front thereof; he was girt to a long sword, and had an anlace also in his belt, and Birdalone saw the rings of a fine hauberk at his collar and knees; otherwise he was not armed.  Over his hauberk he wore a black surcoat, without device of any kind, and his foot and leg gear were of the same hue; wherefore may we call him the Black Knight. Sooth to say, for all his soft speech, she feared him and rued the meeting of him.

Now he spake to her again:  I see that thou art wroth with me, lady; but mayhappen it is not so ill that I have happened on thee; for this dale hath a bad name for more than one thing, and is scarce meet for damsels to wander in.  But now since thou hast a weaponed man with thee, and thou, by All-hallows! not utterly unarmed, thou mayst well go up the valley and see something more thereof.  So come now, mount thine horse again, and I will lead him for thee.

Now Birdalone found speech and said:  Knight, for such thou seemest to me, I deem now that I have no need to fare further in this dale, but I will get me into the saddle and turn my horse's head outward again, giving thee good day first and thanking thee for thy courtesy. And therewith she turned to get to her palfrey, but sore trembling the while; but he followed her and said, with brow somewhat knitted: Nay, lady, I have left my horse somewhat further up, and I must go back to fetch him, that we may wend out of the dale together.  For I will not suffer thee to flee from me and fall into the hands of evil wights, be they ghosts or living men, and that the less since I have heard the speech in thy mouth, as of honey and cream and roses. Therefore if thou go out of the dale, I shall go with thee afoot, leading thine horse.  And look to it if it be courteous to unhorse a knight, who is ready to be thy servant.  Moreover, since thou hast come to this dale of wonder, and mayst leave it safely, pity it were that thou shouldst see nought thereof, for strange is it forsooth, and belike thou shalt never seek thither again.  Wherefore I crave of thee, once more, to mount thine horse and let me lead thee up the dale.

He spake these last words rather as one giving a command than making a prayer, and Birdalone feared him now sorely.  Forsooth she had her bended bow in hand; but let alone that the knight was over-near to her that she might get a shaft out of her quiver and nock it, ere he should run in on her, and let alone also that he was byrnied, she scarce deemed that it behoved her to slay or wound the man because she would be quit of him.  Wherefore angrily, and with a flushed face, she answered him:  So shall it be then, Sir Knight; or rather so must it be, since thou compellest me.

He laughed and said:  Nay, now thou art angry.  I compel thee not, I but say that it will not do for thee to compel me to leave thee.  Go which way thou wilt, up the dale, or down it and out of it; it is all one unto me, so long as I am with thee.  Forsooth, damsel, I have said harder words to ladies who have done my pleasure and not deemed themselves compelled.

She paled but answered nought; then she mounted her palfrey, and the knight went to her bridle-rein without more words, and so led her on up the valley by the easiest way amongst the Greywethers.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_11]

CHAPTER XI. BIRDALONE IS LED UP THE BLACK VALLEY

As they went, the knight fell a-talking to Birdalone, and that without any of the covert jeering which he had used erewhile; and he showed her places in the dale, as caverns under the burgs, and little eyots in the stream, and certain stones amongst the Greywethers whereof stories ran; and how this and the other one had fared in dealings with the land-wights, and how one had perished, and another had been made happy, and so forth.  Withal he told of the mountain- folk, and in especial how they of the plains, when he was scarce more than a boy, had met them in battle in that same dale, and how fierce the fight was; whereas the mountain-men were fighting for a life of desires accomplished, which hitherto had been but a dream unto them; and the men of the plain fought for dear life itself, and for all that made it aught save death in life.  Wherefore up and down the dale they fought, at first in ordered ranks and then in knots, and lastly sword to sword and man to man, till there was no foot of grass or black sand there which had not its shower of blood; and the stream was choked with the dead, and ran red out of the dale; till at last well-nigh all the host of the mountain-men was fallen, and scarce less of the folk of the plains, but these men held the field and had the victory.

All this he told her deftly and well, and though he said not so right out, yet let her wot that, youth as he was, he was of the battle; and his voice was clear and good, and Birdalone's wrath ran off her, and she hearkened his tale, and even asked him a question here and there; and so courteous was this Black Knight now become, that Birdalone began to think that she had fallen short of courtesy to him, because of her fear and the weariness of the waiting which so oppressed her; and that shamed and irked her, for she would fain be of all courtesy. Wherefore now she deemed that perchance she had erred in deeming him an evil man; and she looked on him from time to time, and deemed him goodly of fashion; she thought his eyes were deep, and his face sober and fair of aspect, but that his nose turned down at the end, and was over thin at the bridge, and moreover his lips looked over-sweet and licorous.

Now when the knight was silent of his tales, Birdalone fell to asking him questions sweetly concerning this Stony People which was all about them; and he told her all he knew, soberly enough at first, yet indeed ended by mocking them somewhat, but mocked not at her any more.  At last he said:  Fair lady, that thou hast not come here all for nought I partly know by those words which I heard come from thy mouth at the King's Stone; wherefore I marvelled indeed when I heard thee say that thou wouldst go straight out of the dale; for I had deemed thee desirous of trying the adventure of waking this Stony People a-night-tide.  Forsooth was this thy mind when thou soughtest hither to the dale?

She reddened at his word, and yeasaid him shortly.  Then said he:  Is it not thy mind still?  Sir, said she, as now I have got to fear it. Yea? and that is strange, said he, for thou wouldst have waked the dale alone; and now thou art no longer alone, but hast me to watch and ward thy waking, thou art more afeard.

She looked on his face steadily, to wot if there were no half-hidden smile therein; but herseemed that he spake in all soberness; and she had nought to say to him save this:  Sir, I am now become afraid of the waking.  And he said no more thereof.

Now they went thus, and Birdalone not without pleasure, since her fear of the knight was minished, some three hours up the dale, and still were the Greywethers everywhere about them, so that there were well-nigh as many hours as miles in their wending.

At last they seemed to be drawing nigh to the head of the dale, and the burgs and the rocks were before them all round it as a wall, though yet about a mile aloof at the further end; and this end it was wider than elsewhere.

Came they then to a level space of greensward clear of the grey stones, which were drawn all around it in ordered rings, so that it was as some doom-ring of an ancient people; and within the said space Birdalone beheld a great black horse tethered and cropping the grass. The knight led her into the ring, and said:  Now are we come home for the present, my lady, and if it please thee to light down we shall presently eat and drink, and sithence talk a little.  And he drew nigh to help her off her horse, but she suffered him not, and lighted down of herself; but if she suffered not his hand, his eyes she must needs suffer, as he gazed greedily on the trimness of her feet and legs in her sliding from her horse.

Howsoever, he took her hand, and led her to a little mound on the other side of the ring, and bade her sit down there, and so did she, and from under the nighest of the stones he drew forth a pair of saddle-bags, and took victual and wine thence, and they ate and drank together like old companions.  And now Birdalone told herself that the knight was frank and friendly; yet forsooth she wotted that her heart scarce trowed what it feigned, and that she yet feared him.

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_12]

CHAPTER XII. HOW THOSE TWAIN GET THEM FROM OUT OF THE BLACK VALLEY OF THE GREYWETHERS

When they had dined, and had sat a while talking, the knight said:  I will ask thee once more wherefore thou must needs depart from this dale leaving the Greywethers unwaked?  Yet this must I tell thee first, that this ring at the dale's end is the only one due place where the Greywethers can be rightly waked, and that there be few who wot this.  Wilt thou not tell me then what is in thy mind?

Birdalone gazed down on the ground a while; then she lifted up her head and looked on the Black Knight, and said:  Sir Knight, we have been brought so close together to-day, and as meseemeth I am so wholly in thy power, that I will tell thee the very truth as it is. My mind it was to wake the dale here to-night, and take what might befall me.  And well indeed might I fear the adventure, which few, meseemeth, would not fear.  But so strong is my longing for that which I would crave of these wights, that it overmastered my fear, and my purpose held when I entered the dale.  Then I met thee; and here again is the truth, take it how thou wilt, that presently I feared thee, and yet I fear thee; for I have noted thee closely all this while, and have seen of thee, that thou art over heedful of my poor body, and wouldst have it for thine own if thou mightest.  And there is this in thee also, as I deem, though thou thyself mayst not know it, that thou wouldst have thy pleasure of me whether it pleasure me or grieve me; and this thy pleasure must I needs gainsay; for though thou mayest hereafter become my friend, yet are there other friends of mine, who be such, that my grief would mar any pleasure they might have.  Hast thou heard and understood?

She looked on his face steadily as she spake, and saw that it flushed, and darkened, and scowled, and that his hands were clenched, and his teeth set hard together.  And again she spake:  Sir, thou shalt know that beside these shot-weapons, I have a thing here in my girdle that may serve either against thee or against me, if need drive me thereto; wherefore I will pray thee to forbear.  Forsooth, thou shalt presently happen on other women, who shall be better unto thee than I can be.

By then Birdalone had spoken the word, the knight's face had cleared, and he laughed aloud and said:  As to thy last words, therein at least thou liest, my lady.  But for the rest, I see that it must all be as thou wiliest.  Yea, if such be thy will, we shall presently to horse and ride down the dale again, and at the end thereof I shall leave thee to go home alone at thy will.  She said:  For that I can thee thanks with all my heart.  But why hast thou not asked me of whence I am, and whither I would go home?

Again he laughed and said:  Because I know already.  I have had more than two or three tales from them who have seen thee, or spoken unto others who have seen thee, how the gay Champions of the Castle of the Quest had fished up a wondrous pearl of price from out of the Great Water; and when I set eyes on thy beauty, I knew that the said pearl could be nowhere else than under mine eyes.

Let that pass, she said, and blushed not; but now tell me the truth as I have told thee, why thou art so instant with me to wake the Greywethers to-night?  He kept silence a while, and, as she looked on him, she thought she saw confusion in his face; but at last he said: Thou wert wrong in saying that I heeded not thy pleasure, and solace, and welfare.  Meseemed, and yet doth, that it might be to thine avail to wake the Greywethers to-night; and never again mayst thou have a chance of the waking, as erst I said.  I say I wish thee to have fulfilment of thy craving.  Nor hast thou aught to fear of them, seeing that it is but dastards and fools that they undo.

He broke off his speech, and Birdalone yet looked on him, and after a little he said:  Thou drawest the truth out of me; for moreover I would have thee with me longer than thou wouldst be if we but rode together down the water and out of the dale, and thou to fare away alone.

Birdalone spake in a while, and that while he gazed upon her eagerly; she said:  I shall now tell thee that I shall abide the adventure of the waking to-night, whatever befall.  And I, said he, will so do that thou mayst fear me the less; for I will unarm me when the night cometh, and thou thyself shalt keep mine hauberk and sword and anlace.

She said:  It is well; I will take that, lest desire overmaster thee.

They spake no more of it at that time, and it was now five hours after noon.  Birdalone arose, for she found it hard to sit still and abide nightfall:  she went without the two first rings of the Greywethers, which were set in more open order beyond that, and she looked all about her, to the black rocks on either side, and to the great black wall at the dale's ending, and the blue mountains aloof beyond it; then down toward the plain of the dale came her eyes, and she looked through the tangle of the grey stones.  Now she seemed to be looking more intently upon some one thing; with that she called to her the Black Knight, who was hanging about watching her, and she said to him:  Fair sir, art thou clear-seeing and far-seeing?  I am not thought to be purblind, quoth he.  Then Birdalone reached out her hand and pointed and said:  Canst thou see aught which thou didst not look to see, there, up the dale as I point?  Said he:  All too clear I see the hand and the wrist of thee, and that blinds me to aught else.  I pray thee fool not, she said, but look heedfully, and thou mayst see what I see, and then tell me what it means.  Though forsooth I am exceeding in far sight.

He looked under the sharp of his hand heedfully, then he turned unto her and said:  By All-hallows! there is in thee every excellency! Thou art right; I see a bay horse up there feeding on the bites of grass amongst the Greywethers.  Look again! she said; what else canst thou see?  Is there aught anigh to the bay horse which is like to the gleam and glitter of metal.  Christ! said he, once more thou art right.  There be weaponed men in the dale.  Tarry not, I beseech thee, but get to horse forthright, and I will do no less.

There goeth the waking of the dale for this time, said Birdalone, laughing.  But art thou not in haste, fair sir? may not these be friends?

The knight laid his hand upon her shoulder, and thrust her on toward her palfrey, and spake fiercely, but not loud:  Thee I pray not to fool now!  There is not a minute to spare.  If thou deemest me evil, as I think thou dost, there are worser than I, I tell thee, there are worser.  But we will talk of it when we be in the saddle, and clear of this accursed dale.

Birdalone knew not what to do save obey him, so she lightly gat into her saddle, and followed him, for he was mounted in a twinkling, and riding on.  He led out of the ring, and fell to threading the maze of the Greywethers, keeping ever toward the steep side of the dale, which was on that hand that looked toward the Castle of the Quest, that is to say, the eastern bent.  Birdalone wondered at this leading, and when she was come up with the knight she spake to him breathlessly, and said:  But, fair sir, why wend we not down the dale?  He answered:  First, lady, because we must hide us from them straightway; and next because they be more than we, many more, and their horses be fresh, while thine at least is somewhat spent; and if they were to spur down the dale in chase, they would soon be upon us; for think not that I would escape and leave thee behind.

Said Birdalone:  But thou knowest them, then, what they be? since thou wottest of their numbers and their riding.  Hearken now!  Upon thy soul and thy salvation, be they more friends unto thee than unto me?

He said, as be rode on a little slower than erst:  Upon my soul and my salvation I swear it, that the men yonder be of the worst unfriends to thee that may be in the world.  And now, lady, I promise thee that I will unravel thee the riddle, and tell thee the whole truth of these haps, whatsoever may come of my words, when we be in a safer place than this; and meantime I beseech thee to trust in me thus far, as to believe that I am leading thee out of the very worst peril that might befall thee.  Nay, thou must needs trust me; for I tell thee, that though I now love thee better than all the world and all that is in it, I would slay thee here in this dale rather than suffer thee to fall into the hands of these men.

Birdalone heard him with a sick heart; but such passion went with his words that she believed what he said; and she spake softly:  Sir, I will trust thee thus far; but I beseech thee to have pity upon a poor maiden who hath had but little pity shown unto her until these latter days; and then:  O woe's me, to have fallen out of the kindness and love once more!

The Black Knight spake to her in a little while, and said:  What pity I can to thee, that I will.  Once more I tell thee, that if thou but knew it thou wouldst thank me indeed for what I have done for thee in this hour; and henceforth I will do and forbear with thee to the uttermost that love will suffer me.  But lo thou! here are we safe for this present; but we must nowise tarry.

Birdalone looked and saw that they were come to the wall of the dale, and that there it went down sheer to the plain thereof, and that before them was a cleft that narrowed speedily, and over which the rocks well-nigh met, so that it was indeed almost a cave.  They rode into it straightway, and when that they had gone but a little, and because it had winded somewhat, they could but see the main valley as a star of light behind them, then it narrowed no more, but was as a dismal street of the straitest, whiles lighter and whiles darker, according as the rocks roofed it in overhead or drew away from it. Long they rode, and whiles came trickles of water from out the rocks on one hand or the other; and now and again they met a stream which covered all the ground of the pass from side to side for the depth of a foot or more.  Great rocks also were strewn over their path every here and there, so that whiles must they needs dismount and toil afoot over the rugged stones; and in most places the way was toilsome and difficult.  The knight spake little to Birdalone, save to tell her of the way, and warn her where it was perilous; and she, for her part, was silent, partly for fear of the strange man, or, it might be, even for hatred of him, who had thus brought her into such sore trouble, and partly for grief.  For, with all torment of sorrow, she kept turning over and over in her mind whether her friends had yet come home to the Castle of the Quest, and whether they would go seek her to deliver her.  And such shame took hold of her when she thought of their grief and confusion of soul when they should come home and find her gone, that she set her mind to asking if it had not been better had she never met them.  Yet in good sooth her mind would not shape the thought, howsoever she bade it.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_13]

CHAPTER XIII. NOW THEY REST FOR THE NIGHT IN THE STRAIT PASS

At last, when they had been going a long while, it might be some six hours, and it had long been night in the world without, but moon-lit, and they had rested but seldom, and then but for short whiles, the knight drew rein and spake to Birdalone, and asked her was she not weary.  O yea, she said; I was at point to pray thee suffer me to get off and lie down on the bare rock.  To say sooth, I am now too weary to think of any peril, or what thou art, or whither we be going.  He said:  By my deeming we be now half through this mountain highway, and belike there is little peril in our resting; for I think not that any one of them knoweth of this pass, or would dare it if he did; and they doubtless came into the dale by the upper pass, which is strait enough, but light and open.

As he spoke, Birdalone bowed forward on her horse's neck, and would have fallen but that he stayed her.  Then he lifted her off her horse, and laid her down in the seemliest place he might find; and the pass there was much widened, and such light as there was in the outer world came down freely into it, though it were but of the moon and the stars; and the ground was rather sandy than rocky.  So he dight Birdalone's bed as well as he might, and did off his surcoat and laid it over her; and then stood aloof, and gazed on her; and he muttered:  It is an evil chance; yet the pleasure of it, the pleasure of it!  Yea, said he again, she might well be wearied; I myself am ready to drop, and I am not the least tough of the band.  And therewith he laid him down on the further side of the pass, and fell asleep straightway.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_14]

CHAPTER XIV. THE BLACK KNIGHT TELLS THE TRUTH OF HIMSELF

When the morning was come down into the straitness of their secret road, Birdalone opened her eyes and saw the Black Knight busy over dighting their horses:  so she arose and thrust her grief back into her heart, and gave her fellow-farer the sele of the day, and he brought her victual, and they ate a morsel, and gat to horse thereafter and departed; and the way became smoother, and it was lighter overhead everywhere now, and the rocks never again met overhead athwart the way; and it seemed to Birdalone that now they were wending somewhat downward.

The knight was courteous unto Birdalone, and no longer for the present thrust his love upon her, so that now she had some solace of his fellowship, though he was but few-spoken to her.  It was betimes when they arose, and they rode all the morning till it was noon, which they might well wot of, because the way was much wider, and the cliff-walls of the pass much lower, so that the sun shone in upon them and cheered them.

Now the Black Knight drew rein and said:  Shall we rest, lady, and eat?  And thereafter, if thou wilt, I shall tell thee my tale.  Or rather, if thou wilt suffer me, I shall speak first and eat afterwards, or else the morsel might stick in my throat.  Knight, said Birdalone, smiling, I hope thou hast no lie to swallow down before the meat.  Nay, lady, said he; no lie that is of moment at least.

So they lighted down, and Birdalone sat on the wayside under a birch- bush that came thrusting out from the rock, and the knight stood before her, hanging his head, as though he were one accused who would plead his cause; and he began:

Lady, I must tell thee first of all, that to-day I have done as an unfaithful servant and a traitor to my lord.  Said Birdalone simply: Shall I tell thee the truth, and say that from the first I seemed to see in thee that thou wert scarce trusty?  He said:  Well, that mind I saw in thee, and it went to my heart that thou shouldest think it, and that it should be no less than true.  But now I must tell thee, that it is for thy sake that I have been untrusty to my lord.  How so? said she.  Quoth he:  Heardest thou ever of the Red Knight?  Yea, said Birdalone, I have heard of him ever as a tyrant and oppressor. Then she grew pale, and said:  Art thou he?  Nay, said the knight, I am but a kinsman of his, and his best-trusted man; nor have I failed him ever till yesterday.

He kept silence a while, and then said:  This is the true tale:  that we have had tidings of thee and of thy ridings abroad with that old fool, Sir Aymeris, and how thou hadst been twice to look into the Black Valley.  This I say hath the Red One heard, and the heart of him was touched by the mere hearsay of thee; and moreover 'tis blessed bread to him the doing of any grief to the knights of Quest Castle; wherefore he hath sent me to hang about the dale, to lay hands on thee if I might for; he knew being wise, that thou wouldst hanker after it; and moreover he let one of his wise women sit out in spells on thee.  So I espied, and happened on thee all alone; and mine errand it was, since I came upon thee thus, to draw thee till I had thee safe at home in the Red Hold.  Forsooth I began mine errand duly, and fell to beguiling thee, so that thou mayst well have seen the traitor in me.  But then, and then my heart failed me, because I fell, not to desiring thee as coveting my master's chattel, but to loving thee and longing for thee as my fellow and speech-friend.  And I said to myself:  Into the Red Hold she shall not go if I may hinder it.

Birdalone was very pale, but she refrained her from grief and fear, and said:  But those horsed and weaponed men up the dale, who were they?  He said:  I will not lie now, not even a little; they came into the dale by that upper pass whereof I told thee; they were of our men; I brought them.  I was never all alone in the dale; I was to have fetched thee to them, so that thou mightest not see a rout of folk and flee away; and then would we all have gone home together by the upper pass.  But we two must have gone on unto them in the dale's head, whereas for all that I could say I might not bring them down into that doom-ring where we ate and talked yesterday.  We two have been valianter than thou mayst have deemed, to have done the deed of dining there; for all men fear it.  But as for me, I have been there more than twice or thrice, and thence have I wandered, and found this pass wherein now we be; concerning which I have held my tongue, deeming that it might one day serve my turn; as it hath done now abundantly, since it hath been a refuge unto thee.

Yea, but whither are we going now? said Birdalone; is it perchance to the Red Hold?  Nay, never, said the knight, so help me God and All- hallows!

Whither then? said Birdalone; tell me, that I may at least trust thee, even though I owe thee for all the pain and grief which thou hast wrought me.  He reddened and said:  Wait a while; I bring thee to no ill place; there shall no harm befall thee.  And he fretted and fumed, and was confused of speech and look, and then he said:  When we come there I shall belike crave a boon of thee.

O, but I crave a boon of thee here and now, said Birdalone.  Wipe away thine offence to me and take me back to my friends and the Castle of the Quest!  So mayst thou yet be dear unto me, though maybe not wholly as thou wouldst have it.  And she reached out her two hands toward him.

His breast heaved, and he seemed nigh to weeping; but he said:  Nay, lady, ask me not here and now, but there and to-morrow.  But again I swear to thee by thine hands that to the Red Hold I will not bring thee, nor suffer thee to be brought, if I may hinder it; nay, not though I give my life therefor.

Birdalone was silent awhile; then she said:  And what shall befall me if I come to the Red Hold?  What is the Red Knight, and what would he do with me?  Said he:  The Red Knight is terrible and fierce and wise; and I fear him, I.  He held his peace, and said:  I must needs say it, that to thee he would have been as Death and the Devil.  He would have bedded thee first.  She broke in:  Nay, never! and flushed very red.  But the knight went on:  And after, I wot not; that were according to his mood.  And as to thy never, lady, thou wottest not the like of him or of the folk he hath about him.  Such as thou? she said angrily.  Nay, he said, far worse than me; men who fare little afield, and are not sweetened by adventures and war-perils; and women worser yet; and far worser were they dealing with a woman.  She was silent again awhile, and paled once more; then her colour came back to her, and she held out her hand to him and said kindly:  Thou being what thou art, I thank thee for thy dealings with me; and now until to-morrow, when I shall ask thee of that again, I am friends with thee; so come now, and let us eat and drink together.

He took her hand and kissed it, and then came and sat down meekly beside her, and they ate and drank in that wild place as though they had been friends of long acquaintance.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_15]

CHAPTER XV. THE BLACK KNIGHT BRINGS BIRDALONE TO THE BOWER IN THE DALE

When they had made an end of their meal, they gat to horse again and rode on their ways; and every mile now was their road the easier, the pass wider, and its walls lower and now also more broken; till at last they began to go down hill swiftly, and after a little their road seemed to be swallowed in a great thicket of hornbeam and holly; but the knight rode on and entered the said thicket, and ever found some way amidst the branches, though they were presently in the very thick of the trees, and saw no daylight between the trunks for well- nigh an hour, whereas the wood was thick and tangled, and they had to thread their way betwixt its mazes.

At last the wood began to grow thinner before them, and the white light to show between the trunks; and Birdalone deemed that she heard the sound of falling water, and presently was sure thereof; and the knight spake to her:  Patience, my lady; now are we near home for to- day.  She nodded kindly to him, and therewith they rode on to open ground, and were on the side of a steep bent, broken on their right hands into a sheer cliff as Birdalone saw when the knight led her to the edge and bade her look over.  Then she saw down into a fair dale lying far below them, through the which ran a little river, clear and swift, but not riotous, after it had fallen over a force at the upper end of the dale, and made the sound of water which she had heard. The said dale was so, that whatsoever was on the other side thereof was hidden by tall and great trees, that stood close together some twenty yards aloof from the stream, and betwixt them and it was fair greensward with a few bushes and thorn-trees thereon.

Quoth the knight:  Down there shall we rest till to-morrow, if it please thee, lady; and since the sun will set in an hour, we were best on our way at once.  It pleases me well, said Birdalone, and I long to tread the turf by the river-side, for I am weary as weary may be of the saddle and the pass.

So down the bent they rode, and it was but a little ere they had ridden it to an end, and had met the river as it swept round the cliff-wall of the valley; and they rode through it, and came on to the pleasant greensward aforesaid under the trees; and in a bight of the wood was a bower builded of turf and thatched with reed; and there, by the bidding of the knight, they alighted; and the knight said:  This is thine house for to-night, my lady; and thou mayest lie there in all safety after thou hast supped, and mayst have my weapons by thy side if thou wilt, while I lie under the trees yonder.  And if thou wilt bathe thee in the cool water, to comfort thee after the long ride and the weariness, I swear by thy hand that I will take myself out of eye-shot and abide aloof till thou call me.

Said Birdalone, smiling somewhat:  Fair sir, I will not have my watch and ward unarmed; keep thou thy weapons; and thou wilt not forget, perchance, that I am not wholly unarmed, whereas I have my bow and arrows and my knife here.  And as to my bathing, I will take thee at thy word, and bid thee go aloof a while now at once; for I will go down to the water; and if thou spy upon me, then will it be thy shame and not mine.

The knight went his ways therewith, and Birdalone went down to the water and unclad her; but ere she stepped into the river, she laid her bow and three shafts on the lip thereof.  Then she took the water, and disported her merrily therein; and now, forsooth, she was nowise downcast, for she said to herself, this man is not all evil and he lovest me well, and I look for it that to-morrow he will bring me on my way toward the Castle of the Quest, for mere love of me; and then shall he be a dear friend to me, and I will comfort him what I can for as long as we both live.

So she came out of the water and clad her, and then called aloud for the knight, and he came speedily unto her, as if he had been not exceeding far away, though he swore with a great oath that he had nowise espied her.  She answered him nought, and they went side by side to the bower; and there the knight dight the victual, and they sat together and ate their meat like old friends; and Birdalone asked the knight concerning this valley and the bower, if he had known it for long, and he answered:  Yea, lady, I was but a stripling when I first happened on the dale; and I deem that few know thereof save me; at least none of our flock knoweth thereof, and I am fain thereof, and keep them unknowing, for if my lord were to hear of my having a haunt privy unto me he would like it but ill.

Birdalone turned pale when she heard him speak of his lord; for fear of the Red Knight had entered into her soul, so that now the flesh crept upon her bones.  But she enforced her to smile, and said:  Yea, and what would he do to thee were he ill-content with thy ways? Forsooth, lady, said he, if he could spare me he would make an end of me in some miserable way; nay, if he were exceeding ill-content, he would do as much for me whether he could spare me or not; otherwise he would watch his occasion, and so grieve me that what he did would go to my very heart.  Woe's me! said Birdalone, thou servest an evil master.  The knight answered not, and Birdalone went on speaking earnestly:  It is a shame to thee to follow this fiend; why dost thou not sunder thee from him, and become wholly an honest man?  Said he gruffly:  It is of no use talking of this, I may not; to boot, I fear him.  Then did Birdalone hold her peace, and the knight said:  Thou dost not know; when I part from thee I must needs go straight to him, and then must that befall which will befall.  Speak we no more of these matters.

Birdalone flushed with hope and joy as he spake thus, for she took him to mean that he would lead her, on the morrow, on her way to the Castle of the Quest.  But the knight spake in a voice grown cheerful again:  As to this bower, lady, the tale thereof is soon told; for with mine own hands I builded it some fifteen years ago; and I have come to this place time and again when my heart was overmuch oppressed with black burdens of evil and turmoil, and have whiles prevailed against the evil, and whiles not.  Mayst thou prevail this time, then! said she.  He answered her not, but presently fell to talking with her of other matters, and the two were frank and friendly together, till the August night grew dark about them; and then spake Birdalone:  Now would I rest, for I can no longer keep mine eyes open.  Abide aloof from me to-morrow morning till I call to thee, as thou didst this evening; and then, before we eat together again, thou shalt tell me what thou wilt do with me.  He stood up to depart, and she reached out her hand to him in the glimmer, and he saw it, but said:  Nay, if I take thine hand, I shall take thine whole body.  And therewith he departed, and she laid her down in her smock alone, and slept anon, and was dreamless and forgetting everything till the sun was up in the morning.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f4_16]

CHAPTER XVI. YET A DAY AND A NIGHT THEY TARRY IN THE DALE

Birdalone awoke when the sun came into the bower to her, and stood up at once, and went down to the river and washed the night off her; and then, when she was clad, called on the knight to come to her; and he came, looking downcast and troubled; so that Birdalone thought within herself:  It is well, he will do my will.

She stood before him, and gave him the sele of the day, and he looked on her sorrowfully.  Then she said:  Now is come the time when I am to ask thee to take me back to the Castle of the Quest and my own people.  He was not hasty to answer her, and she spake again:  This must thou do, or else take me to the Red Hold and deliver me to the tyrant there; and I have heard it from thine own mouth that will be nought else than casting me into shame and torment and death.  And I deem thou canst not do it.  Nay, she said, staying the words that were coming from his mouth, I wot that thou canst do it if thine heart can suffer it; for thou art stronger than I, and thou mayst break my bow, and wrest this knife out of mine hand; and thou canst bind me and make me fast to the saddle, and so lead my helpless body into thraldom and death.  But thou hast said that thou lovest me, and I believe thee herein.  Therefore I know that thou canst not will to do this.

He answered in his surly voice:  Thou art right, lady, I cannot. Nay, hearken thou this time.  I have been turning over night-long what thou didst say about leaving my lord, that is, betraying him, for it comes to that; and now I have made up my mind to do it, and I will betray him for thy sake.  Wherefore there is a third way to take which thou hast not seen; we will ride out of this dale in an hour's time, and I will bring thee to them who are only less the mortal foes of the Red Knight than are thy fellows of the Quest, to wit, to the captain and burgesses of the good town of Greenford by the Water; and I will do them to wit that I have rescued thee from the hands of the Red Knight, and am become his foe; and will show them all his incomings and outgoings, and every whit of rede, and entrap him, so that he fall into their hands.  Now, though were I to be taken in battle by them, I should be speedily brought to the halter, or may be to the bale-fire (for we be wizards all in the Red Hold); yet with this word in my mouth, if they trow in it, I shall be made their captain, and presently their master.  Trow in my tale they will, if thou bear me out therein, and they will honour thee, and suffer thee to give thyself to me in marriage; and then I know thee, and myself also, and that ere long we shall be both mighty and wealthy and beloved, and fair will be the days before us.

His voice had grown softer as he spake, and toward the end of his words he faltered, and at last brake out a-weeping, and cast himself wordless on the grass before her.

She was pale, and her brow was knitted, and her face quivered; but she spake coldly to him and said:  This way I cannot take; and I wonder at thee that thou hast shown it unto me, for thyself thou knowest that I cannot go with thee.  I will go nowhere hence save to the Castle of the Quest.  If thou wilt not lead me thereto, or put me on the road, I ask thee straight, Wilt thou stay me if I go seek the way thither myself?

He rose up from the ground with a pale face full of anger as well as grief, and caught her by the wrists and said, scowling the while: Tell me now which of them it is; is it the stupid oaf Baudoin, or the light fool Hugh, or the dull pedant Arthur?  But it matters not; for I know, and all the country-side knows, that they be vowed, each man of them, to his own woman; and if they find not the women themselves, such dolts they are, that they will ever be worshipping the mere shadows of them, and turn away from flesh and blood, were it the fairest in the world, as thou art, as thou art.

She shrank away from him what she might, but he still held her wrists; then she spake in a quivering voice, her very lips pale with fear and wrath:  It is well seen that thou art a man of the Red Knight; and belike thou wouldst do with me as he would.  But one thing I crave of thee, if there is any grain of mercy in thee, that thou wilt draw thy sword and thrust me through; thou mayst leave thine hold of me to get at the blade, I will not stir from where I stand.  O! to think that I deemed thee well-nigh a true man.

He dropped her hands now and stood aloof from her, staring at her, and presently cast himself on the ground, rolling about and tearing at the grass.  She looked on him a moment or two, and then stepped forward and stooped to him, and touched his shoulder and said:  Rise up, I bid thee, and be a man and not a wild beast.

So in a while he arose, and stood before her hang-dog-like; then she looked on him pitifully, and said:  Fair sir and valiant knight, thou hast gone out of thy mind for a while, and thus hast thou shamed both me and thyself; and now thou wert best forget it, and therewithal my last words to thee.

Therewith she held out her hand to him, and he went on his knees and took it, sobbing, and kissed it.  But she said, and smiled on him: Now I see that thou wilt do what I prayed of thee, and lead me hence and put me on the road to the Castle of the Quest.  He said:  I will lead thee to the Castle of the Quest.

Said Birdalone:  Then shall it be as I promised, that I will be thy dear friend while both we live.  And now, if thou canst, be a little merrier, and come and sit with me, and let us eat our meat, for I hunger.

He smiled, but woefully, and presently they sat down to their meat; and he strove to be somewhat merry of mood, and to eat as one at a feast; but whiles his heart failed him, and he set his teeth and tore at the grass, and his face was fierce and terrible to look on; but Birdalone made as if she heeded it nought, and was blithe and debonair with him.  And when they had done their meat he sat looking at her a while, and at last he said:  Lady, dost thou deem that, when all is said, I have done somewhat for thee since first we met the day before yesterday at the lower end of the Black Valley?  Yea, she said, as erst I spake, all things considered I deem that thou hast done much.  And now, said he, I am to do more yet; for I am to lead thee to where henceforth I shall have no more part or lot in thee than if thou wert in heaven and I in hell.  I pray thee say not so, said Birdalone; have I not said that I will be thy friend?  Lady, said the knight, I wot well that according to the sweetness of thine heart wilt thou do what thou canst do.  And therewith he was silent a while and she also.

Then he said:  I would ask thee a grace if I durst.  Ask it, said she, and I will grant it if I may; I have gainsaid thee enough meseemeth.

Lady, he said, I will ask this as a reward of the way-leader, to wit, that thou abide with me here in this dale, in all honour holden, till to-morrow morning; and let this place, which has helped me aforetime, be hallowed by thy dwelling here; and I, I shall have had one happy day at least, if never another.  Canst thou grant me this?  If thou canst not, we will depart in an hour.

Her countenance fell at his word, and she was silent a while; for sore she longed to be speedily whereas her friends should find her if they came back to the castle.  But she thought within herself how wild and fierce the man was, and doubted if he might not go stark mad on her hands and destroy her if she thwarted overmuch; and, moreover, frankly she pitied him, and would do what she might to ease his pain and solace his grief of heart.  Wherefore she cleared her face of its trouble and let it be vexed no longer, but smiled upon the knight and said:  Fair sir, this meseemeth but a little thing for me to do, and I grant it thee with a good will, and this shall now be the first day of the friendship if so thou wilt take it; and may it solace thee.  Who then was gleeful but the knight, and strange it was to see all his sorrow run off him; and he became glad and gamesome as a youth, and yet withal exceeding courteous and kind with her, as though he were serving a mighty queen.

So then they wore the day together in all good fellowship; and first they went up the dale together and right to the foot of that great force, where the stream came thundering down from the sheer rocks; and long Birdalone stood to look thereon, and much she marvelled at it, for no such thing had she seen before.

Thereafter they went afoot into the wood behind the green bower, and when they had gone some way therein for their pleasure, they fell to seeking venison for their dinner; and the knight took Birdalone's bow and shafts to strike the quarry withal, but he would have her gird his sword to her, that she might not be weaponless.  So they gat them a roe and came back therewith to the bower, and the knight dight it and cooked it, and again they ate in fellowship and kindness; and Birdalone had been to the river and fetched thence store of blue- flowered mouse-ear, and of meadow-sweet, whereof was still some left from the early days of summer, and had made her garlands for her head and her loins; and the knight sat and worshipped her, yet he would not so much as touch her hand, sorely as he hungered for the beauty of her body.

Next, when dinner was done, and they lay in the shadow of the trees, and hearkened the moor-hen crying from the water, and the moaning of the wood-doves in the high trees, she turned to him and bade him tell her somewhat of the tale of his life and deeds; but he said:  Nay, lady, I pray thee pardon me, for little have I to tell thee that is good, and I would not have thee know of me aught worse than thou knowest of me already.  Rather be thou kind to me, and tell me of thy days that have been, wherein I know full surely shall be nought but good.

She smiled and blushed, but without more ado fell to telling him of her life in the House under the Wood, and spared not even to tell him somewhat of the wood-mother.  And he said no word to her thereover, save thanks and praises for the kindness of her story.

At last the day wore to its ending, and then the knight's grief strode over him again, and he was moody and few-spoken; and Birdalone was blithe with him still, and would have solaced his grief; but he said:  Let it be; as for thee, thou shalt be happy to-morrow, but this happy day of mine is well-nigh worn, and it is as the wearing of my life.  And the dark night came, and he bade her good-night sorrowfully, and departed to his lair in the wood.  Birdalone lay in the bower, and might not sleep a long while for her joy of the morrow, which should bring her back to the Castle of the Quest.

But when morning was, and the sun was but just risen, Birdalone awoke, and stood up and did on her raiment, and called her servant the knight, and he came at once leading the two horses, and said: Now go we to the Castle of the Quest.  And he was sober and sorrowful, but nought fierce or wild.

So Birdalone thanked him kindly and praised him, and he changed countenance no whit therefor.

Then they mounted and set forth, and the knight led straight into the wood, and by roads that he wotted of, so that they went nowise slowly for wenders through the thick woodland.  Thus went they on their way together, he sorry and she glad.

But now leaves the tale to tell of Birdalone and the knight on whom she happened in the Black Valley of the Greywethers, and turns to the Castle of the Quest and the folk thereof, and what they did in this while and thereafter.

 Here ends the Fourth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is called Of the Days of Abiding, and the Fifth Part now begins, which is called The Tale of the Quest's Ending.

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_01]

THE FIFTH PART: THE TALE OF THE QUEST'S ENDING

CHAPTER I. OF SIR LEONARD'S TROUBLE AND THE COMING OF THE QUEST

Tells the tale that when the chaplain had departed from Birdalone at the bower in the copse, he went home to the castle sadly enough, because of his love and longing for her, which well he wotted might never be satisfied.  Moreover when he was come into the castle again, there fell fear upon him for what might betide her, and he rued it that he had done her will in getting her forth of the castle; and in vain now he set before himself all the reasons for deeming that her peril herein was little or nothing, even as he had laid them before her, and which he then believed in utterly, whereas now himseemed there was an answer to every one of them.  So he sighed heavily and went into the chapel, wherein was an altar of St. Leonard; and he knelt thereat, and prayed the saint, as he had erst delivered folk from captivity, now to deliver both him and Birdalone from peril and bonds; but though he was long a-praying and made many words, it lightened his heart little or nothing; so that when he rose up again, that if anything evil happened to this pearl of women, he wished heartily that some one might take his life and he be done with it.

Now was the house astir, and the chaplain came from out the chapel, and thinking all things over, he thought he would go straight to Sir Aymeris and make a clean breast of it, so that weaponed men might be sent at once to seek Birdalone.  And he said to himself:  What matter if he slay me or cast me into prison, if Birdalone be lost?

So he went his ways to the highest tower, which looked landward and hight the Open Eye, deeming to find Sir Aymeris; but when he got to the topmost, he found neither captain nor carle there:  wherefore he stayed a little and looked forth betwixt the battlements, if perchance there were some wild chance of seeing Birdalone's coming home again; but his keen eyes beheld nothing more than he looked to see, as sheep and neat, and the field-folk of thereabouts.  So he turned away and went by the swale toward the next tallest tower, which looked lakewards, and was called Hearts' Hope; and as he went he fell to framing in his mind the words which he should say to the castellan.

Thus came he, haggard and hapless, on the leads of the tower, which were nought small; and there gathered together in a knot, and all gazing eagerly out over the lake, he found a dozen of men-at-arms and the castellan amongst them.  They took no heed of him as he came up, though he stumbled as he crossed the threshold and came clattering over the lead floor, and he saw at once that there was something unwonted toward; but he had but one thought in his mind, to wit, the rescuing of Birdalone.

He went up now behind where the castellan was leaning over the battlement, and pulled his skirt, and when Sir Aymeris turned round, he said:  Lord, I have a word for thine ear.  But the old knight did but half turn round, and then spake peevishly:  Tush, man! another time! seest thou not I have got no eyes for aught save what we see on the lake?  Yea, but what then? said the priest.  There cometh a boat, said Sir Aymeris, not looking back at him, and our thought is that therein be our lords.

When the priest heard that word, it was to him as if hell had opened underneath his feet; and he had no might to speak for a minute; then he cried out:  Sir Aymeris, hearken, I pray thee.  But the old knight but thrust him back with his hand, and even therewith one of the men- at-arms cried out:  I hear the voice of their horn!  Then shouted Sir Aymeris:  Where art thou, Noise?  Blow, man, blow, if ever thou blewest in all thy life!  And therewithal came the blare of the brass, and Sir Aymeris nodded to the trumpeter, who blew blast after blast with all his might, so that the priest might as well have been dumb for any hearing he might get; and all the while to Leonard the minutes seemed hours, and he was well-nigh distraught.

And then when the knight held up his hand for the Noise to stay his blowing, and Leonard strove to speak, the castellan turned on him and said:  Peace, Sir Leonard; dost thou not know that now we would listen with our ears to heed if they answer us?  Not a word any one man of you, learned or lewd, or ye shall rue it!

Even therewith came clearly the sound of the horn from the water, and again and yet again; and no man spake but the chaplain, who cried out:  Hearken, knight, it is of Birdalone.  But Sir Aymeris laid his hand on his shoulder and said in an angry whisper:  Thou shalt be put downstairs, priest, if thou hold not thy peace.

Leonard drew aback scowling, and went out of the door, and so slowly down the stair, and withdrew him into the cover of the door of the first chamber down from the tower-top, with the mind to waylay Sir Aymeris as he came down; and meanwhile he cursed him for a fool and a dull-wit, and himself yet more, as was but right, for a fool and a licorous traitor.

But he had not tarried there more than a score of minutes, ere he heard a great shout from those up above:  They are come! they are come!  And next thereafter came all the men clattering down the stair past him, scarce refraining them from shoving each his neighbour on to the next one; Leonard followed on them, and presently arose great shouting and tumult through all the house, and all folk, men and women, hurried flock-meal toward the water-gate, and with them went Leonard perforce; and sick of heart he was, calling to mind the first coming thither of Birdalone.

But now when they came to the water-gate, there verily was the Sending Boat just coming to hand; and in the stern stood the three knights together, all clad in their armour, and before them sat three lovely ladies, clad one in gold, one in green, and one in black:  and lo, there was the Quest come home.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_02]

CHAPTER II. NOW ASK THEY OF BIRDALONE, AND SIR LEONARD SPEAKS

Now the prow touched the stones of the stair, and folk were busy to lay hold of it that the wayfarers might land, but Sir Baudoin cried out in a great voice:  Let none be so hardy as to touch this ferry, either now or hereafter; for there is peril therein.  And therewith he took Aurea by the hand, and led her out of the boat and up the stair, and she all joyous and wondering; and thereafter came Hugh and his darling, and last of all Arthur and Atra, and she alone of the three women looked downcast, and her eyes wandered about the throng that was before them there, as though she sought something, yet feared to see it.

But when they were all standing together on the landing-plain, and the folk were all about them in a ring, Sir Baudoin spake to the castellan and said:  Sir Aymeris, thee and other folk I see here, the sight of whom doth me great joy; but where, I pray thee, is the lady, our friend Birdalone, by whom it is that all we are come happily hither?  And he looked around with an anxious face; but Arthur was as pale as ashes, yet he spake nought, and Atra let her hand fall away from his.

Then spake the castellan, and said:  No harm hath befallen the Lady Birdalone; but whiles she hath been somewhat ailing of late, and it is like that she wotteth not what is toward, and keepeth her chamber now, for it is yet betimes in the morning.

As he spake, came thrusting a man through the throng, eager and pale- faced; who but the chaplain; and he said:  He would not let me speak, this fool; I cannot choose my time.  Lords, I bear evil tidings and an ugly welcome home.  The Lady Birdalone is in peril, and she is not in the castle; I wot not where she is.  Ye must send armed men to seek her out.

Thereat fell the silence of woe upon the throng; but Arthur ran forward on the priest with drawn sword, and cried out:  I misdoubt me that thou art a traitor; speak! or I will slay thee here and now.  If I be a traitor, quoth Leonard, I shall tell thee in little while what ye must do to undo my treason, if there be yet time thereto; so slay me not till ye have heard, and then do what ye will with me.

But Baudoin put Arthur aside, and said:  Refrain thee a little, fair brother, else shall words tumble over each other and we shall know nothing clear.  Sir Aymeris, bring our dear ladies to the fairest chambers, and do all honour and courtesy to them.  And ye, sweetlings, ye will not begrudge us that we go to seek your friend. Thou priest, come with us a little apart, and tell thy tale as shortly as thou mayst, and fear nought; we be not God's dastards, as the Red Knight and his men.

Viridis wept and kissed her love before all folk, and bade him go and do his best to find her friend, or never come back to her else.  Much moved, even to tears, was Aurea withal, and reached her hand to Baudoin, and said:  If any man on earth can help us it is thou.  Go thou.  But Atra wept not, and but said to Arthur:  Go thou, it is meet.

Therewith were the ladies brought to fair chambers; but the three knights went with the priest and Sir Aymeris into the solar, and set a guard at the door that their talk should be privy.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_03]

CHAPTER III. HOW THEY FOLLOW THE SLOT OF BIRDALONE AND THE BLACK KNIGHT

It was but five minutes ere the priest had told them all that need was; so they let him abide alone there, though sooth to say there was none of them but had good will to break his neck; and the same rede had all three, that there was nought for it but to go their ways with all speed to the Black Valley of the Greywethers, and follow up the slot of Birdalone if it might yet be found; wherefore they bade saddle their horses straightway; and while that was a-doing they ate a morsel, and bade farewell to their lovelings.  And they dight them to go, they three together, with but one squire and a sergeant, who were both of them keen trackers and fell woodsmen.  But ere they went, by the rede of Arthur they bade Sir Aymeris to arm a two score of men and ride toward the Red Hold, and beset the ways 'twixt that and the Castle of the Quest; for one and all they deemed that if any harm befell Birdalone, the Red Knight would be at the bottom of it.

So rode those fellows, and came unto the dale but some four hours after Birdalone had happened on the stranger knight; and they took up the slot of her, but not easily, whereas the ground was hard and stony; howbeit, they found tokens of the knight also, finding here and there what they deemed the footprints of a tall man.  And this was grievous to those fellows, since now they could not but deem that somewhat untoward had befallen Birdalone.  But they went on making out the slot, and they followed it with much toil until they came to the doom-ring in the head of the dale, whereas Birdalone and the stranger had sat down to meat; but by that time, so toilsome had been their going, it was somewhat more than dusk, and there was nought for it but to abide there night-long.  So a while they sat talking, all of them, and the squire and the sergeant aforesaid were not a little timorous of the adventure of making that stead unkenned their sleeping chamber; and to while away the time, their lords made them tell tales such as they knew concerning that place; and both they said that they had never erst come into the dale but a very little way, and said that they had done so then but trusting in their lords' bidding and the luck of the Quest.  Thereafter turned the talk as to what had befallen Birdalone, and the chances of coming on her; and, as folk will in such a plight, they talked the matter over and over again till they were weary and could say no more.

Then they went to sleep, and nought befell them till they awoke in the broad daylight; but they had little inkling of what hour it was, for all the dale was full of thick white mist that came rolling down from the mountains, so that they could scarce see their hands before them, and there they had to tarry still, would they, would they not; and the sergeant fell to telling tales of folk who had been lost in that stony maze; and all of them deemed, more or less, that this was the work either of evil wights, or it might be of the wizardry of the Red Knight; and, to be short, they all deemed that he it was who had wielded it, save the sergeant, who said that the mountain wights were the masters and not the servants of him of the Red Hold.

Thus, then, it betided; but when the said mist had been hanging upon them for some six hours, it rolled up like a curtain, and lo the blue sky and the sun, and the mountains as clear blue as in a picture; and they saw by the sun that it was but a little after high noon.

But as they rejoiced herein, and betook them once more to tracking out the slot of Birdalone and the other, the sky became suddenly overcast, and down from the jaws of the mountain came a storm of wind and rain, and thunder and lightning, so great that they might scarce see each other's faces, and when it cleared off, in about an hour and a half, and went down the wind to the south-east, the stream was waxen great, and ran brown and furious down the dale, so that it was fordable only here and there; and as for tracking the slot of those twain, there was no need to talk thereof, for the fury of the driving rain had washed all away.

Thus fared they the whole day betwixt fog and clear weather, and they laid them down to rest at night sore disheartened.  When the day broke they talked together as to what was best to do; and the sergeant aforesaid spake:  Lords, said he, meseemeth I am more at home in the Black Valley than ye be; heed ye not wherefore.  Now so it is that if we tarry here till night come we wot not what of evil may betide us, or at the least we do nought.  Or if we turn back and go southward out of the dale we shall be safe indeed; but safe should we have been at your house, lords, and should have done no less.  But now I shall tell you that, if ye will, lords, I shall guide you to a pass that goeth out of the head of the dale to our right hands, and so turneth the flank of the mountains, and cometh out into the country which lieth about the Red Hold; and meseemeth it is thitherward that we must seek if we would hear any tidings of the lady; for there may we lay in ambush and beset the ways that lead up to the Hold, by which she must have been brought if she hath not been carried through the air.  How say ye, lords?  Soothly there is peril therein; yet meseemeth peril no more than in our abiding another night in the Black Valley.

Said Arthur:  We heed not the peril if there be aught to be done; wherefore let us be stirring straightway.  And so said they all. Wherefore they gat to horse, and rode up to the very head of the valley, and the weather was now calm and bright.

But the sergeant brought them to the pass whereof the stranger knight had spoken to Birdalone, which led into the Red Knight's country, and without more ado they entered it when it was now about three hours after noon.  But the way was both steep and rough, so that they had much toil, and went not very far ere night fell upon them, and the moon was not yet up.  So when they had stumbled on another two hours, and their horses were much spent and they themselves not a little weary, they laid them down to sleep, after they had eaten such meat as they had with them, in a place where was a little grass for the horses to bite; for all the road hitherto had been mere grim stones and big rocks, walled on either side by stony screes, above which rose steep and beetling crags.

In the dawn they arose again, and made no ado till they were in the saddle, and rode till they came to the crest of the pass, and came out thence after a while on to the swelling flank of a huge mountain (as it might be the side of the mountain of Plinlimmon in Wales), which was grassed and nought craggy, but utterly treeless.

Now the sergeant led them somewhat athwart the said mountain till they began to go down, and saw below them a country of little hills much covered with wood, and in a while, and ere it was noon, they were among the said woods, which were grown mostly with big trees, as oak here and beech there, and the going was good for them.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_04]

CHAPTER IV. OF THE SLAYING OF FRIEND AND FOE

So came they, three hours after noon, to where was a clearing in the woodland, and a long narrow plain some furlong over lay before them, with a river running along it, and the wood rose on the other side high and thick, so that the said plain looked even as a wide green highway leading from somewhence to somewhither.

At the edge hereof their way-leader, the sergeant, bade draw rein, and said:  Lords, we are now in the lands of the Red Hold, and therein is mickle peril and dread to any save stout hearts as ye be; but meseems we are so steaded, that whatever may come out of the Black Valley of the Greywethers to the Red Hold, ye now may scarce miss.  Yonder along this plain to the north lies the way to the said Hold, and any man coming from the head of the valley is sure to come by the way we have come, and will pass us not many yards at the worst from where we now be.  On the other hand, if any come to the Hold from the mouth of the Black Valley, then along this green road must they needs pass under your very eyes.  Lastly, if we do what we are come to do, to wit, to deliver the lady from the Red Knight, then, the deed done, we have to take the green road southward, and ride it for a league and then turn east, and we shall have our heads turned toward the Castle of the Quest, and shall speedily fall in with Sir Aymeris and our men who be guarding the out-gates of the Red Knight's country toward our house.  So now, by my rede, ye shall lay in covert here and abide a while what may befall; if nought come hereby ere two hours be lacking of sunset, then may we seek further.

They all yeasaid this, and gat off their horses, and lay quiet on the grass, not even speaking save softly.  And when they had abided thus scarce an hour's space, the squire, who was a man of very fine ear, held up his hand as though to bid utter silence, and all hearkened eagerly.  Presently he said:  Hear ye not?  Said Arthur:  Meseemeth I hear a faint tinkle as of a sheep-bell.  Said the squire:  'Tis the clashing of swords down the plain to the south, and meseemeth 'tis but of two:  ride we thither?

Quoth Baudoin:  Nay, not by my rede; for if we can hear them they can hear us; let us quietly edge along afoot somewhat nigher their way, ever keeping the cover of the wood betwixt us and the open plain. Now then to it; and let each man keep his weapons ready.

Even so did they, and spread out in a line as they went, in such wise that there was some six paces betwixt each man of them, and they went softly forward; Baudoin went first, Hugh second, then Arthur; then the squire and the sergeant last of all.

Now when they had gone but a quarter of an hour, the squire caught up with Arthur, and spake to him softly, and said:  The voice of the swords has been silent now a while, and I heard a voice crying out e'en now, a woman's voice.  And now again I could well-nigh deem that I hear horse-hoofs.

Arthur nodded to him, and they went but a little further ere he said: Lo, lo! 'tis the time of the eyes now!  Here come folk.  And therewithal they stayed them.  For the wood turned somewhat here, so as to hide all but a little of the plain, and round the wood neb the new-comers hove in sight, and were close on them at once, so that they might see them clearly, to wit, a knight weaponed, clad all in red, a very big man, riding on a great bay horse, and behind him a woman going afoot in very piteous plight; for she was tethered to the horse's crupper by a thong that bound her wrists together, so that she had but just room left 'twixt her and the horse that she might walk, and round about her neck was hung a man's head newly hewn off.

This sight they all saw at once, and were out of the wood in a trice with weapons aloft, for they knew both the man and the woman, that they were the Red Knight and Birdalone.

So swift and sudden had they been, that he had no time either to spur or even to draw his sword; but he had a heavy steel axe in his hand as the first man came up to him, which was the tall Baudoin; and therewith he smote down on Baudoin so fierce and huge a stroke, that came on him betwixt neck and shoulder, that all gave way before it, and the Golden Knight fell to earth all carven and stark dead:  but even therewith fell Hugh, the squire, and the sergeant on the Red Knight; for Arthur had run to Birdalone and sheared her loose from her tether.  The sergeant smote him on the right arm with a maul, so that the axe fell to the ground; the squire's sword came on the side of his head, and, as it was cast back beneath the stroke, Hugh thrust his sword through the throat of him, and down he fell unto the earth and was dead in less than a minute.

Then gathered the others round about Baudoin, and saw at once that he was dead; and Birdalone came thrusting through the press of them, and knelt down beside him, and when she saw her friend so piteously dight, she wept and wailed over him as one who might not be comforted; and Hugh stood over her and let his tears fall down upon the dead man; and withal the squire and the sergeant did not refrain their lamentations, for sore beloved was Sir Baudoin the Golden Knight.

But Arthur spake dry-eyed, though there was grief in his countenance, and he said:  Fellows, and thou, lady, let us lament afterwards, but now is time for us to get us gone hence as speedily as may be.  Yet I will ask, doth any know whose is this head that the slain tyrant here had hung about the lady's neck?  May the fiends curse him therefor!

Said the sergeant:  Yea, lords, that wot I; this is the head of the Red Knight's captain and head man, Sir Thomas of Estcliffe; one of the hardiest of knights he was while he was alive, as ye surely wot, lords; neither, as I have heard say, was he as cruel a tyrant as his lord that lieth there ready for the ravens.

Now had Birdalone arisen and was standing facing Arthur; her face was pale and full of anguish, and she was dabbled with blood from the dead man's neck; but there was nought of shame in her face as she stood there and spoke:  O my living friends, who have but now saved me, ye and my dead friends, from what shame and death I know not, the tale of this woeful hap is over long to tell if there be peril at hand, and I scarce alive from dread and sorrow; but shortly thus it is:  This man, whose head here lieth, entrapped me as I foolishly wandered in the Black Valley, and afterwards delivered me, and was leading me to your castle, my friends, when this other one, his master, the tyrant of the Red Hold, came upon him, and fell upon him and slew him as a traitor, and dighted me as ye saw.  And woe's me! I am the fool whose folly has slain your friend and mine.  Wherefore I am not worthy of your fellowship, and ye shall cast me forth of it; or to slay me were better.  So she spake, gazing earnestly on Arthur; and so troubled and grieved, that she might well have died but for her woodland breeding, and the toil of the days she had won through in the House under the Wood.

But Hugh spake gently to her and said:  Keep up thine heart yet, maiden; for the hand of Fate it is that led thee, and none doeth grievously amiss but if he mean wrong-doing in his heart; and we know thee for true; and thou hast been our helper, and brought our lovelings unto us to make us happy.

But she brake out weeping afresh, and said:  O no, no! it is but woe and weariness I have brought unto my friends; and to myself woe and weariness yet more.

And she looked piteously into Arthur's face, and hard and stern it seemed unto her; and she writhed and wrung her hands for anguish. But he spake and said:  This will we look into when we be safe behind our walls, and see what she hath done amiss and what not amiss.  But now is there but one thing to do, and that is to get us speedily on our way to the Castle of the Quest, and bind our fellow's body on his horse that he also may ride with us, and the lady shall ride the horse of the accursed thief.  Then they turned to go toward their horses; but therewith Birdalone smote her foot against the slain knight's head, and shrank aback from it, and pointed down toward it and spake no word; and Hugh said:  Friends, the lady is right, this at least we will cover with earth.  Do ye go fetch hither our horses, since we be on the road, and I will do here what need is meanwhile.

So they went on that errand, and then Hugh and Birdalone between them dug a hole with the swords and laid the head of the captain of the Red Knight therein.  And forsooth, somewhat would Birdalone have wept for him had she had a tear to spare.

Then they fell to and bound the dead Baudoin on the Red Knight's mighty bay steed, so that no time might be wasted; and when that was done, and the others had not come back with their horses, Hugh took Birdalone's hand and led her down to the stream and washed the gore off her bosom, and she washed her face and her hands and let him lead her back again in such wise that now she could hearken to the words of comfort he spake to her, and piteous kind he seemed unto her; so that at last she plucked up heart, and asked him how Viridis did. Quoth he:  They be all safe at home in the castle, and Viridis is well and loveth thee well.  And Aurea was well, woe worth the while for her now!  As for Atra, she has not been so glad as the other twain, I wot not wherefore.

Even as he spake were the others come up with the horses, and Arthur nodded yeasay when he saw what had been done with Baudoin dead; and so they gat to horse, and Birdalone it was that rode Baudoin's steed. Then they went their ways, crossing the river into the wood; and the sergeant was ever way-leader, but the squire led the horse which bore the sorrowful burden of the dead Knight of the Quest.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_05]

CHAPTER V. THEY COME HOME TO THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

Now they had gone but some three hours, riding dreary and nigh speechless all of them, ere they began to know the land they were in, and that they were coming to the place where they might look presently to fall in with Sir Aymeris and his company; and even so the meeting betid, that they saw men standing and going about their horses beside a little wood, and knew them presently for their folk, who mounted at once and spurred forward to meet them, spears aloft. Speedily then was the joy of those abiders turned into sorrow, nor may the grief of Sir Aymeris be told, so great it was; and Birdalone looked on and saw the mourning and lamentation of the warriors, and eked was her anguish of mind; and she beheld Arthur the Black Squire, how he sat still upon his horse with a hard and dreary countenance, and looked on those mourners almost as if he contemned them.  But Sir Aymeris came up to Birdalone, and knelt before her and kissed her hand, and said:  If my heart might rejoice in aught, as some day it will, it would rejoice in seeing thee safe and sound, lady; here at least is gain to set beside the loss.

She thanked him, but looked askance toward Arthur, who said:  If that be gain, yet is there more, for the Red Knight lieth in the green plain for a supper to the wolf and the crow.  Vengeance there hath been, and belike more yet may come.  But now, if ye have lamented as much as ye deem befitteth warriors, let us tarry here no longer; for even yet meseemeth shall we be safer behind walls, now that our chief and captain is slain, I scarce know in what quarrel.

None naysaid it, so they all rode forth together, and the sergeant and the squire and Sir Hugh told of their tale what they might to Sir Aymeris and the others; but Arthur held his peace, and rode aloof from Birdalone, whereas Sir Aymeris and Hugh rode on either side of her, and did not spare to comfort her what they might.

They rode straight on, and made no stay for nightfall, and thus came home to the Castle of the Quest before the day was full; and woeful was their entry as they went in the dawn underneath the gate of the said castle, and soon was the whole house astir and lamenting.

As for Birdalone, when she got down from her horse in the gateway, and was stiff and weary of body, and all dazed and confused of mind, there was but little life in her; nor could she so much as think of the new day and Aurea's awakening, but crept up unto her own chamber, so long as it seemed since she had left it, though it was but a little while; and she cast herself upon the bed and fell asleep whether she would or not, and so forgat her much sorrow and her little hope.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_06]

CHAPTER VI. OF THE TALK BETWIXT BIRDALONE AND VIRIDIS

When she woke again, she had slept the night away, and it was broad day, and for a moment she lay wondering what was the burden upon her; but presently she called it all to mind, and deemed it were well might she forget it all again.  Anon she became aware of someone moving about the chamber, and she looked about unhappily; and lo! a woman, fair and dainty, clad all in green, and it was Viridis that had come there.  But when she saw Birdalone stirring, she came up to her and kissed her sweetly and kindly, and wept over her, so that Birdalone might nowise refrain her tears.  But when she might cease weeping, she said to Viridis:  Tell me, art thou weeping for thy friend who is lost, and who shall be thy friend no more; or thy friend whom thou hast found?  Said Viridis:  Forsooth I have wept for Baudoin plenteously, and he is worthy of it, for he was valiant and true and kind.  Said Birdalone:  True is that; but I meant not my question so; but rather I would ask thee if thou weepest because thine heart must needs cast me away, or because thou hast found me again?  Quoth Viridis:  Whoso may be dead, or whoso alive, but if it were Hugh, my loveling, I were rejoiced beyond measure to find thee, my friend.  And again she kissed her as one who was glad and kind. But for new rest of soul and for joy, Birdalone fell a-weeping afresh.

Again she spake:  And what mind have the others about me?  For thou art but one, though the dearest, save . . .  And would they punish me for my fault and folly that has slain the best man in the world?  If the punishment be short of putting me forth of their fellowship, I were fain thereof.

Viridis laughed:  Forsooth, she said, they have much to punish thee for! whereas it was by thy doing and thy valiance that we all came together again and the Quest was accomplished.  Nay, but tell me, said Birdalone, what do they say of me, each one of them?

Viridis reddened; she said:  Hugh, my mate, saith all good of thee; though no one of carl-folk may be sorrier of the loss of his fellow. Aurea layeth not the death of her man upon thee; and she saith:  When the fountain of tears is dried up in me, I will see her and comfort her, as she me.  Atra saith:  she saith but little, yet she saith: So is it fated.  I had done belike no better, but worse than she.

Now turned Birdalone red and then pale again, and she said, but in a quavering voice:  And the Black Squire, Arthur, what sayeth he?  Said Viridis:  He sayeth nought of thee, but that he would hear all the tale of what befell thee in the Black Valley.  Sweet friend, said Birdalone, I pray thee of thy kindness and sweetness that thou go unto him presently and bring him in hither, and then I will tell him all; and he and thou and I together.

Viridis said:  There is this to be said, that when a man loveth a woman he coveteth her, to have her all wholly to himself, and hard and evil he groweth for the time that he misdoubteth her whom he loveth.  And I will tell thee that this man is jealous lest thou wert never so little kind to the slain stranger knight whose head the tyrant hung about thee.  Furthermore, I fear there is no help for it that thou wilt undo the happiness of one of us, that is Atra; yet were it better that that befell later than sooner.  And if Sir Arthur come in here to thee, and hath thy tale with none beside save me, meseems the poor Atra will feel a bitter smart because of it.  Were it not better that we all meet presently in the solar, and that there thou tell thy tale to us all? and thereafter shall we tell the tale of our deliverance and our coming hither.  And thus doing, it will seem less like to the breaking up of our fellowship.

Said Birdalone:  It will be hard for me to tell my tale before Atra and before him.  Might it not be that thou hearken to it here and now, and tell it to the others hereafter?  Nay, nay, said Viridis, I am not a proper minstrel to take the word out of thy mouth.  Never shall I be able to tell it so that they shall trow it as if they had seen it all.  Besides, when all is told, then shall we be more bound together again.  I pray thee, and I pray thee, sweet, do so much for me as to tell thy tale to the fellowship of us.  And if it be hard to thee, look upon it as my share of the punishment which is due to thee for falling into that mishap.

Smiled Birdalone ruefully, and said:  So be it; and may the share of the others be as light as thine, sister.  Yet soothly were I liefer that my body and my skin should pay the forfeit.  But now, since I must needs do this, the sooner is the better meseemeth.

In a little half hour, said Viridis, will I bring what is left of our fellowship into the solar to hearken thee.  So come thou there unto us when thou art clad.  And hear thou! be not too meek and humble, and bow thyself to us in fear of our sorrow.  For whereas thou didst speak of our punishing thee, there will be one there whom thou mayst easily punish to thy pleasure; forsooth, friend, I rue that so it is; but since it will not better be, what may I do but wish thee happy and him also.

Therewith she turned and went out of the chamber, and Birdalone, left to herself, felt a secret joy in her soul that she might not master, despite the sorrow of her friends, whatever it might be.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_07]

CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE TELLETH THE TALE OF HER WANDERING UP THE VALLEY OF THE GREYWETHERS

Now Viridis did as she said, and brought them all in to the solar; there was none lacking save Baudoin, and they sat silently in a half ring, till the door opened and Birdalone came in to them, clad all simply in but a black coat; and she made obeisance to them, and stood there with her head bent down as if they were her judges, for so in sooth she deemed them.  Then Hugh bade her sit down amongst them; but she said:  Nay, I will not sit amongst you till ye have heard my story, and ye have told me that I am yet of your fellowship.  None said aught; Atra looked straight before her, and her eyes met not Birdalone's eyes; Arthur looked down on the ground; but Hugh and Viridis looked kindly on Birdalone, and to Viridis' eyes the tears were come.

Then spake Birdalone and said:  I am here as one that hath done amiss; but I will tell you, so that ye may not think worse of me than ye should, that when ye were gone, ye Champions, and the time wore long that ye came not again, it lay heavy on my heart, and hope waned and fear waxed, and my soul so grieved my body that I thought to fall sick thereof, and I knew that it would be ill for you to come home hither and find me sick; so that I longed sore to do somewhat which should make me whole again.  Then weird would that I should hear all the tale of the Black Valley of the Greywethers, and of how therein is whiles granted fulfilment of desire; and methought how well it were if I might seek the adventure there and accomplish it.  Thereof, doubtless, hath the chaplain, Sir Leonard, told you; but this furthermore would I say, that his doing herein was nought; all was done by my doing and by my bidding, and he might not choose but do it.  Wherefore I do pray you all earnestly that ye keep no grudge against him, but pardon him all.  Tell me, then, will ye do thus much?

Said Hugh:  Let him be pardoned, if he can take pardon.  But Arthur spake not, and Birdalone looked on him anxiously, and her face was moved, and it was with her throat as if she had swallowed something down.  Then she spake again, and fell to tell them all that had betid to her when she went to the Black Valley, even as is hereafore writ, hiding nought that had been done and said; and freely she told it, without fear or shame, and with such clearness and sweetness of words that no one of them doubted her aught; and Arthur lifted up his head, and once and again his eyes met hers, and there was nought of hardness in them, though they turned away at once.

So at last fell Birdalone to telling what betid after they two, the stranger knight and she, left the valley of the force and fell to riding the wildwood with their heads turned toward the Castle of the Quest; and she said:

When we turned into the wood away from the said valley it lacked some four hours of noon; and we rode till noon was, and rested by a stream-side and ate, for we knew no cause wherefore we should hasten overmuch; but my fellow the strange knight was downcast and heavy, and some might have called him sullen.  But I strove to make him of better cheer, and spake to him kindly, as to one who of an enemy had become a friend; but he answered me:  Lady, it availeth not; I grieve that I am no better company than thou seest me, and I have striven to be merrier; but apart from all that I wot and that thou wottest which should make me of evil cheer, there is now a weight upon my heart which I cannot lift, such as never have I felt erst.  So by thy leave we will to horse at once, that we may the speedier come to the Castle of the Quest and Sir Aymeris' prison.

So I arose, but smiled on him and said:  Hold up thine heart, friend! for thee shall be no prison at the Castle of the Quest, but the fair welcome of friends.  He said nought, and mended not his cheer; and in this plight we gat to horse and rode on for some three hours more, till we came out of the thick forest into a long clearing, which went like a wide highway of greensward between the thicket, and it seemed as if the hand of man had cleared that said green road.  Thereto we had come, following a little river which came out on to the clearing with us, and then, turning, ran well-nigh amidst it toward the north.

Now when we were come thither, and were betwixt the thicket and the water's edge, we drew rein, and it seemed to me as fair a stead as might be in the woodland, and I looked thereon well pleased and with a happy heart.  But the knight said:  Lady, art thou not exceeding weary?  Nay, said I, not in any wise.  Said he:  It is strange then, for so weary am I, that I must in any case get off my horse and lay me down on the grass here, or I shall drop from the saddle.  And therewith he lighted down and stood by me a little, as to help me off my horse; but I said to him:  Knight, I pray thee, even if ye be weary, to struggle forward a little, lest we be in peril here.  In peril? quoth he; yea, that might be if the Red Knight knew of our whereabouts; but how should that be?  He spoke this heavily, as one scarce awake; and then he said:  I pray thee pardon me, lady, but for nought may I hold my head up; suffer me to sleep but a little, and then will I arise and lead thee straight to thy journey's end. Therewithal he laid him down on the grass and was presently asleep, and I sat down by him all dismayed.  At first, indeed, I doubted some treachery in him, for how might I trust him wholly after all that had come and gone? but when I saw that there was no feigning in his sleep, I set that doubt aside, and knew not what to make of it.

Thus passed an hour, and from time to time I shook him and strove to waken him, but it was all in vain; so I knew none other rede than to abide his awakening; for I knew not the way to take toward this castle; and, moreover, though he were a knight, and armed, yet might it be perilous for him if he were left there alone and unguarded; so I abode.

But now came new tidings.  Methought I heard the sound of the tinkling of weapons and armour; the green highway so turned that a wood neb about an hundred yards to the north hid it from my sight, so that a man might have drawn somewhat near to us without being seen, came he on the hither side of the river.  So I stood up hastily, and strung my bow, and took a shaft in my fingers, and no sooner was it done than there came a rider round about the aforesaid wood neb.  He was all-armed and had a red surcoat, and rode a great shining bay horse.  I kept my eye upon him while I stirred the sleeping knight with my foot, and cried to him to wake, but he scarce moved, and but uttered words without sense.

Now the new-comer drew rein for a moment when he saw us, and then moved on a little toward me, but I nocked a shaft and pointed it at him, and cried out to him to stay.  Then I heard a great rattling laugh come from him, and he shouted:  Nay, do thou stay, fair wood- wife, and I will risk thy shafts to come at thee.  But why doth not the sluggard at thy feet rise up and stand before me, if he be thy loveling?  Or is he dead?  His voice was harsh and big, and I feared him sore; and it was as much because of fear as of hardihood, that I drew and loosed straightway; and doubtless it was because of fear that I saw my shaft fly an inch or so over his right shoulder.  I heard his rattling laugh again, and saw him bend forward as he spurred; I knew that time lacked for drawing another shaft, so I caught up my skirts and ran all I might; but swift-foot as I be, it availed me nought, for I was cumbered with my gown, and moreover I was confused with not knowing whither to run, since I wotted that in the water the horse would do better than I.

So he was up with me in a twinkling, and reached out his hand and caught hold of me by the hair, and tugged me to him as he reined back his horse.  Then he laughed again and said:  Forsooth she will look better when she is no longer reddened and roughened with fleeing; and, by Red Peter! what limbs she hath.  Then he let me loose and got off his horse, and shoved me on before him till we came to where the Black One lay still sleeping heavily.  Then the Red Knight stood against me, and looked hard into my face; and I saw how huge a man he was, and how a lock of bright red hair came out from under his sallet.  His eyes were green and fierce underneath shaggy red eyebrows; terrible he was to look on.

Now he spake fiercely and roughly, and as though he had something against me:  Tell me, thou, who thou art and who this is?  I answered nought, for fear had frozen my speech.  He stamped his foot on the ground and cried:  Hah! art thou gone dumb?  Speak! thou wert best! I said, all quaking:  My name is Birdalone; I belong to no one; I have no kindred:  as for this man, I know not his name.  He said: Comest thou from the Castle of the Quest?  Art thou the whore of those lily-and-rose champions there?  My heart was hot with anger in spite of my dread, but I spake:  I came from the Castle of the Quest. He said:  And this man (therewith he turned about and spurned him in the side), where didst thou happen upon him?  Again I was silent, and he roared out at me:  So thou wilt not answer!  Beware, or I may see how to compel the speech of thee.  Now answer me this:  Was it in the Black Valley of the Greywethers that ye two came together?  Again I knew not how to answer, lest I might do a wrong to him who had repented him of the wrong he had done me.  But the Red Knight burst out a-laughing and said:  It shall be remembered against thee, first, that thou didst let fly a shaft at me; second, that thou didst run from me; and thirdly, that thou hast been slack in answering my questions.  But all this scathes me nought; first, because thy shaft missed me; second, because thy legs failed thee (though they were fair to look on, running); and third, because all thou canst tell me I know without thine answering.  Now thee will I tell that this is Friday, and that ye two first met in the Black Valley on Tuesday; now I will ask this last question, and thou mayst answer it or not as thou wilt; for presently I shall wake this brisk and stirring knight, and I deem that he will tell me the truth of this if of nought else. Tell me, thou whore of the Questing Champions, where and how many times thou hast lain in this good knight's arms since last Tuesday? Nowhere and never, quoth I.  Thou liest, I doubt thee, said the Red Knight; howsoever, let us see what this doughty one will say.  Hah! thou deemest he shall be hard to wake up, dost thou not!  Well, I shall see to that.  He who giveth sleep may take it away again.

Therewith he went up to the Black One and stooped adown over his head, and spake some words over him, but so softly that I heard not their import; and straightway the sleeper rose up so suddenly that he wellnigh smote against the Red Knight.  He stood awhile staggering, and blinking at the other one, but somehow got his sword drawn forth, and the Red Knight hindered him nought therein, but spake anon when the other was come to himself somewhat:  The sele of the day to thee, Sir Thomas, True Thomas!  Fair is thy bed, and most fair thy bedfellow.

The Black Knight drew aback from him and was now come awake, wherefore he stood on his guard, but said nought.  Then said the Red Knight:  Sir Thomas, I have been asking this fair lady a question, but her memory faileth her and she may not answer it; perchance thou mayst do better.  Tell me where and how many times hast thou bedded her betwixt last Tuesday and this?  Nowhere and never, cried Sir Thomas, knitting his brows and handling his sword.  Hah, said the Red Knight, an echo of her speech is this.  Lo, the tale ye have made up betwixt you.  But at least, having done mine errand, though meseemeth somewhat leisurely, and having gotten the woman for me, thou art now bringing her on to the Red Hold, whatever thou hast done with her on the road?  I am not, said my fellow, I am leading her away from the Red Hold.  Pity of thee, quoth the other, that thou hast fallen in with me, and thou but half-armed.  And he raised aloft his sword; but presently sank it again, and let the point rest on the earth.

Then he spoke again, not mockingly as erst:  A word before we end it, Thomas:  thou hast hitherto done well by me, as I by thee.  I say thou hast gotten this woman, and I doubt not that at first thou hadst the mind to bring her to me unminished; but then thou wert overcome by her beauty, as forsooth I know thee woman-mad, and thou hadst meant to keep her for thyself, as forsooth I marvel not.  But in thy love-making thou hast not bethought thee that keep her to thyself thou mayst not while I am above ground, save thou bewray me, and join thee to my foemen and thine.  Because I am such a man, that what I desire that will I have.  For this reason, when I misdoubted me of thee for thy much-tarrying, I cast the sleep over thee, and have caught thee.  For what wilt thou do?  Doubt it not, that if our swords meet, I shall pay thee for trying to take my bedthrall from me by taking from thee no more than thy life.  But now will I forgive thee all if thou wilt ride home quietly with me and this damsel- errant to the Red Hold, and let her be mine and not thine so long as I will; and then afterwards, if thou wilt, she shall be thine as long as thou wilt.  Now behold, both this chance and thy life is a mere gift of me to thee, for otherwise thou shalt have neither damsel nor life.

Yea, yea, said my friend, I know what thou wouldest:  I have been no unhandy devil to thee this long while, and thou wouldst fain keep me still; but now I will be devil no longer, on this earth at least, but will die and take my luck of it.  And do thou, God, see to the saving of this damsel, since thou hast taken the matter out of my hands. Farewell, dear maiden!

Scarce was the word out of his mouth ere his sword was in the air, and he smote so fierce and straight that he beat down the huge man's blade, and, ere he could master it again, smote the Red Knight so heavily on the crest that he fell to his knees; and the heart rose in me, for I deemed that he might yet prevail; and in as 'twere a flash I bethought me of the knife at my girdlestead, and drew it and ran to the Red Knight, and tore aside his mail hood with one hand and thrust the knife into his shoulder with the other; but so mighty was he that he heeded nought the hurt, but swept his sword back-handed at the Black Knight's unarmed leg, and smote him so sore a wound that down he fell clattering.  Then arose the Red Knight, and thrust me from him with the left hand, and strode over my fellow-farer and thrust his sword through his throat.  Then he turned to me, and spake in a braying voice as if a harsh horn were blown:

Abide thou; if thou takest one step I will slay thee at once.  So he went and sat down on a bank a little way from the dead man, and wiped his sword on the grass and laid it beside him, and so sat pondering a while.  Thereafter he called me to him, and bade me stand in face of him with my hands clasped before me.  Then he spake to me:  Thou art my thrall and my having, since I had thus doomed it no few days ago; and thou art now in my hands for me to do with as I will.  Now instead of being meek and obedient to me thou hast rebelled against me, shot an arrow at me, run from me, denied answer to my questions, and thrust a knife into me.  To be short, thou hast made thyself my foe.  Furthermore, it is by thy doing that I have lost a right good servant and a trusty fellow, and one that I loved; it is thou that hast slain him.  Now have I been pondering what I shall do with thee. I said:  If I have deserved the death, then make an end and slay me presently; but bring me not to thine house, I pray thee.  I pray by the mother that bore thee!

Quoth he:  Hold thy peace, it is not what thou deservest that I am looking to, but what shall pleasure me.  Now hearken; I say that thou hast made thee my foe, and I have overcome thee; thou art my runaway thrall, and I have caught thee.  As my foe I might slay thee in any evil way it might like me; as my thrall I might well chastise thee as sharply and as bitterly as I would.  But it is not my pleasure to slay thee, rather I will bring thee to the Red Hold, and there see what we may make of thee; whereas I cannot but deem that in thee is the making of somewhat more than a thrall; and if not, then a thrall must thou needs be.  Again as to the chastising of thee, that also I forgive thee since I have gotten the hope aforesaid.  Yet forsooth some shame must I do thee to pay thee back for the love that was betwixt thee and the slain man.  I will ponder what it shall be; but take heed that whatsoever it shall be, it will not avail thee to pray me to forego it, though thy speech be as fair and sweet as thy body.

Therewith he was silent a while, and I stood there not daring to move, and my heart was so downcast that all the sweetness of life seemed departed.  Yet I withheld lamentations or prayers, thinking within myself, who knows what occasion may be between this and the Red Hold for my escaping; let me keep myself alive for that if it may be.

Presently he arose and took his sword, and went up to the slain man's body and smote the head from off it.  Then he went to the two horses of Sir Thomas and of me, and took from them such gear of girths and thongs as he would, and therewith he dight me as ye saw, doing a girth about my middle and making me fast to a line wherewith to hold me in tow.  And then he did that other thing which sickens my very soul to tell of, to wit, that he took the slain man's head and tied a lace thereto, and hung it about my neck; and as he did so, he said: This jewel shalt thou thyself bear to mine house; and there belike shall we lay it in earth, since the man was my trusty fellow.  Lo now, this is all the ill I shall do thee till it be tried of what avail thou art.  This is a shaming to thee and not a torment, for I will ride a foot's-pace, and the green way is both soft and smooth; wherefore fear not that I shall throw thee down or drag thee along. And to-morrow thy shame shall be gone and we shall see what is to betide.

Lo, friends, this is the last word he spake ere he was slain, and the ending of my tale; for we had gone thus but a little way ere ye brake out of the wood upon us; and then befell the death of one friend, and the doubt, maybe, of the others, and all the grief and sorrow that I shall never be quit of unless ye forgive me where I have done amiss, and help me in the days to come.  And she spread out her hands before them, and bowed her head, and the tears fell from her eyes on to the floor.

Viridis wept at Birdalone's weeping, and Aurea for her own sorrow, which this other sorrow stirred.  Atra wept not, but her face was sadder than weeping.

But Arthur spake and said:  Herein hath been the hand of Weird, and hath been heavy on us; but no blame have we to lay on our sister Birdalone, nor hath she done light-mindedly by us; though maybe she erred in not trusting to the good-hap of the Quest to bring us back in due time:  and all that she saith do we trow as if it were written in the Holy Gospel.  They all yeasaid this, and called on her to come amongst them; but she thought of little at first save the joy of hearing the sweetness of those words as Arthur spake them; wherefore she hung back a little, and thought shame of it that she might not give more heed to the others of them.  Then came Viridis and took her by the hand and led her to Sir Hugh, and Birdalone knelt down before him and took his hand to kiss it, but he put both hands about her face and kissed her kindly and merrily on the lips.  Then she knelt before Aurea, and was hapless before her; but Aurea kissed her, and bade her be of better cheer, albeit the words came coldly from her mouth.  Next she came to Arthur, and knelt before him and took his hand and kissed it, and thanked him kindly for his kind words, looking into his face meanwhile; and she saw that it was pale and troubled now, and she longed to be alone with him that she might ask him wherefore.

As for Atra, she arose as Birdalone came before her, and cast her arms about her neck, and wept and sobbed upon her bosom, and then went hurrying from out the solar and into the hall, and walked to and fro there a while until the passion that tore her was lulled somewhat, and she might show her face to them calm and friendly once more.  And as she entered Arthur was speaking, and he said:

To you, ladies, I tell what we of the castle wot better than well, that our dear friend hath escaped so heavy a fate in escaping the Red Hold, that it were unmeet for us to murmur at our loss in our fellow; for a warrior's life, which is ever in peril of death, is nought over heavy a ransom for such a friend, and so dear and lovely, from such a long and evil death.  Whereas ye must wot that the said Hold hath this long while been a very treasure-house of woes and a coffer of lamentations; for merciless was the tyrant thereof, and merciless all his folk.  Now another time, when ye are stronger in heart than now ye be, I may tell you tales thereof closer and more nicely of those who did his will; as of his innermost band of men-at-arms, called the Millers; and of his fellow-worker in wizardry and venoms, called the Apothecary; and the three hags, called the Furies; and the three young women, called the Graces; and his hounds that love man's flesh; and the like tales, as evil as nightmares turned into deeds of the day.  But now and here will I say this, that when we have done the obsequies of our dear fellow, it were good that we follow up the battle so valiantly begun by him.  I mean that the Quest of our ladies being now accomplished, we should turn what is left of the fellowship into a war against the Red Hold and its evil things; and that so soon as the relics of Baudoin are laid in earth, we gather force and go thither in arms to live or die in the quarrel, and so sweeten the earth, as did the men of ancient days when they slew the dragons and the giants, and the children of hell, and the sons of Cain.

His cheek flushed as he spoke, and he looked around till his eyes fell on Birdalone, and he saw that her face also glowed and her eyes gleamed; but Viridis, her heart sank so that she paled, and her lips trembled.

But Aurea spake and said:  I thank thee for thy word, Black Squire, and I know that my man shall rejoice in Paradise when he knoweth of it, and thereof shall I tell him to-morrow when the mass is said for him.

And Atra said:  Good is the word, and we look to it that the deed shall be better yet.  Thus hath the evil arisen that shall destroy the evil, as oft hath been when the valiant have been grieved, and the joy of the true-hearted hath been stolen from them; then the hand doth the doughty deed and the heart hath ease, and solaced is sorrow.

They looked on her and wondered, for she spake with her head upraised and her eyes glittering, as she had been one of the wise women of yore agone.  And Birdalone feared her, though she loved her.

Lastly spake Hugh, and said:  Brother, this is well thought of indeed, and I marvel that I did not prevent thee; and I am thine to live and die with thee.  And the adventure is nought unlikely; for if we have lost a captain they have lost their head devil, and their head little devil; moreover, the good men of Greenford shall join them to us, and that shall make us strong, whereas they have men enough, and those stout men-at-arms; and artificers they have to make us engines, and do other wisdom; and therewithal money to buy or to wage what they will.  Wherefore, to my mind, we were best to make no tarrying, but send out the messengers for the hosting straightway.

Straightway, said the Black Squire; and let us go now and find Sir Aymeris.  So they arose both and went their ways, and left the women there alone, and were gone a good while.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_08]

CHAPTER VIII. ATRA AND BIRDALONE TALK TOGETHER WHILE THE LORDS SIT AT THE MURDER-COUNCIL

Meanwhile of their absence, Viridis sat sad and silent and downcast, though she wept not, for her gladness, which erst had been so great, seemed now reft from her; and no merrier was Aurea, as might have been looked for.  But Atra came quietly unto Birdalone, and said softly:  I have a word for thee if thou wilt come forth with me into the hall.  Birdalone's heart failed her somewhat, but she suffered Atra to take her hand, and they went into the hall together, and Atra brought her into a shot-window, and they sat down together side by side and were silent awhile.  Spake Atra then, trembling and reddening:  Birdalone, knowest thou what thought, what hope, was in my heart when I spake so proudly and rashly e'en now?  Birdalone kept silence, and trembled as the other did.  This it was, said Atra:  he will go to this battle valiantly, he may fall there, and that were better; for then is life to begin anew:  and what is there to do with these dregs of life?  Said Birdalone, with flushed face:  If he die he shall die goodly, and if he live he shall live goodly.  Yea, yea, said Atra; forsooth thou art a happy woman!  Dost thou hate me? said Birdalone.  Said Atra:  Proud is thy word, but I hate thee not.  Nay, e'en now, when I spake thus boastfully, I thought:  When he hath died as a doughty knight should, then, when life begins again, Birdalone and I shall be friends and sisters, and we two will talk together oft and call him to mind, and the kindness of him, and how he loved us. Woe's me! that was when he was there sitting beside me and I could see him and his kindness; and then it was as if I could give him away; but now he is gone and I may not see him, it is clear to me that I have no part or lot in him, and I call back my thought and my word, and now it is:  O that he may live!  O thou happy woman, that shall be glad whether he liveth or dieth!

Said Birdalone:  And now thou hatest me, dost thou not, and we are foes?  Atra answered not, nor spake for a while; then she said:  Hard and bitter is it, and I know not what to turn to.  I have seen once and again, on the wall of the Minorites' church at Greenford, a fair picture of the Blessed, and they walking in the meads of Paradise, clad in like raiment, men and women; their heads flower-crowned, their feet naked in the harmless blossomed grass; hand in hand they walk, with all wrath passed for ever, all desire changed into loving- kindness, all the anguish of forgiveness forgotten.  And underneath the picture is it writ:

 Bitter winter, burning summer, never more shall waste and wear;
 Blossom of the rose undying brings undying springtide there.

O for the hope of it, that I might hope it!  O for the days to be and the assuaging of sorrow:  I speak the word, and the hope springeth; the word is spoken, and there abideth desire barren of hope!  And she bowed down her head and wept bitterly; and Birdalone called to mind her kindness of the past and wept for her, she also.

After a while Atra lifted up her head, and thus she spake:  I hate thee not, Birdalone; nor doth one say such things to a foe.  Yea, furthermore, I will crave somewhat of thee.  If ever there come a time when thou mayst do something for me, thou wilt know it belike without my telling thee.  In that day and in that hour I bid thee remember how we stood together erst at the stair-foot of the Wailing Tower in the Isle of Increase Unsought, and thou naked and fearful and quaking, and what I did to thee that tide to comfort thee and help and save thee.  And then when thou hast called it to mind, do thou for me what thou canst do.  Wilt thou promise this?  Yea, yea, said Birdalone; and with all the better will, that oft and over again have I called it to mind.  Wherefore I behight thee to let me serve thee if I may whenso the occasion cometh, even if it be to my own pain and grief; for this I know thou meanest.

See thou to this then, said Atra coldly; and thou shalt be the better for it in the long run belike:  for thou art a happy woman.

She arose as she spake, and said:  Hist! here come the lords from the murder-council; and lo, now that he cometh, my heart groweth evil toward thee again, and well-nigh biddeth me wish that thou wert naked and helpless before me again.  Lo my unhap! that he should mark my face that it shows as if I were fain to do thee a mischief.  And nought of that would I do; for how should it avail me, and thou my fellow and the faithful messenger of the Quest?

Now little of her last words did Birdalone meet, as into the hall came Hugh and Arthur; and though she strove to sober her mind and think of her she-friend and her unhappiness, yet she could not choose but to be full of joy in her inmost heart now she knew without doubt that she was so well-beloved of her beloved:  and she deemed that Atra was in the right indeed to call her a happy woman.

So now they all went into the solar together, and sat them down with the two others; and Hugh did them to wit, how they had ordered all the matter of the messengers who were to summon the knights and chiefs of thereabouts, and the aldermen of Greenford, to meet at the Castle of the Quest, that they might set afoot the hosting to go against the Red Hold.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_09]

CHAPTER IX. HUGH TELLS THE STORY OF THE QUEST'S ENDING.

When this was said, and there had been silence a while, Birdalone took up the word, and spake meekly and sweetly, saying:  Dear friends, how it fared with you on the isle from the time of my leaving you, and how with you, true knights, from the time of your departure, I both were fain to know for the tale's sake, and also I would take the telling thereof as a sign of your forgiveness of my transgression; so I would crave the same of you but if it weary you overmuch.

All they yeasaid her kindly, and Hugh spake and said:  By your leave, fellows, I will tell in few words what betid us on our way to the Isle of Increase Unsought, and then shall Viridis take up the tale from the time that Birdalone left the said isle in the witch's ferry. None said aught against it, and Hugh went on:  Short is my tale of the journey:  We came to the Isle of Nothing on the morrow's morn of our departure, and being warned of thee, Birdalone, we abode there but a little while to rest us from the boat, and went nowhither from the strand, and so went on our way in a three hours' space.

Thence again we took the water, and came to the Isle of Kings, and that was in the middle of the night:  we beheld the dead long and heedfully when the morning came, and departed again before noon, and came to the Isle of Queens a little after nightfall.  The next morning we deemed we needs must go see the images of those ladies, lest aught might have befell since thou wert there which might be of import to the Quest, but all was unchanged, and we came away while the day was yet young.

We made the Isle of the Young and the Old about sunset that day, and the boy and the girl came down to the strand to behold us and wonder at us, and we sported with them merrily a while; and then they brought us to the house of the old man, who received us courteously and gave us to eat and drink.  Forsooth, when the night was somewhat spent, he brought out strong drink to us, and took it somewhat amiss that we drank not overmuch thereof, as forsooth he did, and so fell asleep.  Before he was drunk we asked him many questions about the isle and its customs, but he knew nought to tell us of them.  Of thee also we asked, sister, but he had no memory of thee.

On the morrow he fared down with us to our ferry, and made many prayers to us to take him along with us; for here, said he, is neither lordship nor fair lady; and if here I abide, soon shall I come to mine ending day, and sore I yearn for joyance and a long term to my years.  Now we durst not take him aboard lest we should fare amiss with the wight of the Sending Boat; so we naysaid him courteously, thanked him for his guesting, and gave him gifts, to wit, a finger gold ring and an ouch of gold, so he turned away from us somewhat downcast as we deemed; but ere we had given the word to the Sending Boat we heard him singing merrily in a high cracked voice as he went on his way.

Now on this last day betid somewhat of new tidings; for scarce was this isle out of sight behind, ere we saw a boat come sailing toward us from the north-east, and it came on swiftly with a blue ripple of the lake behind it.  Thereat we marvelled, and yet more when we saw that its sail was striped of gold and green and black; next then were we betwixt fear and joy when, as it drew nigher, we saw three women in the said boat, clad in gold, green, and black; and it came so nigh unto us at last, that we could see their faces that they were verily those of our lovelings; and each reached out her arms to us and called on us for help, each by our name:  and there we were, oarless, sailless, at the mercy of our unkenned ferry.  Then would Baudoin and I have leapt overboard to swim to our loves at all adventure; but Sir Arthur here stayed us, and bade us think of it, that we were now nearing the Witch-land, and if we might not look to be beset with guiles and gins to keep us from winning to our journey's end; wherefore we forbore, though in all wretchedness, and the gay boat ran down the wind away from us, and the breeze and the ripple passed away with it, and the lake lay under the hot sun as smooth as glass; and on we went, weary-hearted.

Came again another sail out of the north-east, when the sun was getting low, and speedily it drew nigh, but this time it was no small boat or barge, but a tall ship with great sails, and goodly-towered she was and shield-hung, and the basnets gleamed and the spears glittered from her castle-tops and bulwarks, and the sound of her horns came down the wind as she neared us.  We two handled our weapons and did on our basnets, but Arthur there, he sat still, and said:  Not over-wise is the witch, that she lets loose on us two sendings in one day so like unto each other.  Hah, said Baudoin, be we wary though; they are going to shoot.  And sure enough we saw a line of bowmen in all the castles and even along, and a horn blew, and then forth flew the shafts, but whither we knew not, for none came anywhere anigh us; and Arthur laughed and said:  A fair shot into the clouds; but, by our Lady! if none shot better in our country, I would bear no armour for their shafts.  But we two were confused and knew not what to think.

The great ship flew past us on the wind as the barge had done, but when she was about half a mile aloof we saw her canvass fall to shivering and her yards swaying round, and Arthur cried out:  St. Nicholas! the play beginneth again! she is coming about!

Even so it was, and presently she was bearing on us, and was ere long so close aboard that we could see her every spar and rope, and her folk all gathered to the windward, knights, sergeants, archers, and mariners, to gaze at us and mock us; and huge and devilish laughter arose from amongst them as she ploughed the water so close beside us, that one might well-nigh have cast a morsel of bread aboard her; for clear it was presently that she had no mind to run us down.

Spake Arthur then:  There will be a fresh play presently, my mates, but ye sit fast, for meseemeth this show is no more perilous than the other, though it be bigger.

Scarce were the words out of his mouth, ere there was a stir amongst the men gathered in the waist, and lo, amidst a knot of big and fierce mariners, three women standing, pale, with flying hair, and their hands bound behind them, and one was clad in gold and another in green and the third in black; and their faces were as the faces of Aurea and Viridis and Atra.

Then there came forth from that ship a huge cruel roar blent with mocking laughter that shamed our very hearts, and those evil things in the form of mariners took hold of each one of the ladies and cast them overboard into the gulf of the waters, first Aurea, next Viridis, and then Atra; and we two stood up with our useless swords brandished and would have leapt over into the deep, but that Arthur arose also and took hold of an arm of each of us and stayed us, and said:  Nay, then, if ye go, take me with you, and let all the Quest sink down into the deep, and let our lovelings pine in captivity, and Birdalone lose all her friends in one swoop, and we be known hereafter as the fools of lovers, the unstable.

So we sat us down, but huge shrieking laughter rose up unblended from the keel of the evil thing, and then they let her go down the wind, and she went her way with flashing of arms, and streaming of banners and pennons, and blowing of horns, and the sun was setting over the wide water.

But Arthur spake:  Cheer up, brethren! see ye not how this proud witch is also but an eyeless fool to send us such a show, and the second time in one day to show us the images of our dearlings, who hours ago flitted past us in the stripe-sailed boat?  Where, then, did they of the ship meet with them?  Nay, lords, let not the anguish of love steal all your wits.

We saw we had been fools to be so overcast by guile, and yet were we exceeding ill at ease, and over-long the time seemed unto us until we should be come to the Isle of Increase Unsought, and find our lovelings there.

Now was the night come, and we fell asleep, but belike were not often all asleep at once; and at last it was, when we felt the dawn drawing near, though, the moon being down, it was the darkest of the summer night, that we were all three awake, when all of a sudden we heard just astern the rushing of the water, as though some keel were cleaving it, and dimly in the dark we saw a sail as of a boat overhauling us.  Close at hand there rang out a lamentable cry:  O, are ye there, fellows of the Quest?  O, help me, friends! save me and deliver me, who am snatched away to be cast into the hands of my mistress that was.  Help me, Baudoin, Hugh, Arthur!  Help! help!

Then all we knew the voice of Birdalone, and Arthur leapt up, and would have been overboard in a trice had not we two held him, and he fought and cursed us well-favouredly, there is no nay thereto; and meanwhile the wailing voice of thee, my sister, died out in the distance, and the east grew grey, and dawn was come.

Then spake Baudoin:  Arthur, my brother, dost thou not mark that this also was of the same sort of show as those two others, and thou who wert so wise before?  It is but beguilings to bring the Quest to nought; wherefore call to mind thy manhood and thy much wisdom!

And we admonished him and rebuked him till he became quiet and wise again, but was sad and downcast and silent.  But the Sending Boat sped on through the dawning, and when it was light we saw that we had the Isle of Increase close aboard, and we ran ashore there just as the sun was rising.  Fain were we then to get out of the boat and feel earth under our feet.  We took all our hards out of the boat, and hid away under the roots of an old thorn a little mail wherein was your raiment, my ladies, which ye had lent to Birdalone; then we did on our armour, and advised us of whereabout on the isle we were, and we saw the orchards and gardens before us, and the great fair house above all, even as ye told us of them, Birdalone.

Next, then, without more ado, we went our ways up through the orchard and the gardens, and when we were well-nigh at the end of them, and in face of those many steps ye spake of, we saw at the foot of them a tall woman clad in red scarlet, standing as if she abode our coming. When we drew nigh we saw that she was strong-looking, well-knit, white-skinned, yellow-haired, and blue-eyed, and might have been called a fair woman, as to her shaping, save that her face was heavy, yet hard-looking, with thin lips and somewhat flagging cheeks, a face stupid, but proud and cruel.

She hailed us as we came up, and said:  Men-at-arms, ye be welcome to our house, and I bid you to eat and drink and abide here.

Then we louted before her, and bade her Hail; and Baudoin said: Lady, thy bidding will we take; yet have we an errand to declare ere we break bread with thee, lest when it is told we be not so welcome as ye tell us now.  What is it? said she.  Said Baudoin:  This man here is called the Green Knight, and this the Black Squire, and I am the Golden Knight; and now will we ask thee if this isle be called the Isle of Increase Unsought?  Even so have I called it, quoth she, wherefore I deem none other will dare call it otherwise.  It is well, quoth Baudoin; but we have heard say that hereto had strayed three dear friends of ours, three maidens, who hight Viridis, the friend of the Green Knight, and Atra, who is the Black Squire's, and Aurea, who is mine own friend, so we have come to take them home with us, since they have been so long away from their land and their loves.  Now if they be thy friends thou wilt perchance let them go for love's sake and the eking of friendship; but if they be thy captives, then are we well willing to pay thee ransom, not according to their worth, for no treasure heaped up might come nigh it, but according to thy desire, lady.

Laughed the proud lady scornfully and said:  Big are thy words, Sir Knight:  if I had these maidens in my keeping I would give them unto you for nothing, and deem that I had the best of the bargain.  But here are they not.  True it is that I had here three thralls who were hight as thou hast said; but a while ago, not many days, they transgressed against me till I chastised them; and then was I weary of them and would be quit of them; for I need no servants here, whereas I myself am enough for myself.  Wherefore I sent them away across the water to my sister, who dwells in a fair place hight the House under the Wood; for she needeth servants, because the earth there yieldeth nought save to the tiller and the herdsman and the hunter, while here all cometh unsought.  With her may ye deal, for what I know, and buy the maidens whom ye prize so high; though belike ye may have to give her other servants in their place.  For, indeed, a while ago her thrall fled from her and left her half undone, and it is said that she came hither in her shamelessness:  but I know not; if she did, she slipped through my fingers, or else I would have made her rue her impudence.  Now meseemeth, Sir Knights, here is enough of so small and foolish a matter; and again I pray you to enter my poor house, and take meat and drink along with me, for ye be none the less welcome because of your errand, though it be a foolish one.

Now would Sir Baudoin have answered wrathfully, but Arthur plucked at his skirt, and he yeasaid the lady's bidding, though somewhat ungraciously; but that she heeded nought; she took Sir Baudoin by the hand and led him up the stately perron, and thence came we into a pillared hall, as fair as might be.  And there on the dais was a table dight with dainty meats and drinks, and the lady bade us thereto, and we sat to it.

Thereat was the lady buxom and merry:  Baudoin scowled across the board; I was wary and silent; but Arthur was as blithe with the lady as she with him; nor did I altogether marvel thereat, since I knew him wise of wit.

But when we were done with the meal, the lady stood up and said: Now, Sir Knights, I will give you leave; but this house is as your own to roam through all its chambers and pleasure you with its wonders and goodliness; and when ye are weary of the house, then is the orchard and the garden free to you, and all the isle wheresoever ye will go.  And here in this hall is meat and drink for you whenso ye will; but if ye would see me again to-day, then shall ye meet me where ye first happened on me e'en now, at the foot of the great perron.

Then she laid her hand on Arthur's shoulder, and said:  Thy big friend may search out every nook in this house, and every bush in the whole island, and if he find there the maidens he spake of, one or all of them, then are they a gift from me unto him.

Therewith she turned, and went out of the hall by a door in the side thereof; and now already meseemed that though the woman was hateful and thick-hearted and cruel, yet she was become fairer, or seemed so, than when we first came on her; and for my part I pondered on what it might grow to, and fear of her came into my soul.

Now spake Baudoin:  Fellows, let us get out into the garden at least; for this place is evil, and meseems it smells and tastes of tears and blood, and that evil wights that hate the life of men are lurking in the nooks thereof.  And lo, our very she-friend that was so kind and simple and dainty with us, there is, as it were, the image of the dear maiden standing trembling and naked before the stupid malice of this lump of flesh.  So spake he, Birdalone.

But I said to Arthur in a soft voice:  And when shall we slay her? Said he:  Not until we have gotten from her all that may be gotten; and that is the living bodies of our friends.  But come we forth.

So did we, and came down to the orchard and did off our helms, and lay down under a big apple-tree which was clear of cover all round about, and so fell to our redes; and I asked Arthur what he deemed of the story of our loves having been carried to the House under the Wood, and if it might not be tried seeking thither; but he laughed and said:  Never would she have told us thereof had it been sooth: doubtless our friends are here on this isle, but, as I deem, not in the house, else had not the witch left all the house free for us to search into.  Yea, said I, but how if they be in her prison?  Said he:  It is not hard to find out which is the prison of so dainty a house as is yonder; and when we had found it, soon should we have hit upon a way to break it, since we be three, and stout fellows enough. Nay, I deem that the lovelings be stowed away in some corner of the isle without the house, and that mayhappen we shall find them there; and yet I trow not before we have made guile meet guile, and overcome the sorceress.  But come now, let us be doing, and begin to quarter this little land as the kestrel doth the water-meadow; and leave we our armour, lest we weary us, for we shall have no need for hard strokes.

We hung up there on the tree helm and shield and hauberk, and all our defences, and went our ways quartering the isle; and the work was toilsome, but we rested not till the time was come to keep tryst with the lady; and all that while we found no sign of the darling ones: and the isle was everywhere a meadow as fair as a garden, with little copses of sweet-growing trees here and there, and goodly brooks of water, but no tillage anywhere:  wild things, as hart and buck and roe, we came upon, and smaller deer withal, but all unhurtful to man; but of herding was no token.

Came we then back to that lordly perron, and there, at the foot thereof, stood the witch-wife, and received us joyously; clad was she all gloriously in red scarlet broidered and begemmed; her arms bare and her feet sandalled, and her yellow hair hanging down from under its garland; and certainly it was so that she had grown fairer, and was sleek and white and well-shapen, and well-haired; yet by all that, the visage of her was little bettered, and unto me she was loathsome.

Now the feast went much as the earlier meal had done; and Baudoin was surly and Arthur blithe and buxom; and nought befell to tell of, save that dishes and meats, and flasks and cups, and all things came upon the board as if they were borne thereon by folk unseen; and thereat we wondered not much, considering in what wonder-house we were.  But the lady-witch looked on us and smiled, and said:  Knights, ye marvel at the manner of our service, but call to mind that we told you this morning that we were enough for Ourselves, and we have so dight our days here that whoso is our friend on this Isle of Increase shall lack nothing.  Fear not, therefore, to see aught ugly in our servants as now unseen, if their shapes were made manifest unto you.

All things were we heedful to note at this banquet; but when it was over, then came music into the hall from folk unseen, but not as if the musicians were a many, only belike some three or four.  And thereat the lady spake, saying:  Knights, ye may deem our minstrels but few, but such is our mind that we love not our music overloud, and for the most part only three sing or play unto us at one time.

Thereafter the lady brought us to fair chambers, and we slept there in all ease, and we arose on the morrow and found the lady still blithe with us; yet I noted this, that she seemed to deal with Arthur as if she saw him now for the first time, and much he seemed to be to her liking.

Again we fared forth, and were no less diligent in searching the isle than erst, and found nought; and all went that day as before.

On the morrow (that is, the third day) the witch seemed to have somewhat more memory of Arthur than erst, and even yet more liking of him, so that she reached out her hand for him to kiss, which needs must he do, despite his loathing of her.

When we had lain under the apple-tree a little while, Baudoin spake and said:  Yesterday and the day before we searched the open land and found nought; now to-day let us search the house, and if we find nought, then at least it shall lie behind us.  We yeasaid it, and presently went back, and from chamber to chamber, and all was fair and goodly as might be, and we marvelled what would betide to it when the witch was undone and her sorcery come to an end.

To the Wailing Tower we came, and up the stairs, and found the door open of the prison-chamber, and all there as thou hast told us, Birdalone; only we opened the great coffer, whence thou didst refrain thee, and found it full of hideous gear truly, as fetters and chains, and whips and rods, and evil tools of the tormentors, and cursed it all and came away; and Arthur said:  Lo you, this stupid one!  How eager is she to bid us what to do, and to tell us that our ladies are not in this evil house, since she leaveth all open to us.  Yet we went about the house without, and counted the windows heedfully to see that we had missed no chamber, and found nought amiss; and then we went in again and sought as low down as we might, to see if perchance some dungeon there were underground, but found nought save a very goodly undercroft below the great hall, which was little less fair than that which was above it.  So came the evening and the banquet, and the end of that day; but the witch-wife led Arthur by the hand to the board, and afterwards to the chamber ere we slept.

On the fourth day and the fifth it was no otherwise than erst; and when I fared to bed I felt confused in my head and sick of heart.

The night of the next day (the sixth), as we went to our chambers, and the witch-wife and Arthur hand-in-hand, she stayed him a while, and spake eagerly to him in a soft voice; and as he came up to me afterwards he said:  To-night I have escaped it, but there will not be escape for long.  From what? said I.  He said:  From bedding her; for now it has come to this, that presently we must slay her at once and have no knowledge of our sweetlings, or I must do her will.

In such wise passed four more days, and it was the twelfth morning of our sojourn there, and we went forth on our search of every mead and every covert of the isle, and all day we found nought to our purpose; but as it grew toward sunset, and there grew great clouds in the eastern ort, piled up and copper-coloured, we came over a bent on to a little green dale watered by a clear brook, and as we looked down into it we saw something shine amongst its trees; so we hastened toward that gleam, and lo, amidst the dale, with the brook running through it, a strange garth we saw.  For there was a pavilion done of timber and board, and gaily painted and gilded, and out from that house was, as it were, a great cage of thin gilded bars, both walls and roof, just so wide apart as no one full-grown, carl or quean, could thrust through.

Thitherward then ran we, shouting, for we saw at once that in the said cage were three women whose aspect was that of our sweetlings, and presently we were standing by the said herse, reaching our hands out to them to come to us and tell us their tale, and that we would deliver them.  But they stood together in the midst of the said cage, and though they gazed piteously on us thence, and reached out their hands to us, they neither spake nor came to the herse to us; so we deemed that they were bewitched, and our joy was dashed.

Then we went all about the cage and the pavilion to find ingate, and found it not; and then the three of us together strove with the bars of the herse, and shook and swayed them, but it was all to no purpose.

Moreover, while we were at this work the sun seemed to go out, and there came a heavy black mist rolling into the dale, and wrapped us about so that we saw not each other's faces, and the bars of the herse were gone from our hands as we stood there.  Then came rain and thunder and lightning on to the black night, and by the glare of the lightning we could see the leaves and grass of the dale, but neither herse nor house nor woman.  So we abode there in the dark night, and the storm all bewildered us, till the rain and clouds drew off and it was calm fair starlight again, but clean gone was the golden cage and they that stood therein; and we turned sadly, and went our ways toward the witch-house.

On the way said Arthur:  Brethren, this meseemeth is but a-going on with the shows which were played us on the water as we came hither; but whether she doth this but for to mock and torment us, or that she would beguile us into deeming that our friends are verily here, I wot not; but to-morrow, meseemeth, I shall can to tell you.

Now came we to the perron of the house, and there stood the witch- wife under the stars to meet us.  And when she saw us, she took hold of Arthur by the hand and the arm to caress him, and found that he and we were drenched with the rain and the storm, as might well be deemed; then she bade us up to our chambers to do on raiment which she had dight for us, and we went thither, and found our garments rich and dainty indeed; but when we came down into the hall where the witch abode us, we saw that Arthur's raiment was far the richest and daintiest.  But the witch ran to him and cast her arms about him, and clipped and kissed him before the others, and he suffered it.  So sped the feast again.

But when they went to bed, the said witch took Arthur's hand and spake a word unto him, and led him away, and he went with her as one nought loth; but we twain were afraid lest she should destroy him when she had had her will of him.  Wherefore we waked through the more part of the night with our swords ready to hand.

But when we were clad in the morn he came unto us, he also clad, and was downcast and shamefaced indeed, but safe and sound; and he said: Speak no word about our matter till we be out in the open air, for I fear all things about us.

So when we had gone forth and were under the apple-tree once more, spake Arthur:  Now, lords, am I shamed for ever, for I have become the leman of this evil creature; but I pray ye not to mock me; and that the more as the same lot may happen on you both, or either; for I can see for sure that the wretch will weary of me and desire one of you two.  Let it pass.  Somewhat have I found out from her, but not much; first, that she has forgotten her first lie, to wit, how she sent our ladies to the sister-witch; for I told her of the golden cage, and how we had missed it in the storm; and she said:  Though I deem it a folly that ye should seek these thralls, yet would I help you if I might, since ye are now become my dear friends.  Though, forsooth, when ye meet them I deem that ye will find them sore changed to you.  For, as I told you, they fled away from me, after I had chastised them for a treason, into the hidden places of the isle, whereas they had no keel to sail away hence.  And I cared not to follow them, as I myself am queen and lady of all things here, and am enough for myself, save when love constraineth me, dear lord.  Now, my rede is that ye seek the golden cage again and yet again, because I deem that these thralls have somehow learned some wisdom, and they have enchanted the said cage for a defence against me, from whom they might not hide as they did from you; for of me have they stolen their wizardry, and I am their mistress therein.

This, therefore, is the new lie of her, and my rede is that we heed it nought.  For my mind is that she it is that hath made the appearance of the cage and the women therein, and that she hath our poor friends somewhere underneath her hand.

Now this we deemed most like; yet whereas we had nought to do with the time, which, now that we had searched the isle throughly, hung heavy on hand, we deemed it good to go to the dale of the golden cage again, though we looked not to find the cage there any more.  But this betid, that we found the little dale easily enough, and there stood the cage as we had seen it yesterday, but nought was there within its bright bars save the grass and the flowers, and the water of the brook a-running.

We loitered about that place a while, and went back to the house in due time; and to shorten the tale, I shall tell that for many days it betid that we went every day to seek the golden cage, but after the first three days we saw it no more.

Now began sadness and weariness to overcome us as the days and weeks wore, and belike the witch-wife noted it that we were worse company than heretofore.

And now on a day Arthur bade us note that the said witch was growing weary of him, and he bade me look to it; for, said he, she is turning her face toward thee, brother.  My heart burned with rage at that word; I said nought, but made up my mind that I would try to bring the matter to an end.

That same night befell what Arthur had threatened; for the feast being done in the evening, the witch drew me aside while the music was a-playing, and caressed my hand and my shoulder, and said:  I am yet wondering at you Champions, that ye must needs follow after those three wretched thralls, whom never will ye find, for they. need ye not, but will flee from you if ye have sight of them, as they did that other day; and therein they are scarce in the wrong, whereas they may well think that if ye find them they should fall into my hands; for easily may I take them any day that I will, and then I have a case against them, and may lawfully chastise them according to the law that has been given unto me; and then shall they be in grievous plight.  Wherefore the rede We give unto you three now is the rede of friendliness that ye make yourselves happy in Our Island, and then will We do everything We may for your pleasure and delight; and if ye will that We make Ourselves even fairer than now We be, that may be done, and shall be a reward unto you for your yielding and obedience.  And if ye will women thralls for your pleasure, that also may be gotten for you; for We be not wholly without power in these waters, though We have no keel or ferry upon them.  And now, thou fair lad, We give thee this last word:  Ye Champions have been dwelling in Our house a long while, and that while have ever striven to thwart Us.  We now counsel you to make an end of it, and it shall be better for you.

She seemed to my eyes prouder and stupider than ever erst, despite her golden hair and white skin and lovely limbs; and I said to myself that now must we destroy the evil of that house even if we died for it, or else we were all undone; withal I saw somewhat of truth thrusting up through her much lying, and I deemed, even as Arthur did, that she had our friends under her band somewhere.

Nought else betid that night; but on the morrow we went forth and strayed on till we were come into the southernmost quarter of the isle, and not very far from the water we came upon a wood or big thicket which was new to us.  So we entered it, and as we went and noted the wild things of the wood going hither and thither, we espied afar off the shape of a man going amidst the thicket; wherefore we went warily towards him, lest he should see us and flee from us; and when we drew a little nigher we saw it was a woman, though she was clad as a hunter, with legs naked to above the knee.  She had a quiver at her back and a bow in her hand, and her coat was black of hue.  Belike now she heard our going amongst the dry leaves, for she turned her face to us, and lo! it was the face of Atra.

When she saw us, she gave a shrill cry, and fell to running at her swiftest away from us, and we followed all we might, but we could not over-run her, though we kept her in sight ever, till we had run all through the wood, and before us was the sheer side of a rocky hill and the mouth of a cave therein, and by the said mouth who should there be but Aurea and Viridis, as we thought, clad in gold and in green, but the fashion of their raiment not otherwise than Atra's. Their bows were bended and they had shafts in their hands, and as we came out of the thicket into the open lawn before the cave, Viridis nocked a shaft and aimed at us and drew, and the shaft flew over my head; therewith mocking laughter came from them, and they ran into the cave.  Speedily we ran up to it, but when we came home thither, there was the sheer hillside, but never a cave nor an opening.

Dismayed were we thereat; but more dismayed had we been but that we deemed that all this was but a cheat and a painted show put upon us by the witch to back up her lying.  Nevertheless we fared the next day to seek the wood and the cave in the sheer rock, but nowise might we find either wood or cave.

Now it was the night of the day hereafter, as we went to our chambers, that the witch-wife took me by the hand and led me apart, and said me many soft things of her accursed lust, whereof I will not say one again.  But the upshot of it all was that she would bring me to her chamber and her bed.  And whereas I was determined what to do, and had my war-sword by my side, I naysaid her not, but made her good countenance.  And when we came to her chamber, which was full gloriously dight, and fragrant as with the scent of the roses and lilies of mid-June, she bade me to lie in her bed of gold and ivory and she would be with me anon.  So I unclad myself and laid me down, but I drew forth my sword, and laid the ancient naked blade betwixt my side and her place.

Anon she cometh back again unclad, and would step into the bed; but she saw the sword and said:  What is this, Champion?  Said I:  These edges are the token of sundering between us, for there is a spell on me, that with no woman may I deal, save with mine only love, but I shall do her mortal scathe; so beware by the token of the grey edges of battle.  She drew aback, and was as a spiteful and angry cat, and there was no loveliness in her; and she said:  Thou liest, and thou hatest me; see thou to it, both for thyself and thy loveling.  And she turned about and strode out of the chamber; but I arose and clad myself in haste, and took my naked sword in my hand.  But before I went, I looked around, and espied an ambry fashioned in the wall of the bed-lane, and the door was half open; and the said ambry was wrought of the daintiest, all of gold and pearl and gems; and I said to myself:  Herein is some treasure, and this is a tide of war.  So I opened the ambry, and within it was even more gloriously wrought than without; and there was nought therein, save a little flask of crystal done about with bands of gold set with great and goodly gems.  So I took the said flask and went my ways hastily to my own chamber, and there I looked at the said flask and took out the stopple; and there was a liquor therein, white like to water, but of a spicy smell, sweet, fresh, and enheartening.  So I yet thought this was some great treasure, and that much hung upon it, could I find out unto what use it might be put.  And I said:  To-morrow we will put it to the proof. Then I put the said flask under my pillow, and laid my sword by my side and slept, and was not ill-content so far.

But on the morrow, when I met my fellows, they asked me how I had sped, and I told them, Well, and that we would talk the matter over under our tree of counsel.  So we went down into the hall, where we met the witch-lady; and I looked for it that she would be angry and fierce with me; but it went far otherwise; for she was blithe and buxom, and abounding in endearments more than I could away with.  But this I noted, that her eyes wandered, and her speech faltered at whiles, and ever she seemed to be seeking somewhat; and withal that her caressing hands were seeking if they could aught stowed away in the bosom of my coat.  But all was nought, for as we came to the door of the hall I gave Baudoin the flask to guard until we should come to our apple-tree of rede.  Wherefore the she-wolf went red and white by turns, and fumed, and fretted her bedizenments with unrestful hands, and when she should let us go our ways, she lingered and looked back oft, and was loth to depart ere she had gotten what she lacked, and that, forsooth, was the said flasket.

But when we were without the house, I bade our fellows go with me to another place than the wonted apple-tree of rede, and they understood my word, and I led them to a little grassy plain without the orchard, where was no covert for a wide space about it, nought but the one linden-tree under which now we sat.  There I told them all the tale of the last night and of the flasket, and put before them all that was in my mind to do that evening at the banquet, and they both of them yeasaid it.  But what it was, that shall ye hear anon when we carried the matter through; but I bade Baudoin still carry the flasket till the evening.

Thereafter we spake of other matters; but soon we had good cause to rejoice that we had not talked our talk under the apple-tree (whereas I doubted not that the witch would spy upon us there), for not long had we been at our talk ere, looking that way, we saw the evil creature by the hedge of the orchard and gazing over at us.

We arose then, and came to her as if nought had happened; and she bade us walk the garden with her, and we yeasaid it, and went with her, and paced about amidst the flowers and lay on the blossomed grass.  Forsooth, both to her and to us the time hung heavy on hand. And meseemed that the sleekness and fairness of her body was worsened since yesterday, and she was pale and haggard, and her eyes were wandering and afraid.

Now she bade us come a little further into the garden and eat a morsel at noon; and we arose, and she brought us to where were vines trellised all about and overhead, so that it was like a fair green cloister; and there was a board laid and spread with many dainties of meat and drink.  And she bade us sit.  Verily we had but little stomach to that dinner; and I said to myself, Poison! poison! and even so my fellows deemed, as afterwards they told me.  And I saw Baudoin loosen his sword in the sheath, and I knew that his mind was to smite at once if he saw aught amiss.  And I, who sat next to the witch, laid my hand on a little dagger which I wore at my girdle. She also saw this, and turned as pale as death, and sat trembling before us; and whatso we ate or drank at that board under the rustling vine-leaves, she gave unto us with her own hand; and then we wotted full surely that she had meant our deaths there and then, but was cowed by the fierce eyes of Baudoin and the threat of my hand.

Withal it seemed that she might not bear it to sit there long amongst us.  She rose up and smiled on us as ghastly as a corpse, and gave us leave, and went hurrying into the house.  And right glad we were to be at rest from her.  Yet as we ourselves durst not go far away from the house, lest some new thing might happen, neither could she leave us quite alone, but thrice again that afternoon at some turn of the garden, or orchard, or meadow, we came upon her wan face and eyes full of all hate and staring pride, and she enforced her to smile upon us, and turned away with some idle word.

At last the sun began to sink, and we went to the perron of the house, and found her standing to meet us in her wonted way.  But when we came up she gave no hand to any one of us but went up the stairs before us, and we followed with no word spoken.

There was the hall with the lordly service on the board, and the wax- candles lighted all about, and the great vault of stone fair and stately over it.  We went to the dais and the board and sat down, the witch-wife in her gold and ivory chair at the board's end, and I at her right hand and looking down the hall, my two fellows facing me, with their backs to the clear of the hall.

There we sat, and the meats and drinks were before us as dainty as ever erst; but we put forth no hand to them, but sat staring at each other for some two minutes it might be, and the witch looked from one to the other of us, and quaked that her hands shook like palsy.

Then I rose up and put my hand to my bosom (for Baudoin had given me the flasket ere we came to the perron):  I spake in a loud voice, and it sounded wild and hard in the goodly hall:  My lady, I said, thou art looking but pale now, and sick and downcast.  Drink now to me out of this precious flasket, and thou shalt be whole and well.

And therewith I held the flasket aloft; but her face changed horribly; she sprang up in her chair and reached out her arm to clutch at the flasket, screaming like an eagle therewith.  But I thrust her back into the chair with my left hand; and therewith arose Baudoin and Arthur, and caught her by the shoulders, and bound her fast to the chair with cords that they had gotten thereto.  But when she got her breath she yelled out:  Ah, now shall all tumble together, my proudful house and I under it!  Loose me, traitors! loose me, fools! and give me one draught of the water of might, and then shall I tell you all, and ye shall go free with your thralls if ye will.  Ah! ye will not loose me? ye will not?  Well then, at least ye, the fools, shall be under it, and they also, the she-traitors, the scourged and tormented fools that might not save themselves from me.  O loose me! loose me! thou in whose arms I have lain so many a night, and give me to drink of the proud water of might!

So she yelled; and now had all the fairness gone from her body: flaggy and yellow were her limbs, and she looked all over as her face, a lump of stupid and cruel pride, and her words lost meaning and changed into mere bestial howling.  But for me, since she so desired that water, I knew that it was good for us to drink, and I took out the stopple and drank, and it was as if fire ran through all my veins, and I felt my strength three-folded straightway, and most wondrous clear was my sight grown therewith; and I raised my eyes now and looked down the hall, and lo, there was Aurea, chained by the ankle to the third pillar from the dais; and over against her, Viridis; and next, to the fourth pillar, Atra.  Then I cried in a loud voice that rang through the witch's hall:  Lo what I see!  And I ran round the head of the board, and thrust and dragged Baudoin and Arthur along with me, crying out:  Come, come! they are found! they are here!  And I came to my sweetling, and found her clad but in her white smock, which was flecked with blood all about, and her face was wan and pined, and the tears began to run when she saw me, but no word came from her lips though the kissing of them was sweet.

Then I turned about to my two fellows, and they stood bewildered, not knowing what was toward; and I came to them and made them drink of the flasket, and their eyes were opened and the strength of giants came to them, and they ran each to his sweetling; but Baudoin, before ever he kissed Aurea, caught hold of the chain that bound her to the pillar, and by main force dragged it out.  Wise was that, meseemed, for words were again come into the witch's howls, and I heard her: Ah, long may ye be playing with the chains, long! for now the house rumbleth toward its fall.  Ah, the bitches are loose!  Woe's me! to die alone!  And once more she howled wordless, as both I and Arthur had our loves in our arms, and fell to following Baudoin out on to the perron and down into the fresh fragrant garden wherein now was the moon beginning to cast shadows.

Stood we then aloof from the house, and the rumbling whereof the evil hag had howled waxed into a thunder, and under our very eyes the great white walls and gold-adorned roofs fell together, and a great cloud of dust rose under the clear moonlit sky.

We looked and wondered, and our loves also, but no word they spake; but ere the other two had time to grieve thereat, I gave Viridis to drink of the water of might, and she fell to sweet speech straightway, of such sort and such wise as I will not tell you.  Then I did the same by Aurea and Atra, and forthwith the speech flowed from them to their friends.

Full happy were we then in the early night-season, for the water of might gave them strength also, as to us, and healed all the stripes and wounds their bodies had suffered of the foul witch, and made their eyes bright, and their cheeks full and firm, and their lips most sweet, and their hands strong and delicious.

Now when we had stood gazing toward the melting of the beauteous palace for a little, we took our darlings in our arms again, whereas the chains would have hindered their walking, and went down to the lip of the water whereas lay the Sending Boat, so that we might be anigh our ferry in case of need; for we knew not what might betide the isle now its mistress had perished.  Then we fell to and sawed off the chains from the dear ankles with our swords, and took Birdalone's lendings from the mail.  And Aurea had her gown again, and Viridis her smock, and my green surcoat over it, and Atra wore the battle-coat of the Black Squire.  As for their bare feet (for Atra would not have hers dight prouder than her sisters'), we so clad them with kisses that they were not ill-covered belike.

So gat we aboard our ferry, and did blood-offering to the wight thereof, and so sped merrily and lovingly over the wide lake back on our homeward road.  And we said:  This hath the dear Birdalone done for us.

And now, my Viridis, I will that thou fill up the tale by telling to Birdalone, as ye told us, how it fared with you three and the evil one from the time that ye sped Birdalone on her way till the moment when mine eyes first beheld you made fast to the pillars of the palace which has crumbled into dust.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_10]

CHAPTER X. HOW IT FARED WITH THE THREE LADIES AFTER THE ESCAPE OF BIRDALONE

Viridis took up the word without more ado, and said:  I will do my best herein, and ye, sisters, must set me right if I err.  When we had seen the last of you, dear Birdalone, that early morning, we turned back again to the house as speedily and as covertly as we might, lest the witch might espy our disarray and question us thereover.  Then we went to the wonder-coffer, and gat thereout raiment for that which we had given away, which was easy for us to do, whereas the witch-mistress was so slothful that she had given to us the words of might wherewith to compel the coffer to yield, so that we might do all the service thereof, and she not to move hand or foot in the matter.  So when we were clad, and the time was come, we went into the hall, by no means well assured of our mistress.

When we came before her, she looked on us in surly wise, as her wont was, and said nought for a while; she stared on us and knit her brows, as if she strove to call to mind something that ran to and fro in her memory; and I noted that, and for my part I trembled before her.  But she spake at last:  Meseemeth as if there is a woman in the isle besides you three; some misdoer that I was minded to punish. Tell me, you! was there not a naked one who came into this hall a while ago, one whom I threatened with pining?  Atra, who was the boldest of us, bowed the knee before her, and said:  Nay, our lady, since when do stranger women come naked into thine hall, and dare thee there?

Said the witch:  Yet have I an image of a naked woman standing down there before me; and if I have it in mine eye, so should ye.  Tell me therefore, and beware, for We are not bidden to hold Our hand from you if We take you in misdeeds.

If I quaked before, now much more I quaked, till my legs well-nigh failed me for fear; but Atra said:  Great lady, this image will belike be of that one whom a while ago ye had stripped and tied to a pillar here, and tormented while ye feasted.

The lady looked on her hard, and again seemed striving to gather up the thrums of some memory, and then her face became smooth again, and she spake lightly:  All that may well be; so do ye go about your due service, and trouble Our rest here no longer; for We love not to look on folk who be not wholly Our own to pine or to spare, to slay or let live, as We will; and We would that the winds and the waves would send Us some such now; for it is like to living all alone to have but such as you with Us, and none to cower before Us and entreat Us of mercy.  So begone, I bid you.

Thus for that time were we saved from the witch's cruelty; but our time came before long.  The days wore heavily, nor kept we count of them lest we should lose heart for the weariness of waiting.  But on a day as we stood on the steps of the perron and served my lady with dainties, of a hot afternoon, came two great white doves a-flying, who pitched down right before our mistress's feet; and each had a gold ring about his neck, and a scroll tied thereto, and the witch bade us take the doves and take off the scrolls and give them unto her; and she looked on the gold rings which the doves bore, and for a moment on the scrolls, and then she said:  Take ye the doves and cherish them, lest We have need of them; take also the two scrolls and keep them till to-morrow morning, and then give them into Our hands.  And look ye to this, that if ye give them not unto Us it will be treason against Us, and We shall have a case against you, and your bodies will be Ours.

Then she rose up slowly, and bade me to her that she might lean upon my shoulder and be helped upstairs, so slothful a beast as she was; and as we went up I heard her say softly to herself:  Weary on it, now must I drink a sup of the Water of Might, that I may remember and do and desire.  But dear is my sister, and without doubt she hath matters of import to tell me by these doves.

So when we were together alone I told the others hereof, and we talked it over; and they deemed the tidings ill, even as I did; for we might not doubt but that the doves were a sending from the witch- sister who dwelt at the House under the Wood; and sore we misdoubted that they were sped to our mistress to tell her of thee, Birdalone, and mayhappen of the Quest, so wise as we knew she was.  As to the two scrolls, forsooth, they were open, and not sealed; but when we looked on them we could make nought of it; for though they were writ fairly in Latin script, so that we read them, yet of the words no whit might we understand, so we feared the worst.  But what might we do? we had but two choices, either to cast ourselves into the water, or abide what should befall; and this last one we chose because of the hope of deliverance.

Next morning, therefore, we came before our mistress in the hall, and we found her pacing up and down before the dais; though her wont was at that hour to be sitting in her throne of gold and ivory, lying back on the cushions half asleep.

So Atra went up to her, and knelt before her and gave her the scrolls, and she looked on her grimly, and smiled evilly, and said: Kneel there yet; and ye others kneel also, till I see what befitteth you.  So did we, and indeed I was fain to kneel, for I might scarce stand up for terror; and all of us, our hearts died within us.

But the witch read those scrolls to herself, sitting in her throne, and spake not a long while; then she said:  Come hither, and grovel before Us, and hearken!  Even so we did; and she said again:  Our sister, who hath been so kind unto you, and saved you from so many pains, here telleth Us, by the message of the two doves, that ye have betrayed Us and her, and have stolen her thrall and her Sending Boat, and sent her an errand for Our destruction; and therewith she delivereth you into Our hands, and ye are Ours henceforward; nor is it to be thought that ye may escape Us.  Now, for your treason, some would slay you outright here and now, but We will be merciful, and let you live, and do no more than chastise you sharply now; and thereafter shall ye be Our very thralls to do as We will with: thereafter, that is to say, when they whom ye have sent Our sister's thrall to fetch have come hither (as belike I may scarce stay them), and I have foiled them and used them, and sent them away empty.  Now I tell you, that meanwhile of their coming shall ye suffer such things as We will; and when they be here We will not forbid you to be anigh them; but We shall see that there will be little joy to you in that nighness.  Yea, ye shall know now to what market ye have brought your wares, and what the price of treason is therein.

Verily then we suffered at her hand what she would, whereof it would shame me to tell more as at this present; and thereafter did she chain us to those three pillars of the hall whereas ye found us chained; and we were fed as dogs be, and served as dogs, but we endured all for the sake of hope; and when we durst, and deemed the witch would not hear us, we spake together and enheartened each other.

But on the fourth day of our torment came the witch to us, and gave us to drink a certain red water from out of a leaden flasket; and when I drank I deemed it was poison, and was glad, if gladness might be in me at such a tide; and when I had drunk I felt an icy chill go through all my body, and all things swam before my eyes, and deadly sickness came over me.  But that passed away from me presently, and I felt helpless and yet not feeble; all sounds heard I clearer than ever yet in my life; also I saw the hall, every arch and pillar and fret, and the gleam on the pavement from the bright sun that might not enter; and the witch I saw walking up and down the hall by the dais; but my sisters I saw not when I looked across to their pillars. Moreover, I might not see myself when I reached out my hand or my foot, though I saw the chain which made my ankle fast to the pillar; and withal, when I set my hand on my face, or any other part of my body, or what else I might touch, I felt there what I looked to feel, were it flesh or linen, or the cold iron of my fetter, or the polished face of the marble pillar.

Now I knew scarce if I were alive or dead, or if I were but beginning to be dead; but there came upon me the desire of life, and I strove to cry out to the sisters, but though I formed the words in my mouth, and did with my throat as when one cries out aloud, yet no sound of a voice came from me, and more helpless did I feel than erst.

But even therewith I saw the witch come toward me, and therewith all my body felt such fear of her that I knew I was not dead.  Then she came before me and said:  O shadow of a thrall, whom none can see but them unto whom wisdom hath given eyes to see wonders withal, now have I tidings for thee and thy sisters, to wit, that your lovers and seekers are at hand; and presently I shall bring them into this hall, and they shall be so nigh unto you that ye might touch them if I did not forbid it; but they shall not see you, but shall wonder where I have hidden you, and shall go seeking you to-day and many days, and shall find you not at all.  So make ye the most of the sight of them, for in them henceforward ye have no other part or lot.

Therewith she spat out at me, and went over to my sisters, and said words of like import to those which she had said unto me.  And presently she went out of the hall; and not long afterwards I heard voices speaking on the perron, and knew one for the voice of the witch, and the other for the voice of my lord Baudoin; and then again wore a little while, and I saw the witch come through the great door of the hall leading Sir Arthur by the hand, as if she were his dear friend, and Baudoin and Hugh, my man, following them.  And the said witch was clad full fair, and had laid by her sloth and stupid pride, as meseemed; and her limbs were grown rounder and sleeker, and her skin fairer, so that to them that knew her not she might well seem to be a goodly woman.

Now they sat to meat as my man hath told you, and then departed from the hall, and the witch also.  But after a while she came back again and loosed us, and grimly bade us go with her, and needs must we, though we could not so much as see our own feet upon the floor.  And she set us to tasks about the house, and stood by while we toiled for her, and mocked us not without stripes, and in all ways was as rough and cruel and hard with us as she had been smooth and debonair to our lords; but after noon she brought us back and chained us to our pillars again.  And when the evening came and the banquet was, it was we who were the unseen players of the string-play; and we might play no other melody than what the witch bade us; else belike, could we have held converse, we might have played such tunes as would have smitten the hearts of our loves, and told them that we were anigh. To make a short story of it, thus did she day by day, and no comfort or converse might we sisters have of each other, or of aught else save the sight of our beloved ones, and a glimmer of hope therewith. And, forsooth, for as grievously as my heart was wrung by the yearning of me for my love, yet was it a joy unto me to think that he went there desiring me, and that whom he desired was not the poor wretched creature chained there in her nakedness, with her body spoiled by torment and misery, but the glad maiden whom he had so often called fair and lovesome.

So passed the days, and at last hope had grown so pale and wan, that she was no more to be seen by us than we were by our lords; and now it seemed to me that death was coming, so feeble and wretched as I grew.  But the witch would not let us die, but sustained us from time to time with some little draughts of a witch-drink that revived us.

So wore the time till that evening, when came hope together with the fulfilment of hope, so that one minute we durst hope for deliverance, and the next we were delivered.

Nor is there more to tell, Birdalone, my dear, save that we came safely to the Isle of the Young and the Old in the full morning-tide; and as our ferry drew nigh the green shore, there were the two younglings whereof thou didst tell us awaiting our landing, and when we stepped ashore they came to us bearing cakes and fruit in a fair basket, and they made much of us and we of them.  And so we came to the old man, who was exceeding fain of us, and grand and courteous, till he became a little drunk, and then he was somewhat over-kind to us women.  Nevertheless, there in that pleasant isle we rested us for three days, that we might somewhat calm and refresh our spirits with what was small and of little account.  And when we departed, the old man followed us down to the strand, and lamented our departure, as he had done with our lords erewhile; only this time yet greater was his lamentation, and needs must we kiss him, each one of us, or never had he been done.  So he turned up landward, bewailing the miss of us, but presently, before we had seen the last of him, was cheerful again and singing.

So we went on our way; and we also, we maidens, in our turn, saw those woeful images of the Isle of Queens and the Isle of Kings; and we came to the Isle of Nothing, and abode warily by our ferry, and so came away safe, and thus, as thou wottest, home to the castle to hear evil tidings of thee.  Now is this all my tale.

Birdalone sat shyly and hushed when all was done; and then all they did somewhat to comfort her, each after their own fashion; and now sorrow for the slain man was made softer and sweeter for them, whereas they had to lose not two fellows, but one only.  Yet, despite of all, trouble and care was on Birdalone's soul betwixt the joy of loving and being beloved, and the pain and fear of robbing a friend of her love.  For Atra's face, which she might not hate, and scarce might love, was a threat to her day by day.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_11]

CHAPTER XI. BIRDALONE AND THE BLACK SQUIRE TALK TOGETHER IN THE HALL OF THE CASTLE.

Now within a few days was the body of Baudoin laid in earth in the chapel of the castle; and in the solemnest of fashions was the burial done.  When it was over, the two knights and Sir Aymeris turned them heartily to dighting the war against the Red Hold, and less than a month thereafter was the hosting at the Castle of the Quest, and if the host were not very many (for it went not above sixteen hundreds of men all told), yet the men were of the choicest, both of knights and sergeants and archers.  There then they held a mote without the castle, whereas Arthur the Black Squire was chosen for captain, and in three days they were to depart for the Red Hold.

Now this while Birdalone had seen but little of Arthur, who was ever busy about many matters, and never had she had any privy talk with him, though sore she longed for it; yet indeed it was more by her will than his that so it was.  But when it was come to the very last day before the departure, she said that she must needs see him before he went, and he perchance never to come back again.  So when men were quiet after dinner she went into the hall and found him there, pacing up and down the floor.  For indeed she had sent a word to him by Leonard the priest that he should be there.

So she went up to him, and all simply she took him by the hand and led him into a shot-window and set him down by her; and he, all trembling for love and fear of her, might not forbear, but kissed her face and her mouth many times; and she grew as hot as fire, and somewhat she wept.

Then she spake after a while:  Dear friend, I had it in my mind to say to thee many things that meseems were sage, but now neither will the thought of them come into my mind, nor the words into my mouth. And this is a short hour.  And therewith she fell to kissing him, till he was well-nigh beside himself betwixt desire and joy and the grief of departure, and the hardness of the case.

But at last she forbore and said:  Will it not be when thou art gone to-morrow as it was when ye were away upon the Quest, and I knew not how to bear myself, so heavy lay all the world and its doings and its fashion upon me?  It will be hard to me, he said; evil and grim will be the days.  She said:  And yet, even now in these last days, when I see thee oft, every day my soul is worn with grief, and I know not what to do with myself.  I shall come back, he said, and bear my love with me, and then belike we shall seek some remedy.  She was silent a while, and then she said:  Meanwhile of thy coming, and I see thee not at all for many days, how will it be with my grief then?  Quoth he:  More than enough of grief no soul may bear; for either death comes, or else some dullness of the pain, and then by little and little the pain weareth.  Then she said:  And how would it be if thou come not back and I see thee never again, or if when thou come back thou find me not, for that I be either dead or gone away out of thy reach?  He said:  I know not how it would be.  When thou sayest thou shalt die, dost thou wholly believe it in thy sense or thy body otherwise than Holy Church would?  I will tell thee, she said, that now I am sitting by thee and seeing thy face and hearing thy voice, it is that only which I believe in; for I may think of nought else of either grief or joy.  Yea, when I wept e'en now, it was not for sorrow that I wept, but for I cannot rightly tell what.  And she took his hand and looked fondly upon him.

But presently she looked on his hand, and said:  And now meseemeth that we twain are grown to be such close friends that I may ask thee what I will, and thou be neither angry, nor wonder thereat.  I see on thy finger here the ring that I brought with me from the Isle of Increase, and which thereafter thou hadst of me when I gave thee back also the shoon which were lent unto me.  Tell me how thou hadst it back from Atra, as I suppose thou gavest it unto her.  But how now art thou angry? for I see the blood come up in thy face.  Nay, beloved, said he, I am not angry, but whenso I hear of Atra, or think of her closely, shame comes on me and confusion, and maybe fear.  But now will I answer thee.  For even in those hours which we wore on the Isle of the Young and the Old, when all we should have been so happy together, she divined somewhat of my case, or indeed, why do I not say it out, all thereof.  And she spake to me such words (for she is both tender and wise and strong of heart) that I cowered before her and her grief and pain; and she gave me back the said ring, which forsooth I gave to her in the Sending Boat in the first hour that the Isle of Increase lay astern of us.  And I wear it now as a token of my grief for her grief.  See now, love, since I have answered thee this question without anger or amaze, thou needest not fear to ask me any other; for this of all things lies closest to my heart.

Birdalone drooped her head, and she spake in a low voice:  Lo now! the shadow of parting and the shadow of death could not come between our present joy; but this shadow of the third one cometh between us and is present between us.  Woe's me! how little did I think of this when thou wert away and I was sick of longing for the sight of thee, and deemed that that would heal it all.

He spake not, but took her hand and held it; and presently she looked up again and said:  Thou art good, and wilt not be angry if I ask thee something else; this it is:  Why wert thou so grim with me that other day when ye found me in that evil plight in tow of the Red Tyrant, so that I deemed that thou of all others hadst cast me off? That was worse to me than the witch's stripes, and I kept thinking to myself:  How simple was my trouble once, and now how tangled and weary!

Then he might not refrain him, but threw himself upon her, and clipped her and kissed her all he might, and she felt all the sweetness of love, and lacked nought of kindness and love to him. And thereafter they sat still awhile, and he said, as if her question had but that moment left her lips:  This, forsooth, was the cause that I looked grim on thee:  first, that from the time I first saw thee and heard thy tale, and of thy deeds, I had deemed thee wise above the wisdom of women.  But this going forth of thee to the Black Valley, whereof came the slaying of Baudoin, seemed unto me a mere folly, till again I had heard thy tale of that also; and then the tale and thy speech overcame me.  But again, though I was grieved and disappointed hereat, belike that had passed from me speedily, but then there was this also which would not let my soul rest, to wit, that I feared concerning that slain knight whose head the Red One had hung about thy neck; for how else, methought, might he have been so wroth with him and thee; and meseemed, moreover, that thou wert kind in thine heart to the dead man, even when we were come to thee; and then, seest thou, my desire for thee and the trouble of Baudoin's slaying, and the black trouble aforesaid.  Lo now, I have told thee this.  When wilt thou cease to be angry with me?

She said:  I ceased to be grieved with thine anger when thine anger died; yet strange, meseemeth, that thou shouldst trust me so little when thou lovest me so much!

And she leaned against him and caressed him gently, and again was he at point to take her in his arms, when lo! the sound of men coming unto the screen of the hall; so then those two stood up and went to meet them, and there was the speech of their sundering done.  Yet belike for a little while both those twain were happy.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_12]

CHAPTER XII. THE KNIGHTS AND THEIR FELLOWS BETAKE THEM TO THE ASSAULTING OF THE RED HOLD

On the morrow, when the day was yet young, the knights were ready for departure, and in the very gate they bade farewell to the ladies, who kissed them kindly one and all, and Viridis wept sore; and Atra constrained herself to do even as the others did; but pale she was and quaking when she kissed Arthur and watched him get a-horseback.

But the knights bade their ladies be of good cheer, for that they would send them tidings of how they sped every seven days at least, whereas it was no long way thence to the Red Hold, save there were battle on the road, and they deemed their host which should beset the Hold would be enough to clear all the ways behind it.  For that same cause withal they had Sir Aymeris with them, nor left a many men behind them, and they under the rule of three squires, whereof two were but young, and the third, who was made the captain of the castle, was an old and wise man of war, who had to name Geoffrey of Lea.  There, withal, was the priest Sir Leonard, who went about now much hushed and abashed, and seemed to fear to give a word to Birdalone; albeit she deemed of him that his thoughts of her were the same as erst they had been.

So now when the knights were departed, and all the host was gone out of sight, it was heavy time indeed in the Castle of the Quest till they should hear tidings of them again.  Both Aurea and Atra kept much to themselves, and did I know not what to wear away the time; for now it was not to be looked for that they should venture out-a- gates.  But as for Viridis, she waxed of better cheer after a while, but whatever betid she would not sunder herself from Birdalone; nay, not for an hour; and Birdalone took all her kindness kindly, though forsooth it was somewhat of a pain unto her; it shall be told wherefore ere long.

Withal, as if to wear the time, Birdalone betook her diligently to her needlework, and fell to the cunningest of broidery; so that Viridis and the others wondered at her, for when they were done it seemed indeed that the flowers and creatures and knots had grown of themselves upon the cloth, such wondrous work it was.

Moreover, to his great joy, the very first day of the departure of the host she called Sir Leonard unto her, and prayed to go on again with the learning her fair scribe-craft; and therein also was she diligent hours of every day; and Viridis would sit beside her wondering at the deftness of her fingers, and crying out for joy as the page grew fair and well-learned under them.

Thus wore a week, and at the end thereof came a messenger from the host and told how they had come before the Red Hold and had summoned them thereof to yield, which they had utterly denied to do, but defied the host; wherefore the host had now beset the Hold, and more folk were daily flocking unto them; but that the said Hold would be hard to win by plain assault, whereas it was both strong and well- manned; but few of the host had been slain or hurt as yet, and of the chieftains not one.  Right glad were they of the castle because of these tidings; though, forsooth, the men-at-arms knew well enough that the time would soon come when some fierce assault would be made, and then, forsooth, would be sore peril of life and limb unto the chieftains.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_13]

CHAPTER XIII. BIRDALONE BETHINKS HER TO FULFIL THE PROMISE MADE UNTO ATRA

Again wore a week, and once more came the messenger, and did them of the castle to wit that there had been nought more done at the Red Hold, save skirmishing at the barriers, wherein few were hurt on either side; and also that the engines for battering the walls were now well-nigh all dight, and they would begin to play upon the Hold, and in especial one which hight Wall-wolf, which had been set up by the crafts of Greenford.

This tidings also was deemed good by all, save it might be by Atra, who, as Birdalone deemed, pined and fretted herself at the delay, and would fain that, one way or other, all were over.  Atra spake but little to Birdalone, but watched her closely now; oft would she gaze on her wistfully, as if she would that Birdalone would speak unto her; and Birdalone noted that, but she might not pluck up heart thereto.

Wore a third week, and again came the messenger, and told how three days ago, whenas Wall-wolf had sorely battered one of the great towers which hight the Poison-jar, and overthrown a pan of the wall there beside, they had tried an assault on the breach, and hard had been the battle there, and in the end, after fierce give and take, they of the Hold had done so valiantly that they had thrust back the assailants, and that in the hottest brunt the Black Squire had been hurt in the shoulder by a spear-thrust, but not very grievously; but withal that he sent, in so many words, forbidding the ladies to make any account of so small a matter.  And, quoth the sergeant, most like my lord will wear his armour in four days' time; also now we have reared another great slinger, which we call Stone-fretter, and soon, without doubt, we shall be standing victorious within that den of thieves.

Now though these tidings were not so altogether ill, yet were those ladies sore troubled thereby, and especially Atra, who swooned outright when she had heard the last word thereof.

As for Birdalone, she made as little semblance of her trouble as she might, but when all was quiet again she went to find Viridis, and brought her to her chamber and spake to her, saying:  Viridis, my sister, thou hast been piteous kind unto me from the first minute that thou sawest me naked and helpless, and fleeing from evil unto worse evil; nowise mightest thou have done better by me hadst thou been verily my sister of blood; and I know it that thou wouldst be loth to part from me.

Viridis wept and said:  Why dost thou speak of parting from me, when thou knowest it would break my heart?

Said Birdalone:  To say it as short as may be, because the parting must now come to pass.  Viridis waxed pale and then red, and she stamped her foot and said:  It is unkind of thee to grieve me thus, and thou doest wrong herein.

Hearken, dear sister, said Birdalone:  thou knowest, for thou thyself wast the first to tell me thereof, that I am the supplanter in our fellowship, and that I have undone Atra's hope.  This I did not of mine own will, but it came unto me; yet of mine own will I can do the best I may to amend it; and this is the best, that I depart hence before the Red Hold is taken and my lords come back; for if they come back and I see my lord Arthur, so fair and beauteous as he is, before me, never shall I be able to go away from him.  And lo thou, I have promised Atra by all the kindness she did me when we were come to the Wailing Tower, and I naked and quaking and half-dead with terror, that if occasion served I would do my utmost to help her, even if it were to my own grief.  Now behold this that now is, is the occasion, and there will not be another; for when my love comes home hither and beholdeth me, think thou how all the desire which has been gathering in his heart this while will blossom and break forth toward me; and mayhappen he will make but little semblance of it before other folk, for proud and high of heart is he; but he will seek occasion to find me alone, and then shall I be with him as the lark in the talons of the sparrow-hawk, and he will do his pleasure of me, and that with all the good-will of my heart.  And then shall I be forsworn to Atra, and she will hate me, as now she doth not, and then is all the fellowship riven, and that by my deed.

Yet was Viridis wrath, and she said:  Meseemeth this is fool's talk. Will not the fellowship be all the more riven if thou depart and we see thee no more?

O nay, said Birdalone; for when I am gone thy love shall be no less for me, though as now thou art angry; and Atra will love me for that I shall have held to my promise to mine own scathe; and thy man and Aurea will lay it to me that I have done valiantly and knightly.  And Arthur, how can he choose but love me; and maybe we shall yet meet again.

And therewithal she did at last bow down her head and fall to weeping, and Viridis was moved by her tears and fell to kissing and caressing her.

After a little Birdalone lifted up her head and spake again: Moreover, how can I dare to abide him? didst thou not see how grim he was to me when they delivered me and brought me back? and he with his own lips told me so much, that it was because he doubted that I had done amiss; and now if I do amiss again, even if it be at his bidding, will it not be so that he will speedily weary of me, and curse me and cast me off?  What sayest thou, Viridis mine?

What is to say, said Viridis, save that thou hast broken my heart? But thou mayst heal it if thou wilt take thy words back, and tell me that thou wilt not sunder thee from us.

But Birdalone brake out weeping and lamenting aloud, and she cried out:  Nay, nay, it may not be; I must depart, and Atra hath smitten me amidst of my friends.  And Viridis knew not what to say or to do.

At last came Birdalone to herself again, and she looked sweetly on Viridis and smiled on her from out her tears, and said:  Thou seest, sister, how little a loss thou wilt have of me, a mere wild woman. And now nought availeth either me or thee but I must begone, and that speedily.  Let it be to-morrow then.  And when the messenger comes at the end of this week, send word by him of what I have done; and look thou to it but both our lords will praise me for the deed.

Said Viridis:  But whither wilt thou, or what wilt thou do?  To Greenford first, said Birdalone, and after whither the Good Lord shall lead me; and as for what I will do, I am now deft in two crafts, script and broidery to wit; and, wheresoever I be, folk shall pay me to work herein for them, whereby I shall earn my bread. Hearken also, my sister, canst thou give me any deal of money? for though I wot little of such matters, yet I wot that I shall need the same.  And I ask this whereas, as e'en now I said, I deem our lords shall praise my deed, and that, therefore, they would not that I should depart hence as an outcast, wherefore they shall not begrudge it to me.  Moreover, for the same cause I would thee speak to the old squire Geoffrey of Lea, and tell him that I have an errand to Greenford, and crave of him that he lend me one of the two younglings, Arnold or Anselm, and two or three men-at-arms to bring me safely thither; since now, forsooth, I need no more adventures on the road.

She smiled as she spake; and now all the passion of anguish seemed to have left her for that while; but Viridis cast her arms about her neck and wept upon her bosom, and said:  Woe's me! for I see that thou wilt go whatsoever I may say or do; I strove to be angry with thee, but I might not, and now I see that thou constrainest me as thou dost all else.  I will go now straightway and do thine errand.

Thus then they parted for that time; but it was not till the day after the morrow that Birdalone was alboun.  Viridis told of her departure both to Aurea and Atra; and Aurea lamented it, but would not do aught to stay her; for she was waxen weary and listless since the death of her man.  As for Atra, she spake but little concerning it, but to Viridis praised Birdalone's valiance and kindness.  Yet unto herself she said:  Verily she understood my word that I spake to her about the occasion of her helping.  Yet woe's me! for she shall carry his love with her whithersoever she wendeth; and a happy woman is she.

But when Geoffrey the squire knew that the ladies, all three, were at one with Birdalone as to her departure, he doubted nothing, but bade Arnold, his mate, take four good men with him, and bring the Lady Birdalone unto Greenford and do her bidding there.  Albeit, he deemed no less but they would bring her back again.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f5_14]

CHAPTER XIV. BIRDALONE LEAVES THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

On the morrow morn, then, Birdalone spake farewell both to Aurea and Atra; but as for Viridis, she sent her word that she had no heart thereto, and yet she sent her a word of comfort, to wit, that she deemed that they would one day meet again.  Aurea, in her parting words, part praised her, part chid her; saying that she did well and kindly and valiantly, as her wont was.  Yet, said she, when all is said, thou mightest have abided this tangle and trouble, which at the worst had not been so evil as death between us.  Yea, sister, said Birdalone, but might not death have come of my abiding?

As she spake, in came Atra, with her head somewhat drooped, meek and humble, her cheeks red, her hands trembling; and she said:  Wilt thou take now my word of farewell and blessing, and the kiss of peace betwixt us, and bear away the memory of our kindness together?

Birdalone stood up proud and straight, and was somewhat pale as she suffered Atra to kiss her cheeks and mouth, and said:  Now hast thou forgiven me that weird dragged me in betwixt thy love and thy goodhap; and I have forgiven thee that I am led away by weird into the waste and the wilderness of love.  Farewell.  Therewith she went her way to the gate, and the others followed her not.

Without abode her Arnold and the four men-at-arms, and her palfrey and a sumpter-horse bearing two goodly coffers, wherein Viridis had let load raiment and other havings for her; and Arnold came up to her smiling, and said:  My lady Viridis hath given me a pouch wherein is money to bear for thee to Greenford and hand over to thee there when we be safe; and she hath bidden me to be in all wise obedient unto thee, lady, which needed not, whereas now and from hence forth am I by mine own will thy very servant to do thy pleasure always and everywhere.

She thanked him and smiled on him kindly, so that his heart beat fast for joy and love of her; and therewith she gat into the saddle and they rode their ways together, and Birdalone looked back never till the Castle of the Quest was shut from their eyes by the nesses of the little hills.

 Here ends the Fifth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is called The Tale of the Quest's Ending, and begins the Sixth Part of the said tale, which is called The Days of Absence.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_01]

THE SIXTH PART: THE DAYS OF ABSENCE

CHAPTER I. BIRDALONE RIDES TO GREENFORD AND THERE TAKES LEAVE OF ARNOLD AND HIS MEN

On the road to Greenford nought befell to tell of; they came thither when the sun was at point to set, for they had ridden diligently all day.

As they rode the streets of the good town, they noted of them, that though it was evening wherein folk do much disport them abroad, there were women and children enough in the streets or standing at their doors, but of carles very few, and they for the more part grey-heads.

Now did Arnold bring Birdalone to the town hall, wherein yet sat the deputy of the burgrave, who himself was in the leaguer at the Red Hold; this man, who was old and wise and nothing feeble of body, made much of Birdalone and her folk, and was glad of them when he knew that they had the seal and let-pass of Geoffrey of Lea; wherefore he gave them to eat and drink, and lodged them in his own house, and made them the best of cheer.

But betimes on the morrow did Birdalone send back Arnold and the four men-at-arms, with no tale but that such was her will; and bidding farewell to the said Arnold, she suffered him to kiss her hands, and gave him a ring from off her finger, so that he went on his way rejoicing.

So soon as she saw him and his men well on the road, she went to the old man, the vice-ruler of the town, who was of the aldermen thereof, and did him to wit that she would wage two or three carles who could deal with horses and beasts, and withal handle weapons if need were, to be both as servants and guards for her, as she had errands in that country-side, and belike might well have to go from town to town thereabout.  He took her asking kindly, but said it was none so easy to find men who for any wage would fare forth of Greenford at that stour, whereas well-nigh all their fighting-men were lying before the Red Hold as now.  Howsoever, ere noontide he brought before her a man of over three score, but yet wayworthy, and two stout young men, his sons, and told her that these men were trusty and would go with her to the world's end if need were.

She took these men readily, and agreed with them for a good wage; and whereas each one had bow and arrows and short sword, she had but to buy for them jacks, sallets, and bucklers, and they were well armed as for their condition.  Withal she bought them three good horses and another sumpter-horse; which last was loaded with sundry wares that she deemed that she needed, and with victual.  Then she took leave of the alderman, thanking him much for his good-will, and so departed from Greenford at all adventure, when the day was yet young.

The alderman had asked her whither away, and she had told him that she was boun for Mostwyke first, and thereafter for Shifford-on-the- Strand; whereas she had heard talk of these two towns as being on one and the same highway, and Mostwyke about a score of miles from Greenford; but when she was well out-a-gates she came to a little road on the right hand which turned clean away from Mostwyke, and she took the said road; and when she had followed it some three miles, she asked the old carle whither it led.  He looked on her and smiled somewhat, and she on him in turn; and she said:  Wonder not, my friend, that I am not clear about my ways, for I shall tell the sooth that I am a damsel adventurous, and am but seeking some place where I may dwell and earn my livelihood till better days come; and this is the whole truth, and thou shalt know it at once, to wit, that I am indeed fleeing, and were fain to hide the footsteps of me, and I bid you three to help me therein.  But ye must know that I am fleeing, not from my foes, but from my friends; and, if ye will, as we go by the way, I will tell you all the story of me, and we will be friends while we are together, yea, and thereafter if it may be.

Now she said this because she had looked carefully on these men, and herseemed that they were good men and true, and not dull of wit. Forsooth the old man, who hight Gerard of the Clee, was no weakling, and was nought loathly to look on, and his two sons were goodly and great of fashion, clear-eyed, and well-carven of visage; they hight Robert and Giles.

Now spake old Gerard:  Lady, I thank thee heartily of thy much grace unto me; now would I get off my nag and kneel to thee in the highway therefor, but that I see that thou wert fain to make as much way as may be to-day; wherefore, by thy leave, I will tarry my homaging till we rest our horses by the wayside.  She laughed, and praised his wisdom; and the young men looked on her and worshipped her in their hearts.  Forsooth, the fellowship of these good and true folk was soft and sweet to her, and soothed the trouble of her spirit.  And she enforced herself to talk cheerfully with them, and asked them many things, and learned much of them.

But now went on Gerard to say:  Lady, if thou wilt hide thy ways from whomsoever it may be, thou hast happened on no ill way; for though this road be good to ride, it is but a byway through the sheep-walks that folk may drive their wains hereby in the wet season of winter and spring; and for a great way we shall come to but little save the cots of the sheep-carles; scarce a hamlet or two for the space of two days' riding; and on the third day a little town, hight Upham, where are but few folk save at the midsummer wool-fair, which is now gone by.

Now there is a highway cometh into this road from out of the tilled country and Appleham, a good town, and goeth through it toward the tillage, and the City of the Bridges and the liberties thereof; and all the land is much builded and plentiful; but, if thou wilt, we will not take either highway, but wend over the downland which lieth north-east of Upham, and though it be roadless, yet is it not ill- going, and I know it well and its watering-places, little dales and waters therein all running north-east, wherein be certain little thorps here and there, which shall refresh us mightily.  Over that downland we may wend a four days, and then the land will swell up high, and from the end of that high land we shall behold below us a fair land of tillage, well watered and wooded, and much builded; and in the midst thereof a great city with walls and towers, and a great white castle and a minster, and lovely houses a many.  In that city mayst thou dwell and earn thy livelihood if thou canst do aught of crafts.  And if thou mayst not, then may we find somewhat to swink at for a wage, and so maintain thee and us.  But the said city is called the City of the Five Crafts, and the land round about it is the frank thereof; and oftenest, frank and city and all, it is called the Five Crafts all simply.  Now what sayest thou hereof, my lady?

She said:  I say that we will go thither, and that I thank thee and thy sons of thy good-will, and so may God do to me as I reward you well therefor.  But tell me, good Gerard, how it is that thou art so willing to leave kith and kin to follow a gangrel wife along the ways?  Said Gerard:  Dame, I think that the face and body of thee might lead any man that yet had manhood in him to follow thee, even if he left house and all to go with thee.  But as for us, we have no longer a house or gear, whereas they of the Red Hold lifted all my bestial, and burned my house and all that was therein a month ago. Yea, said Birdalone, and how befalleth it, then, that ye are not before the Red Hold to avenge thee?  Dame, said he, when the muster was I was deemed somewhat over old, wherefore the sheriff took me not, but suffered my sons also to abide behind to earn a living for me; may God be good to him therefor, and St. Leonard!  But as to my kindred, I must tell thee that I am not kinned hereabout, but in a good town hight Utterhay, and that when our alderman sent for me to bring me to thee, I was more than half-minded to get me back thither. Now sooth it is that the best way thither, though it may be indeed the safest rather than the shortest, lies through the Five Crafts; for the road goes thence to Utterhay a three score miles or so, making the longer of it, as it skirteth ever some way off a perilous forest, a place of sore dread and devilish, which hight Evilshaw, on the edge whereof lieth Utterhay, a merry cheaping-stead and a plenteous, and the home of my kindred.  Wherefore now is the City of the Five Crafts handy to us; because when thou hast done with us, as I hope it may be long first, then are we others nigh home, and may all simply wend our way thither.

Birdalone thanked him again full heartily; but therewithal as they rode along there seemed to stir in her some memory of the earliest of her days in the witch's house, and she began to have a longing to betake her to Utterhay and the skirts of Evilshaw.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_02]

CHAPTER II. OF BIRDALONE AND HER FELLOWSHIP, THEIR FARING OVER THE DOWNLAND

Thus rode they along and loitered not, though they talked blithely together; and Birdalone wondered to herself that she might so much as hold up her head for bitter thoughts of the days and the longings but late passed away, but so it was, that it was only now and again that they stung her into despair and silence, and for the most part she hearkened to the talk of the old man and the lads about the days of Greenford and the alarms of lifting and unpeace, and the ways of the chapmen and the craftsmen.

An hour after noon they rested in a little dale of the downland where was a pool and three thorn-bushes thereby; and when they had lighted down, the old man knelt before Birdalone and took her hand, and swore himself her man to do her will, whatso it were; and then he stood up and bade his sons do likewise; so they two knelt before her in turn, somewhat shy and abashed, for all that they were such stout, bold fellows, and found it hard to take her hand, and then when they had it in theirs, hard to let it go again.

A score of miles and five they rode that day, and had no roof over them at night save the naked heaven, but to Birdalone that was but little scathe:  they made a shift to have some fire by them, and the three men sat long about it that even while Birdalone told them somewhat of her life; and as she told of the House under the Wood and the Great Water, Gerard had some inkling of whereabouts it was; but was nought so sure, because, as abovesaid in this tale, seldom did any from the world of men venture in Evilshaw, or know of the Great Water from its banks that gave unto the forest.

In like wise they rode the next day, and came at eventide to a thorp in a fair little dale of the downland, and there they guested with the shepherd-folk, who wondered much at the beauty of Birdalone, so that at first they scarce durst venture to draw nigh unto her until Gerard and his sons had had some familiar converse with them; then indeed they exceeded in kindness toward them, in their rough upland fashion, but ever found it hard to keep their eyes off Birdalone, and that the more after they had heard the full sweetness of her voice; whereas she sang to them certain songs which she had learned in the Castle of the Quest, though it made her heart sore; but she deemed she must needs pay that kindly folk for their guestful and blithe ways.  And thereafter they sang to the pipe and the harp their own downland songs; and this she found strange, that whereas her eyes were dry when she was singing the songs of love of the knighthood, the wildness of the shepherd-music drew the tears from her, would she, would she not.  Homelike and dear seemed the green willowy dale to her, and in the night ere she slept, and she lay quiet amidst of the peaceful people, she could not choose but weep again, for pity of the bitter-sweet of her own love, and for pity of the wide world withal, and all the ways of its many folk that lay so new before her.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_03]

CHAPTER III. THEY COME TO THE CITY OF THE FIVE CRAFTS, AND BIRDALONE MEETS WITH THE POOR-WIFE

They made not so much way that they came to the Five Crafts on the fourth day, but lay under the bare heavens in a dale below the big swell of the downland, whereof Gerard spake.  But betimes in the morning Birdalone arose and stirred up her men, and they gat to horse, and rode the hill before them till they came on to the crest thereof.  Then Birdalone cried aloud with joy to see the lovely land before her, and the white walls and the towers of the great city, whereas Greenford was but small beside it.

So they rode down into the frank, and entered the gates of the city a little after noon, and again was Birdalone in all amaze at the going to and fro in the streets and the thronging of the markets, and the divers folk, as chapmen and men-at-arms, and craftsmen and lords, who used the said city; and to say sooth, somewhat her heart sank within her, and it seemed to her that it would be hard and troublous to have to deal with so much folk, and that they must needs go past her on the right hand and the left without heeding her life.

Howsoever, Gerard, who knew the city, brought her to a fair hostel, where she was well lodged, she and her men.  Straightway, then, before she went out into the streets again, she fell to getting together what she had of fine broidered work and of fair script, and to finishing what she had unfinished.  And she sent forth Gerard and his sons to find out where was the market for such goods, and if she would have leave to sell the same therein, or anywhere in the town; and Gerard found the hall of the embroiderers, and therein the master of the craft, and he received the carle courteously when he heard that there was fine work come to town, and did him to wit that none in any such craft might have freedom of the market save by leave of the guild of the craft; but, said he, the guilds were open-handed and courteous, and were nowise wont to refuse the said leave, were the work good and true; and he bade Gerard withal tell his mistress that she were best to bring samplings of her work to the Guildhall so soon as she might.  So the very next day went Birdalone thither, and found the master a well-looked tall man of some five-and-forty winters, who looked on her from the first as if he deemed it were no ill way of wearing the time.  To this man she showed her work, and though he found it not easy to take his eyes off Birdalone herself, yet when he looked at her handiwork, he found it better than very good, and he said to her:  Damsel, here is what will be sought for at a great price by the great lords and ladies of the land, and the rich burgesses, and especially by the high prelates; and so much of it as thou hast a mind to do is so much coined gold unto thee; and now I see thee what thou art, I were fain that thou gathered good to thee. But as diligent as thou mayst be, thou hast but one pair of hands, wonderful soothly, and yet but one pair.  He broke off at that word, for he was verily staring at her hands, and longing to see more of her arms than the wrists only, so that he scarce knew what he was saying.  Then he turned red and said:  Soothly I wot that no other hands save thine may do such needlework, or make the draughts for them.  But thou wilt need women-servants to help thee, both in dighting the house for thee (for this big old carle here will be scarce meet thereto) and as apprentices to help thee about the work itself; and if thou wilt, I shall seek the best ones out for thee. Moreover I must tell thee, that though I know for sure how that no woman in the world may work such needlework as thine, yet whiles there cometh hither a woman of middle age, a woman worn by troubles, pious, meek, and kind; and by St. Lucia! now I look on thee again, she might be somewhat like unto thee, were she young and fresh- looking and strong as thou art.  Now this woman I say, and thereat I marvel, doeth needlework that is somewhat after the manner of thine, and which seemed to us excellent till I had seen thine.  Good livelihood she earneth thereby, and is diligent therein; but she hath no heart to get apprentices, or be made one of our guild, both of which were lawful to her as to thee, lovely damsel.  But now I shall counsel her to be made of our guild along with thee, if thou wilt have it so, and then may ye both have three apprentices each, and may make in our city a goodly school, so that our guild shall be glorified thereby, for there will be none such work in the world. How sayest thou?

She thanked him much, and yeasaid him, and thought in her heart that such work which would keep her hands and her head both busy, would solace the grief of her heart, and wear away the time, that she might live till hope might peradventure arise in her.

Then said the master:  There is one thing else, that is, thy dwelling-place; and if thou wilt I shall hire thee a house in the street of the Broiderers, a goodly one:  sooth to say, that same is mine own, so thou mayst deem that I tell thee hereof to mine own gain; and that may be (and he reddened therewith); but there is this in it, that if thou lackest money I shall let thee live therein without price till thou shalt have earned more than enough to pay me.

Birdalone thanked him well, but she did him to wit that she was nowise penniless; and presently she departed well pleased, though she deemed that the said master was well-nigh more friendly than might be looked for.  And the next day he came to her in the hostelry, and without more ado brought her to the house in the street of the Broiderers, and she found it fair and well plenished, and so she fell to work to get all things ready.

Now the next week was the day appointed when she should be received into the broiderers' guild, and the day before came the master aforesaid to see Birdalone.  Sooth to say, he had not failed to come to see her every day, on one pretence or another, since the first day they had met, but ever he did to her with all honour and simply.  But on this day he brought with him the woman skilful of her hands, to show her unto Birdalone, who received her gladly, and thereafter Master Jacobus left them alone together.

The said woman looked worn and aged indeed, but was not of more than five-and-forty winters even by seeming, after the first look at her; she was somewhat tall and well-knit, her face well shapen, and her hair yet goodly.  There was a kind look in the eyes of her, as if she might love anyone with whom she lived that would be kind to her. Meek, or rather over-meek, of mien she was, and it seemed of her that she had been sore scared and oppressed one while or another.

So when Master Jacobus was gone, Birdalone set her down on the settle beside her, and spake to her full sweetly and kindly, and the woman spake little in turn save answering simply to her questions. Birdalone asked where she was kinned, and she answered:  In Utterhay. Then said Birdalone:  Within these last few days I have heard that town named twice or thrice, and never before, as meseemeth; and yet, hearing the name from thy mouth, it seemeth to stir something in me, as if I had been there one time and longed to be there again.  Is there aught in the place whereof folk tell wide about, so that I might have heard it told of and not noted it at the time?  Nay, lady, said the dame, save perchance that it is on the verge of a very great and very evil wood, otherwise it was once a merry town and of much resort from the country-side.

Birdalone looked on her, and saw that the tears were coming from her eyes and running down her cheeks as she spake; so she said to her: Why dost thou weep, mother?  Is there aught I may do to assuage thy grief?  Said the dame:  Thou art so kind to me, and thy voice is so dear and sweet, that I cannot choose but weep.  Meseems it is because love of thee hath taken mine heart, and therewith is blended memory of past sorrow of mine.  Thou askest me if thou mayest do aught to assuage my grief; dear lady, I am not grieved now, that has gone by; nay, now I am more than not grieved, I am made happy, because I am with thee.  But since thou art so debonair with me, I will ask thee to do somewhat for me; and that is, to tell me of thy life gone by; I mean, sweet young damsel, of thy life when thou wert a little child.

Then Birdalone kissed her and said:  It goes to my heart that thou lovest me; for soon as I set eyes on thee my heart went out to thee; and now belike we shall be dear friends; and that is a thing that shall avail me much, to have a friend who is so much older than I, so that nought can come between us, of the love of men and other griefs. Yea, now, said the dame, smiling somewhat sadly; now do I see the water standing in thine eyes, and thy voice quavers.  Is it so, thou lovely kind damsel, that thou hast been grieved by love of a man? Who then may prevail in love if thou prevail not?  And she fell to fondling Birdalone's hand; but Birdalone said:  It is over-long to tell of all my life, mother, though I be so young; but now I will do as thou badest me, and tell thee somewhat of my days when I was little.

And therewith she fell to telling her of her days in the House under the Wood, and the witch and her surliness and grimness, and of her love of the wild things, and how she waxed there.  And she spake a long while, for the memory of those days seemed to lead her along, as though she verily were alive now in them; and the woman sat before her, gazing on her lovingly, till Birdalone stayed her tale at last and said:  Now have I told thee more than enough of a simple matter, and a life that was as that of a wild creature of the woods.  Now shalt thou, mother, tell me somewhat of thee, and what was thy grief of Utterhay:  for thou shalt find that the telling thereof shall solace thee.  Ah! so think young folk, said the woman sadly, because there are many days left for them to hope in.  But though the telling of my sorrow be a fresh sorrow to me, yet shalt thou hear it.  It is but of the loss of my babe; but she was of all babes the fairest and the sweetest.

Then she fell to telling Birdalone all that concerning the witch at Utterhay and the poor-wife that ye have heard in the beginning of this book, until the time when she left the house to buy meat for the witch; for she herself was the said poor-wife.  And then she told how she came back again and found her guest gone and the child withal; and though she had wept for love of Birdalone, she wept not at telling of this grief, but told it as a tale which had befallen some other one.  And she said:  And so when I had done running up and down like a wild thing, and asking of the neighbours with lack of breath and fierceness of speech who had taken my child away from me; and when I had gone up to the wood and even some way into it, and when I had wandered up and down again, and night was falling, I came back at last again to my poor house so weary with my woe, that I scarce knew what had befallen me.  And there upon the board lay the victual and drink which I had brought, and the money which the witch had given unto me; and despite of grief, hunger flamed up in me at the sight, and I threw myself on to it and ate and drank, and so came to myself, that is, to my grief.  But the next day I ran about hither and thither, and wearied folk with my asking and my woe; but it was all of none avail.  The child was gone away from me.  There is little more to tell of me, sweet lady.  If I were to live, needs must I take the poor price of my little one, to wit, the witch's money, and deal with folk for my livelihood; wherefore I bought me cloth and silks, having now the wherewithal, and set to work on broidery, for even then was I a cunning needle-woman.  So were God and the saints good to me, and inclined the folk to me, that they were good and piteous, and I lacked not work nor due livelihood; but after a while I wearied of Utterhay, where my dear child should have been running about before my feet; and having by this time gotten a little money together, and being exceeding deft in my craft, I came on hither to live, and, praise be to St. Ursula! I have found it easy to live: and praise be to All-hallows withal that I have found thee, who art so kind and lovely; and thou by seeming of the very age my child should be if she be living:  or how old art thou, dear lady?

Birdalone laid her hand on her breast, and she was turned pale, but she said in a low voice:  I deem that I am of twenty summers.

Then they both sat silent, till Birdalone might master the fluttering of her heart, and she said:  Now meseems I have a memory even earlier than those I told thee erst.  A woman took me out of a basket and set me on the back of an ass, and I looked about, and I was in a grassy lawn of the woods; and I saw a squirrel run up a tree-trunk before me, and wind round the tree and hide him; and then I stretched out my hands and cried out to him; and then came the woman unto me, and gave me wood-strawberries to eat out of her hand.

Brake out the poor-wife thereat, pale and trembling:  Tell me now, my child, hast thou any memory of what the woman was who set thee on the ass and gave thee the strawberries?  Birdalone looked on her, and scanned her face closely, and then shook her head, and said:  Nay, it was not thou, mother.  Nay, surely; nay, surely, said the woman; but think again.  Said Birdalone, speaking slowly:  Was it my mistress then?  She was a tall woman, somewhat thin and bony, with goodly red hair and white-skinned, but thin-lipped.  Quoth the poor-wife:  No, no; it is of no use; nought such was she.  Then Birdalone looked up and said eagerly:  Yea, but it was her other shape belike:  therein was she a tall woman, dark-haired, hook-nosed, and hawk-eyed, as if of thirty summers; a stark woman.  Hast thou seen such? dost thou remember her?

The woman sprang up and cried out, and was like to have fallen, but Birdalone arose and held her in her arms and comforted her, and set her in her seat again and knelt before her; and presently the poor- wife came to herself and said:  My child, thou sayest do I remember her; how shall I ever forget her? she was the thief who stole my child.

Therewith she slid from off her seat, and knelt by Birdalone, and stooped low down on the floor as if the tall maiden were but a little one, and she fell to kissing her and patting her, her face and her hands, and all about; and said, sobbing and yet smiling:  Suffer me a little, my child, mine own lovely child!  For in good sooth I am thy mother, and it is long since I have seen thee:  but hearken, when I come quite to myself I shall pray thee not to leave me yet awhile, and I shall pray thee to love me.

Birdalone clipped and kissed her, and said:  I love thee dearly, and never, never shall I leave thee.

Then they stood up, and the mother took Birdalone by the shoulders, and held her a little aloof, and devoured her with her eyes; and she said:  Yea, thou hast grown tall, and belike wilt grow no taller: and how fair and lovely thou hast grown; and thou that wert born in a poor man's house! no wonder that any should covet thee.  And I, I wonder if ever I was as fair as thou art; forsooth many called me fair for a little while; and now behold me!  Nay, child and darling, let not thy face grow downcast, for now shall I know nought more of fear and grief; and is it not like that I shall grow fairer of flesh, and shapelier, in the happy days we shall dwell together?  And therewith she took her to her arms, and it seemed as if she might never have enough of clipping and embracing her; and she would look at Birdalone's hands and her feet and her arms, and stroke them and caress them; and she wondered at her body, as if she had been a young mother eaten up with the love of her firstborn.  And as for Birdalone, she was as glad of her mother as might be; and yet in her heart she wondered if perchance one of the fellowship might stray that way, and be partaker in her joy of this newfound dear friend; and she said, might it be Viridis; but in her inmost heart, though she told it not to herself, she longed that the Black Squire might find her out at last.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_04]

CHAPTER IV. OF THE LOVE OF GERARD'S SONS AND OF JACOBUS FOR BIRDALONE

Now dwelt Birdalone in rest and peace when she had been taken into the guild along with her mother, and they had taken the due apprentices to them; and they began to gather much of goods to them, for of fine broidery there was little done in the Five Crafts, and none at all that could be put beside their work, either for beauty of the draught of it, or for skill of handiwork.  She declared unto all folk how that the poor-wife (who had to name Audrey) was her very mother, from whom she had been stolen in her youngest days; but she told none any tale of how she was stolen.  And the twain dwelt together in the greatest loving-kindness; and it was with Audrey as she had forecast, that now her days were happy, and she living in all ease and content, that the goodliness of her youth came back to her, and she became a fair woman as for her years; and therewith it grew to be clear that the two were so much alike one to the other, that all might see that they were mother and daughter.

Gerard and his two sons she maintained yet as her men; and not only were they of much use to her in fetching and carrying, but also true it is that her beauty was so manifest, that she whiles needed a stout lad weaponed at her back when she was in the streets or amidst the throng of the market; and many were they, and whiles of the highest, who craved love of her, some with honour, and some with lack of it.

Of these, forsooth, were but two that anywise troubled her; and the most trouble was this, that she might not fail to see that the love of her had entered into the hearts of the two Gerardsons, Robert and Giles; so that times were when she deemed she must even send them away, but when it came to the point she had not the heart thereto; though none other remedy there seemed, so sorely as their souls were wounded by longing for her.  It is not to be said that they ever spake to her thereof, or wittingly wearied her with signs of love; but they could not so easily cover it up but that it was ever before her eyes.  But she suffered it all for friendship's sake and for their true service, and in all friendliness did what she might to solace their grief.  Forsooth so good and true she found that father- kind, and the young men so goodly and kind, that she said to herself, had she not another man lying in her heart, she might well have chosen one of those twain for her very speech-friend and true lover.

The second wooer that troubled her was the master, Jacobus, who, when but three months were worn of her dwelling in her house, did all openly crave her love and offer her marriage, he being a man unwedded.  Sore was her heart that she must needs gainsay him, so kind and courteous as he had been to her at their first coming together; though this indeed is sooth, that straightway, so soon as he saw her, he fell into the captivity of her love.  Howsoever, gainsay him she needs must, and he took the naysay so hardly that he was scarce like a man before her, and wept and prayed and lamented many times over, till she wearied of it, and well-nigh fell to loathing him.  So that it came to this at last, that one day she spake to him and said that she might no longer bear it, but must seek another house and leave his.  There then was the to-do, for he fell on his knees before her, and kissed her feet, would she, would she not, and cried out in his grief, till at last for pure weariness of his folly she gave way unto him, and said that she would still abide there; whereon he rose up from her and went away with all the grief run off him for that time, and as glad a man to look on as you might see on a summer's day.

But the next morning he came unto her again, and she thinking all was begun afresh, made him no glad countenance; but he stood up before her and spake friendly, and said how that she was in the right of it, and that if they both dwelt in one house together they were like to have but a weary time of it, both she and he.  But, said he, I will not that thou shouldst depart out of this house, for a goodly one it is, and full meet for thee; it is for me to depart, and not for thee. I tell thee, forsooth, that I had from the first meant this house as a gift from me to thee.  And therewith he drew from his pouch a scroll, which was a deed of gift of the said house, duly sealed and attested, and he gave it into her hands; but she was sore moved thereat, and at the demeanour of him that morning, and she let the scroll fall to the floor and wept for pity of him, and reached out both her hands, and he kissed them, and then her lips also, and sithence he sat down beside her.  But she said:  Alas! that thou wilt give me what I may not take, and wouldst have of me what I may not give.

But now he waxed hotter, and said:  This once I command thee to do my will, and take my gift.  It will be nought to my gain if thou take it not; for I may not live in this house when thou art gone from it; and I swear by All-hallows that I will not let any have it to hire, nor will I sell it, since thou hast made it holy by dwelling therein.

Yet was she sore moved by his generous fashion, and she said:  I will take thy gift then, and live here in honour of thee and thy friendship; for well I wot thou hadst no mind to buy me with thy gift.

So she spake, and he stood up stark and stern, and so departed, and kissed her not again; though meseems she would have suffered him had he offered it.  Nay, belike had he at that moment pressed his wooing somewhat masterfully, it is not so sure but she might have yeasaid it, and suffered him to wed her and lead her to bed; though it would have gone ill both with him and with her thereafter.

Thenceforth dwelt Birdalone with her mother and her maidens and her men in that house, and it became famous in the Five Crafts because of her beauty and her wisdom, which minished not, but waxed day by day; but therewithal as the time wore, waxed her longing and sadness.  But all this she hid in her own heart, and was debonair to all about her, and so good to poor folk that none had a word save of blessing on her beauty and her wisdom.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_05]

CHAPTER V. OF THE DEATH OF AUDREY, MOTHER TO BIRDALONE.  SHE IS WARNED IN A DREAM TO SEEK THE BLACK SQUIRE, AND IS MINDED TO DEPART THE CITY OF THE FIVE CRAFTS, AND SEEK AGAIN THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

Thus dwelt Birdalone in the Five Crafts in such rest and peace as her heart would let her; and dear and good friends she had about her; her mother first, whose love and desire for love of her made all things soft and dear unto her.  Gerard and the Gerardsons were next, who were ever faithful and true unto her, and deft both of hand and of mind, so that they wrought many things for her avail.  Then came the master, Jacobus, who held himself unwedded for her sake, and though he no longer dwelt in the same house with her, might scarce endure to miss the sight of her for two days running:  a dear friend she deemed him, as forsooth he was, though whiles he tormented and wearied her, and belike had wearied her more, but for the sorrow which lay on her own heart, whereof it came that she might not think of any man as of one who might be a lover, and so felt safe even with so kind a friend and so stubborn in his love as was this one.  Moreover he never again craved love of her in so many words, but only in his goings and comings so did, that it was clear how he had her, and the love of her, ever in his heart.

Wore thus a five years; and then came a sickness on the city, and many died thereof; and the said sickness entered into Birdalone's house, and slew Audrey her mother, but spared all else therein. Thereby at the first was Birdalone so overwhelmed that she might heed nought, neither her craft nor her friends, nor the days to come on the earth for her.  And moreover when she came more to herself, which was not for many days, and asked why her friend Jacobus had not been to see her the last days, she was told that he also was dead of the pestilence; and she sorrowed for him sorely, for she loved him much, though not in the way he would.

And now did the city and land of the Five Crafts begin to look unfriendly to Birdalone, and she fell to thinking that she must needs depart thence, as she well might do, whereas she had foison of goods: and at first it was in her mind to go with Gerard and his sons unto Utterhay; but then she deemed the thought of her mother, and how she would be ever thinking of the loss and the gain, and the loss once more stood in the way; and she turned one thing and another over in her mind, and might not face it.

On a night, as she slept, came to her dreams of her days in the House under the Wood (as very seldom betid), and the witch-wife was speaking to her in friendly fashion (as for her) and blaming her for fleeing away, and was taunting her with the failure of her love, and therewith telling her how fair a man and lovesome was the Black Squire, and what a loss she had of him; and Birdalone was hearkening and weeping for tenderness' sake, while the witch was unto her neither fearful nor irksome, and forsooth nought save a mouthpiece for words that both grieved Birdalone and yet were an eager pleasure unto her.  But in the midst thereof, and ere the dream had time to change, Birdalone awoke, and it was an early morning of later spring, and the sky was clear blue and the sun shining bright, and the birds singing in the garden of the house, and in the street was the sound of the early market-folk passing through the street with their wares; and all was fresh and lovely.

She awoke sobbing, and the pillow was wet with her tears, and yet she felt as if something strange and joyous were going to betide her, and for joy of the love of life the heart beat fast in her bosom.

She arose all darling naked as she was, and went to the window and looked out on the beauty of the spring, while the sound of the market-wains brought to her mind the thought of the meads, and the streams of the river, and the woodsides beyond the city; and she fell a-longing for them, as a while she knelt on the window-seat, half dreaming and asleep again, till the sun came round that way, and its beams fell upon her bosom and her arms; and she stood up and looked on the fairness of her body, and a great desire took hold of her heart that it might be loved as it deserved by him whom she desired. And thus she stood there till she became ashamed, and hastened to do on her raiment; but even as she was about it, it came upon her that what she had will to do was to seek to the Castle of the Quest, and find out where was her love if there he were not, and so to seek him the world over till she found him.  And such a flood of joy possessed her when she thought this, and so eager to begone she was, that she deemed every minute wasted till she were on the road.

Nevertheless, in a while, when her mind was steadied, she knew that she had somewhat to do ere she might be gone, and that here, as oft, it would be more haste less speed.

So she abode a little, and then came into her hall duly dight, and found Gerard and his sons there to serve her; and she brake her fast, and bade them sit by her at table, as oft she did; and she spake to them of this and that, and Gerard answered lightly again; but the two Gerardsons looked at one another, as though they would speak and ask a question from time to time, but forbore because they durst not. But Gerard looked on them, and deemed he wotted what was in their minds; so at last he spake:  Our lady, both I, and meseemeth my sons also, deem that there is some tidings toward which are great unto thee; for thine eyes sparkle, and the red burns in thy cheeks, and thine hands may not be quiet, nor thy feet abide in one place; wherefore I see that thou hast something in thy mind which strives to be forth of it.  Now thou wilt pardon us, our dear lady, that we ask concerning this, because it is in our love for thee that we speak, lest there be some change toward which shall be a grief to some of us.

My men, said Birdalone, flushing red, sooth it is that there is a change at hand, and I shall tell you straightway what it is.  Years ago I told you that I was fleeing from my friends; now the change hath betid that I would seek them again; and needs must I leave the Five Crafts behind to do so.  And moreover there is this ill word to be said, which I will say at once, to wit, that when I am but a little way gone from the Five Crafts I must wend the other deal of my journey birdalone, as my name is.

All those three sat silent and aghast at that word, and the young men grew pale; but after a while spake Gerard:  Our lady most well- beloved, this word which thou hast spoken, to wit, that thou needest us no longer, I have looked to hear any time this five years; and praise be to the saints that it hath come late and not soon.  Now there is no more to be said but that thou tell us what is thy will that we should do.

Birdalone hung her head awhile for sorrow of sundering from these men; then she looked up and said:  It seemeth, my friends, as if ye deem I have done you a wrong in sundering our fellowship; but all I may say hereon is to pray you to pardon me, that I needs must go alone on my quest.  And now what I would have you do, is first of all to fetch hither a notary and scrivener, that he may draw up a deed of gift to you, Gerard and Gerardsons, of this house and all that is therein, saving what money I may need for my journey, and gifts such as I shall bid you to be given to my workwomen.  Ye must needs yeasay this, or ye are forsworn of your behest to do my will.  But furthermore, I will have you to let the workwomen of mine (and the head one ruling) to hire the aforesaid house, if so they will; for now are they skilled, and may well earn good livelihood by the work. But the next work is simple; it is to furnish for me the array of a young man, with such armour as I may easily bear, to dight me for my road.  Forsooth ye wot that not unseldom do women use the custom of going arrayed like men, when they would journey with hidden head; and ye may happen upon such gear as hath been made for such a woman rather than any man; but thou shalt get me also a short bow and a quiver of arrows, for verily these be my proper weapons that I can deal with deftly.  Now my last command is that, when all is done, maybe to-morrow, or maybe the next day, ye bring me out of the city and the frank of the Five Crafts, and bring me somewhat on my way over the downs, for loth am I to part from you ere needs must.  Then they knelt before her and kissed her hands, and they were full of grief; but they saw that so it had to be.

Thereafter Gerard spake with his sons apart, and in a while came to Birdalone, and said:  Our lady, we will do your will in all wise; but we shall tell thee, that the Five Crafts will look but strange to us when thou art gone, and that we have a mind to betake us to Utterhay and the land of our kindred.  Wherefore we pray thee to give this house that hath been so dear to us unto thy workwoman and her mates; for we need it not, nor the hire thereof, but shall do well enough with what money or good thou mayst give us.  Is this according to thy will, or have I spoken rashly?

She said:  Ye are good and ungreedy, and I bless you for it; be it as ye will; and this the more, as I were fain that ye go to Utterhay; for whiles I have deemed that I myself am drawn thitherward, wherefore it may be that we shall meet again in that place.

And when she had so spoken, she might not refrain her tears; and the Gerardsons turned away, for they were ashamed, both that they should see her weep, or she them.  But at last she called to them and said: Now make we the speediest end we may of this, for sorry work is the tarrying of farewell; so I pray you, my friends, to go about the work I have bidden you.

So all was done as she would, and the day after the morrow was Birdalone abiding the coming of Gerard and his sons with the horses; and despite of the sundering of friends and the perils that belike lay before her, the world seemed fair to her, and life beginning anew.  And she made no doubt that she would soon be at the Castle of the Quest, and there find all things much as she had left them; and there at least would be the welcome of her dear friend Viridis.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_06]

CHAPTER VI. OF THE SUNDERING OF BIRDALONE FROM GERARD AND HIS SONS

Presently were the horses come with Gerard and his sons, and Birdalone gat to horse amongst them.  She was armed in a light hauberk, and over it a long and loose surcoat that came down beneath the knee of her; and a sallet she had upon her head, wide but light, so that not very much of her face was to be seen.  She had made up her mind to this tale upon the road, when she was among folk, that she was under a vow not to do off her helm for a seven days' space. Withal she had covered up the lovely shapeliness of her legs with long boots of deer-leather, and her surcoat was wide-sleeved; she was well hidden, and whereas she was a tall and strong woman, she might well pass for a young man, slender and fair-faced.  She was girt with a good sword, and Gerard had gotten her a strong horseman's bow and a quiver full of arrows, wherewith, as aforesaid, she knew well how to deal; wherefore she was by no means without defence.

So they went their ways through the streets and out-a-gates; and it must be said, that were not Birdalone's thoughts turned toward the Castle of the Quest, and what she should meet there, her heart had been somewhat sore at leaving the city which had cherished her so well these years past; nay, as it was, the shadow of the southern gate, as she past thereunder, smote somewhat cold upon her, and she silently bade farewell to the City of the Five Crafts with some sorrow, though with no fear.

Forth they rode then through the frank and up on to the shepherd country, and whereas their horses were of the best, and they had no sumpter-beast with them till they came to Upham, where they must needs have victual, they made but five days of it to the place where the road turned aside from the country of Mostwyke.  There then they drew rein, and Birdalone lighted down from her horse, and they all, and they lay upon the grass and ate and drank together.

But when they were done, spake Birdalone and said:  Dear friends, this is the hour and the place when we must needs part; for ye shall go back again to Five Crafts, and do what I have bidden of you, and do your will, and wend your ways with your livelihood unto Utterhay. But as for me, I must go my ways first unto Greenford, and thence to seek my friends from whom erst I was fleeing when ye first became my friends.  Now perchance ye will say that I have taken you up in my need, and cast you aside at my pleasure; but I may only say that there be at present two deals of my life, and of one of them have ye been partakers, and of the other ye may not be.  Forsooth that is a grief unto me, as I suppose unto you is it a greater one.  But unto me also were it heavier but that my heart tells me it shall not ever be so; for as I said to you some days agone, I have a hope that we shall yet meet again, be it in Utterhay or in some other place.  And now I pray you to pardon me wherein I may have done amiss unto you, and begrudge it not that there be others, who indeed were first- comers in regard to you, and whom I love better than you; for of your truth and your good-will and loving-kindness will I bear witness wheresoever I may be.

Then spake Gerard:  Do ye speak, my sons; for I have no grudge against her, nor aught to bewail me as to her, save, it may be, that I am now so well on in years that it may well befall that I shall not live till the time of the meeting in Utterhay.  But I will pray thee this, dear lady, that if thou come to the place where I lie dead thou wilt kiss my burial-stone, and sing due masses for me.  Nay, she said, but this is the worst shall betide betwixt us.

Then spake Robert Gerardson:  I am not deft of speech, but this parting makes me bold to say this:  that from the time when first I set eyes on thee I have loved thee in such wise that never mayst thou love me as much as I love thee, if thou hast anywhere, as I deem thou hast, a lover of thy body, whom thou lovest.  Now I have seen that for a long while thou hast known this, and hast ever because of it been as meek and kind with me as thou mightest be.  And this hath partly grieved me the more, because it hath eked my longing for thee; and yet it hath comforted me the more, because it hath made me deem better of thee, and deem thee worthier of worship and holier; therefore have thou all my blessing for it.  And now I know that thou sunderest from us that thou mayst go seek thy very bodily lover; and I say, that if the sundering had been for any lighter cause, grieved at heart should I have been; but since it is even so, once more I bless thee, and ever shall I be happy in the thought of thee; and if ever we meet again, still shalt thou find me as now I am in heart and in soul.

She turned to him, not dry-eyed, and said:  I know that what thou sayest is sooth; and thou hast guessed right as to my goings; and I take thy blessing with love and joy.

Then were they silent; but Giles Gerardson was struggling with words, for he was slow to speech; at last he said:  I say much as saith my brother:  but see thou, our lady, how ill it had gone if thou hadst loved one of us with an equal love; woe worth the strife then!  But now I will crave this of thee, that thou kiss me on the lips, now whenas we part; and again, that thou wilt do as much when first we meet again hereafter.  And I tell thee right out, that if thou gainsay this, I shall deem it unfriendly in thee, and that those lovely words which thou didst speak e'en now were but words alone, and that thou art not as true as I have deemed thee.

She laughed amidst her tears, and said:  Dear lad, doom me not till I have been found guilty!  I shall nowise naysay thee this, for I love thee, and now and ever shalt thou be unto me as a brother, thou and Robert also; for even so have ye done by me.  But thou wottest, dear lad, that whiles and again must sister sunder from brother, and even so it has to be now.

Then they sat silent all four; and thereafter Birdalone arose and did off her sallet, and kissed and embraced Gerard and his sons, and bade them farewell, and she and the young men wept.  Then she armed herself and gat to horse, and went her ways towards Greenford, having nought with her but the raiment and arms that her body bore, and her horse, and some gold pieces and gems in a little pouch.  So rode she; and the others turned back sadly toward the Five Crafts.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_07]

CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE COMETH TO GREENFORD, AND HEARS OF THE WASTING OF THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

Now came Birdalone riding into Greenford an hour before sunset on a day of the latter end of May; and she had no doubt but to go straight to the hostelry, and that the less as she had not abided there before, as hath been told.  To them that served her she told the tale of her vow, that she might not do off her sallet that seven days; and some trowed her, and some deemed her a woman, but whereas she seemed by her raiment to be of condition none meddled with her.  Moreover, as she told her intent to ride on betimes in the morning, it mattered the less unto them:  withal she gave out that she came from foreign parts, as sooth it was.

In the evening she sat in the hall, and with her were three chapmen travelling with their wares, and two good men of the town sitting; and they were talking together, and were courteous and blithe, and amidst their talk they threw many a glance at the slim and fair young squire, as Birdalone seemed, and were fain to speak unto him, but refrained them for courtesy's sake.  For her part, Birdalone longed sore to ask them somewhat of the Castle of the Quest, but the words clave to her throat for very fear; and she sat restless and ill at ease.  However at last said a townsman to a chapman:  Art thou for the Red Hold, Master Peter, when thou art done here?  Birdalone turned very pale at that word; and Master Peter spake:  Yea, surely, neighbour, if the folk leave aught in my packs for others to buy.  He spake in a jovial voice, as if he were merry, and the others all laughed together, as though they were well pleased and in good contentment.  And now, deemed Birdalone, would be her time to speak if she would learn aught; so she constrained herself at last, and spake, though in a quavering voice:  Meseems then, masters, this good town is thriving as now?  This I ask because I am a stranger in these parts this long while, and now I am come back hither fain were I to find the land in good peace; for I may chance to take up my abode hereby.

The goodmen turned to her and smiled kindly when they heard the sweetness of her voice; and one of them said:  Sir of the sallet, ye shall be content with the peace in this land, and the thriving of its folk; the very villeins hereabout live as well as franklins in most lands, and the yeomen and vavassours are clad as if they were knights of a good lord's household.  Forsooth their houses are both goodly and easy to enter; and well is that, whereas there lacks never good meat and drink on the board therein.  And moreover their women are for ever seeking whatso is fair and goodly, whatso is far-fetched and dear-bought, whereof we chapmen also thrive, as thou mayst well deem. Ah! it is a goodly land now!

The others nodded and smiled.  But Birdalone spake, hardening her heart thereto for very need:  Belike then there is a change of days here, for when I last knew of the land there was little peace therein.  And that will not be so long agone, said a townsman, smiling, for I doubt we should see no grey hair in thine head if thy sallet were off it.  Birdalone reddened:  It will be some five years agone, said she.  Yea, yea, said the townsman, we were beginning to end the unpeace then, and it was the darkest hour before the dawn; for five years agone we and the good knights of the Castle of the Quest were lying before the walls of the Red Hold.  Forsooth we cleared out that den of devils then and there.  What betid unto it after ye won it? said Birdalone, and she trembled withal.  Said the townsman:  Heard ye never of the Black Squire, a very valiant knight, since thou sayest that thou hast known this country-side?  She bowed a yeasay, for this time she found it hard to speak.

Well, said the townsman, we held garrison in the Red Hold for some three months, and thereafter we craved of him to come and be our captain therein; for, even after the Hold was won, there was yet a sort of runagates that haunted the country-side, men who had no craft save lifting and slaying.  And forsooth we knew this Lord Arthur for the keenest and deftest of men-at-arms; so he yeasaid our asking, and did all he might herein, and forsooth that was all there was to do; for he was ever in the saddle, and at the work.  Forsooth he was not a merry man, save when he was at his busiest; and little he spake in hall or chamber, else had he been better beloved.  But at least by no man better might the land have been served.

There was silence a little, and Birdalone waxed deadly pale; then she strove with herself and said:  Thou sayest he was and he was; is he dead then?  Said the townsman:  Not to our knowledge.  When he had brought the land into good peace, which is some three years and a half agone, he went his ways from the Red Hold all alone, and we saw him no more.  But some folk deem that he hath entered into religion.

Birdalone's heart sickened, and she thought to herself that now all was to begin again; yet she felt that the worst was over since he was not dead, and she was able to think what she should do.  So she said: Mayhappen he hath gone back to the Castle of the Quest?  Nay, nay, said the townsman, that may not be; for waste is that house now; there is none dwelleth there, save, it may be, now and again a wandering carle or carline abideth there a day or two.  Said Birdalone:  How hath that befallen? or where is gone Sir Hugh, the Green Knight?  Said the townsman:  We knew the Green Knight well; frank and free and joyous was he; all men loved him; and his lady and speech-friend, none ever saw a lovelier, and as kind as was he.  But we might not keep them with us; they are gone into their own country. Sir Hugh left the Castle of the Quest some three months after the Black Squire came to us for captain, and he gave over the castle to Sir Geoffrey of Lea, an old and wise man of war.  But not many months thereafter we heard that he also had departed, leaving it ungarnished of men; and we deem that the cause thereof is that something uncouth is seen and heard therein, which folk may not endure.  Is it not so, my masters?

They all yeasaid that, and the talk went on to other matters.  As for Birdalone, though her hope to come amongst friends was so utterly overthrown, yet she saw not what to do save to go her ways to the Castle of the Quest, and see if perchance she might find any tidings there.  And she said to herself, that if the worst came to the worst, she would herself dwell there as an hermit of love; or, maybe, to face those uncouth things and see if any tidings might be compelled out of them.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_08]

CHAPTER VIII. BIRDALONE COMETH TO THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST, HEARETH THE TALE THEREOF FROM LEONARD, AND DEPARTETH THENCE BY THE SENDING BOAT

She arose betimes on the morrow, and was out of Greenford so soon as the gates were open, and at first made all speed that she might toward the Castle of the Quest; and nothing hindered her, for the land was verily in good peace, and she might have come there if she would before sunset, for all whom she met furthered her.  But as the day waned her courage waned with it, so that at last she stayed some six miles short of the house, and craved shelter at a yeoman's stead there, which was granted her with all kindness; and they made much of her, and she told them her vow of the sallet, and they deemed nought save that she was a young man.

She departed early in the morning with their God-speed, and while the day was yet young came into the meadows before the castle, and saw the towers thereof rising up before her:  then she checked her horse, and rode on no faster than a foot's pace; yet as slow as she might ride, needs must she get to the gate while the day was yet young.

So came Birdalone by that bower wherein she had slept that first night she came to the castle; and she reined up to look on it; and as she sat there gazing, came a man out from it clad as a man of religion; and her heart beat quick, and she was like to fall from her horse, for there came into her mind what the townsman had said, that the Black Squire had gone into religion.  But the hermit came towards her with a cup of water in his hand, and he cast his hood aback from him, and she saw at once that it was Leonard the priest, and though it was not the friend whom she sought, yet was she glad that it was a friend; but he came and stood by her, and said:  Hail, wayfarer! wilt thou drink of our well and rest thee a while?  So she took the cup and drank of the water, looking kindly on him, while he wondered at the beauty of her hand, and misdoubted him.  Then she gave him back the cup and lighted down off her horse, and took the sallet from her head, and spake:  I may not pass by a friend without a word; think if thou hast not seen me before?

Then he knew her, and might not refrain him, but cast his arms about her and kissed her, weeping; and she said:  It is sweet to me to find a friend after what I have been told of yonder house.  Yea, said he, and art thou going up thither?  Certes, said she, and why not?  Said he:  They are gone, and all gone!  How and whither? said she.  But I must full certainly go thither at once; I will go afoot with thee; do thou tether my horse till thou comest back.

He said:  But wilt not thou come back?  I know not, she said:  I know nought save that I would go thither; let it be enough that I suffer thee to go with me, and on the way thou shalt tell me what thou canst of the tale.

Then went Leonard and tethered the horse, and they went together afoot to the gate; and Birdalone told what she had heard of Arthur and Hugh; and Leonard said:  This is true, and there is not much else to be said.  When the Black Squire came back from the leaguer of the Red Hold, and had heard before of thy departure, he was heavy of mood and few-spoken, and wandered about as one who might find no rest; yet was he not stern with Atra, who for her part was no less heavy- hearted:  soothly a sad company we were, and it was somewhat better when my Lord Arthur went his ways from us; and indeed eager he was to be gone; and it could be seen of him that he was fain of the toil and peril which they of Greenford offered him.  Then in some four months spake my lord Hugh that he also would be gone to a place where were both a land and folk that would look friendly on him; so he went with my lady Viridis and my lady Aurea, and they had Atra also with them; and me also they would have had, but my heart failed me to leave the place where I had been so glad and so sorry with thee; death had been better; wherefore in yonder bower as in an hermitage I serve God and abide my time.  But though I wot nought of where is gone the Black Squire, I know whereto those four are gone, and it is but a seven days' ride hence, and the land is goodly and peaceable, and if they be not dead, most like they be there yet.  How sayest thou then, thou dearest and kindest, wilt thou thither to them?  For if so, I may well lead thee thither.

Birdalone shook her head.  Nay, she said, I deem that I am drawn elsewhither, but soon I shall tell thee.  Lo now the gate.  But ere we enter, tell me of Sir Geoffrey of Lea, and why it was that they might not abide the uncouth things, or if there were any such.  Spake Leonard:  Things uncouth there were, and I was called upon to lay them, and I did as biddeth Holy Church in all wise, but prevailed not against them, and still were they seen and heard, till folk might endure it no longer.

And what like were these things? said Birdalone, and are they yet seen and heard?  Said Leonard:  Strange it is, but last night I went into the great hall where they mostly betid, and laid me down there, as whiles I do, for I fear them not, and would see if they yet appear; but all night came nothing at all.  As to the likeness of them . . .  Then he stopped, but said presently:  Hard it is to tell thee of them, but needs must I.  There be two of these things; and one is an image of a tall woman of middle-age, red-haired, white- skinned, and meagre, and whiles she has a twiggen rod in her hand, and whiles a naked short sword, and whiles nought at all.  But the voice of her is cursing and blaspheming and ill-saying.

Said Birdalone:  This is then a fetch of my witch-mistress of whom I told thee erst, and the image of her; what is the other?  Said Leonard:  I were fain not to tell thee.  Yet needs must thou, said Birdalone.  Dear lady, said Leonard, the other is an image of thee, and even most like unto thee; but whiles clad in a scanty grey coat and barefoot, and whiles clad in a fair green gown goodly broidered, and broidered shoon; and whiles all mother-naked.

And what voice cometh from mine image? said Birdalone, smiling, yet somewhat pale withal.  Said Leonard:  One while a voice of sweet singing, as of a bird in the brake, and that is when thou art clad; and again, when thou art naked, a voice of shrieking and wailing, as of one enduring torments.

Spake Birdalone:  And when did these wonders begin?  Said he:  Not till after Sir Hugh and thy she-friends were gone hence.

Pondered Birdalone a little; then she said:  I see herein the malice of my witch-mistress; she would not send these fetches while Hugh was here, lest he should turn to seeking me with all his might.  But when they departed, she would have the castle waste, and then she sent them, wotting that thereby she would rid her of Sir Geoffrey of Lea; while, on the other hand, I was nought so much unto him that he would spend all his life seeking me.  But now I deem I know so much of her that I may bid thee to look on her as dead if these fetches come not again within a little while.  Then mayst thou send and do Sir Geoffrey to wit thereof, and belike he will come back again; and fain were I thereof for it will be merrier if the Castle of the Quest be dwelt in once more.

Yea, verily, said Leonard; but far merrier yet wert thou to dwell there.  Nay, she said, but now I see that it is not fated for me. Let us go in, for I would get to what I would do.

So therewith they passed under the shadow of the archway, and Birdalone stayed not but went straightway into the hall, and through it; and the priest, who lagged somewhat behind her speedy feet, cried out unto her:  Whither wilt thou? what chamber wilt thou visit first? But she stayed not, and spake to him over her shoulder as she went: Follow me if thou wilt; I have but one place only to come to ere I leave the Castle of the Quest, save I must needs turn back on my footsteps.

Then Leonard came up with her, and she went her ways out of the hall, and out on to the waterswale of the castle, and so to the little haven of the water-gate.  There Birdalone looked about her eagerly; then she turned to Leonard and pointed with her finger and said:  Lo thou! there yet lieth my ferry of old time, the Sending Boat; now wot I wherefore I was drawn hither.  And her eyes glittered and her body quivered as she spake.

Yea forsooth, said Leonard, there it lieth; who of all folk in the castle had durst to touch it?  But what hath it to do with thee, O kindest lady?

Friend, she said, if this day weareth, and I am yet within these walls, then meseemeth there must I abide for evermore; and there perchance shall I meet that seeming of myself, maybe for this night, maybe for ever, till I die here in this castle void of all that I love, and I over-young for it, friend.  And I know now that there is hope within me; for I bethink me of a dear friend over yonder water of whom I have never told any, nor will tell thee now, save this, that she is the wisdom of my life.

Wherefore now I will try this ferry and wot if the wight thereof will yet obey the voice of the speaker of the spell, who has shed of her blood to pay therefor.  Put not forth a hand therefore nor speak a word to let me, but take this farewell of me, with my pity and such love as I may give thee, and let me go, and think kindly of me.

Then she went up to him, and laid her hands upon his shoulders, and kissed him, and turned about without more ado and stepped into the boat; then she sat down and stripped her arm of its sleeve, and drew forth a knife and let blood of her arm, and then arose and smeared stem and stern therewith, and then sat down with her face to the stern and sang:

The red raven-wine now
 Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
 Wake then and awake
 And the Northward way take:
 The way of the Wenders forth over the flood,
 For the will of the Senders is blent with the blood.

Then she abode a little, while Leonard stood staring on her speechless with grief and blinded with his bitter tears, till the boat began to move under her, and presently glided out of the little haven into the wide lake; then she turned her face back unto him and waved her hand, and he knelt down and blessed her, weeping.  And so she vanished away from before him.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_09]

CHAPTER IX. BIRDALONE FINDETH THE ISLE OF NOTHING GREATLY BETTERED, AND IS KINDLY ENTREATED THERE

Now it was scarce noon when she departed, and the dark night came upon her in the midst of the water; and she fell asleep in the boat ere the night had grown very old, and woke up in the morning, not exceeding early, maybe about six o'clock; then she looked ahead and thought presently to see the ill-favoured blotch of the Isle of Nothing on the bosom of the blue waters, whereas it was a fair and cloudless morning of latter May.  Sure enough she saw land ahead, and it lay low down on the water, but she deemed from the first that it was green of hue, and as she neared it she saw that it was verily as green as emerald.  Thereat she was a little troubled, because she thought that mayhappen the Sending Boat had gone astray, and that if the wight thereof were not wending the old road, maybe he was not making for the old haven.  For now indeed she told herself right out that her will was to go back again to the House under the Wood, and see what might betide there, and if she and the wood-mother together might not overcome the witch.

But whatever might happen nought could she do but sit in her place and wend as the Sending Boat would; and in an hour's space she was right under the lee of the land, and she saw that it was shapen even as the Isle of Nothing had been aforetime.  But this made her wonder, that now the grass grew thick down to the lip of the water, and all about from the water up were many little slim trees, and some of them with the May-tide blossom yet on them, as though it were a fair and great orchard that she was nearing; and moreover, beyond all that she saw the thatched roofs of houses rising up.

Presently then the Sending Boat had brought her to the land, and she stepped ashore, but was wary, and gat her bow bent and set an arrow thereto she began to go up from the water.  Yet she thought within herself, it will be nought ill if I be come amongst folk, so long as they be peaceful, or else how might I live the journey out to all the isles and so home to the House under the Wood?

So she turned her face to where she had seen those roofs, which now she saw no longer because of the thick leaves of the little trees, and so went along a narrow path, which grew to be more and more closely beset with trees, and were now no longer apple and pear and quince and medlar, but a young-grown thicket of woodland trees, as oak and hornbeam and beech and holly.

At last as she went she heard voices before her, so she stole warily to the edge of the copse, finger on shaft; and presently could see clear of the saplings and out on to a wide space of greensward, beyond which was a homestead of many houses and bowers, like unto that of a good yeoman in peaceful lands, save that the main building was longer, though it were low.  But amidst the said greensward was a goodly flock of sheep that had been but of late washed for the shearing, and along with the sheep four folk, two carles and two queans, all of them in their first youth, not one by seeming of over a score and two of summers.  These folk were clad but simply, man and woman, in short coats of white woollen (but the women's coats a little longer than the men's), without shoon or hosen; they had garlands of green leaves on their heads, and were wholly unarmed, save that one of the men bore an ashen wand in his hand.  As for their bodies, they were goodly of fashion, tanned indeed by the sun's burning, but all sweet of flesh were they, shapely and trim, clean- made, and light and slim.

Birdalone's heart yearned toward them, and she stepped straightway from out of the cover of the coppice, and the sun flamed from her sallet and glittered in the rings of her hauberk, so that the folk might not fail to see her; the sheep fled bundling from her past their keepers, who stood firm, but seemed somewhat scared, and moved not toward Birdalone.  She gave them the sele of the day and stood still herself; but the man with the ash-wand said:  Hail, thou man; but we would have thee come no nearer a while, though thy voice be sweet:  for we know what things they be which thou bearest, and that thou art a warrior.  Wilt thou hurt us?

Birdalone laughed as sweetly as the blackbird sings, and she did off her sallet and shook the plenteous hair down over her, and then drew forth her sword and dagger and cast them to earth, and laid her bow and quiver of arrows upon them, and said:  Now will I come to you, or ye shall come to me, whereas I am unweaponed, and no warrior, but a woman, and ye are four to one, and two of you carles; wherefore now ye may bind me or slay me if you will; but in any case I pray you first to give me a mouthful of meat.

When she had done her speech, she went up to the fairest of the women and kissed her; but the two carles made no more ado but came to Birdalone and kissed her one after other, and that as men who needed nought to compel them therein, and each thereafter took a hand of her and held it and caressed it.  But the other woman had run into the house as soon as Birdalone spoke, and came back again with a treen bowl full of milk and a little loaf, not white but brown; and there blundered about her legs as she came a little lad of some three winters old, naked and brown, who was shy of the gleaming new-comer, and hid him behind the woman one while, and the other while came forth to see the new thing.  But the woman said:  Dear woman, here is for thee some of the ewes' milk, and a bite of bread, and a little deal of cheese; the said milk is yet warm, so that it is not yet clottered; but if thou wilt come with us thou mayest speedily drink cows' milk, and we be now at point to go milk them.

Birdalone thanked her with a heart full of content, and was not ill- pleased to get her hands free from the two carles; so she sat down and ate her breakfast while they talked with her, and told her of diverse work of theirs; as to how their trees were waxing, and new tillage they had done the past spring, and how it befell to the kine and the goats; of their children also they spake, and how there were already four thereof, and one of the women, the meat-bringer, already quickened with child once more.  So that ere we die, quoth the carle who was speaking, we look to see many grandchildren, and shall have some stout carles and queans here.  And by that time will some of the trees be well grown, so that we may fell timber and make us some keel that will wend the lake, and help us a-fishing; or we may go to other lands; or whiles folk may come to us, even as thou hast, thou dear- handed, sweet-voiced woman.  But wilt thou abide here ever?

Yea, said the other, but that is looking forward a long while, that building of ships.  What is nearer and well to think of is, that these apple and pear trees be so well fruited, small as they be, that this harvest we shall be able to make us cider and perry; yea, and no little deal thereof.  But art thou minded to abide with us ever? That were dear to us; and belike thou wouldest bear us children, thou also.

Then spake the meat-fetching woman and laughed withal:  Nay, thou also lookest aloof a pretty deal; whereas what is now to do is to go milk the kine, and to take this guest with us, so that she may drink somewhat better than ewes' milk though the cider be not ready to hand.  But tell me, our dear guest, art thou verily going to abide with us a long while? that were sweet to us, and we will do all we may to pleasure thee.

Nay, said Birdalone, it will no better be but that I depart on the morrow; and all thanks do I give you for your kindness.

The woman kissed her, and she arose, and all they went together to the milking of the kine some half mile inland; and they passed through much of orchard, and some deal of tillage, wherein the wheat was already growing high; and so came they to a wide meadow through which ran a little stream, and therein was a goodly herd of kine.  So they fell to the milking, and made Birdalone drink of the sweet cows' milk, and then went and lay down under the shade of the little young trees, and talked and were merry together.  But the men were both of them somewhat willing at first to kiss Birdalone and toy with her, but when she let them know that she desired it not they refrained them without grudging.

All this while of their talk they asked Birdalone nought of whence and whither, and she would not ask them, lest it might stir their asking, and then she would have to tell them some deal of her story; and telling it was now become unto her somewhat weary work.

In a while they arose all, and the men and one woman went their ways to deal with the acre-land, but the meat-fetcher went back with Birdalone into the house; and she showed her all that was therein, which was for the more part, forsooth, the four babes aforesaid.  The others came back in the eventide, bearing with them foison of blue hare-bells, and telling joyously how they had found them anigh the coppice edge in such a place:  and thereafter they were merry, and sang and talked the evening away, and showed Birdalone at last to a fair little chamber wherein was a bed of dry grass, where she lay down and slept in all content.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_10]

CHAPTER X. OF BIRDALONE'S FLITTING FROM THE ISLE OF NOTHING

On the morrow Birdalone arose betimes, and would not tarry despite all the kindness of that folk and the change which had come over the Isle of Nothing; so the friends saw her down to the boat all together, and bore down with them a deal of bread and cheese and late apples of the last year, for her provision on the road, and a pail of milk withal; and men and women they kissed her at departure, and the meat-fetcher said:  If by any means thou mayst find a keel which will carry thee hither, at some time, I would thou wouldst come; for even if thou be old, and we passed away, yet here shall be our children or our grandchildren to welcome thee; and we will tell them the tale of thee that they remember it and long for thee.

Then Birdalone kissed her again, and made much of her, and so stepped into the boat, and fell to her sacrifice to the wight thereof; and those others stared at her and wondered, and spake nought unto her till she was gone gliding over the face of the waters; but as they walked back to the house, they spake amongst themselves that this must be some goddess (for of Holy Church they knew nought) who had come to visit them in her loveliness; and in after times, when this folk waxed a many, and tilled all the isle and made ships and spread to other lands and became great, they yet had a memory of Birdalone as their own very lady and goddess, who had come from the fertile and wise lands to bless them, when first they began to engender on that isle, and had broken bread with them, and slept under their roof, and then departed in a wonderful fashion, as might be looked for of a goddess.

But as for Birdalone, she came not back ever, nor saw that folk again, and now she sped over the water toward the Isle of Kings.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_11]

CHAPTER XI. COMING TO THE ISLE OF KINGS BIRDALONE FINDETH THERE A SCORE AND TWO OF FAIR DAMSELS WHO WOULD FAIN HAVE HER COMPANY

Birdalone came ashore at the said isle at the day-dawn, and saw but little change in the isle when it grew light, and still the castle stood looking down awfully on to the meadows.  But when she had set foot on the land, she handled her bow lest the worst might befall, and looked about her, deeming that this time she would not go her ways to the dread show that was arrayed in the castle, if forsooth those dead folk yet abode there.

So now as she looked across the meadow, she saw one with light and fluttering raiment come forth from the trees, and look toward her whereas she stood flashing and gleaming in the sun like an image of the God of Love turned warrior.  Now Birdalone deemed for sure that this was a woman; she saw her come a little nigher to her, and then stand looking at her under the sharp of her hand; then she turned about and ran back to the brake whence she came; and presently Birdalone heard the sound of voices coming thence, and in a little while thereafter came forth from the said brake a rout of women (one score and two as they were told thereafter) and walked over the meadow straight unto her.  She stood where she was, so as to be nigh unto her ferry in case they willed her unpeace; for though they were weaponless by seeming, they were a many.

When they were come near they stood about her in a half ring, whispering and laughing each to each.  Birdalone saw that they were all young, and that none of them might be called ungoodly, and some were full fair.  They were bright and fine of array.  Most bore gold and gems on fingers and neck and arms; they were clad in light, or it may be said wanton raiment of diverse colours, which had only this of their fashion in common, that they none of them hid over-much of their bare bodies; for either the silk slipped from the shoulder of her, or danced away from her flank; and she whose feet were shod, spared not to show knee and some deal of thigh; and she whose gown reached unsheared from neck to heel, wore it of a web so thin and fine that it hid but little betwixt heel and neck.

Birdalone stood gazing on them and wondering, and she had a mind to think that they were some show sent by her old mistress the witch for her undoing, and she loosened her sword in its sheath and nocked an arrow.

But then ran forward two of the damsels and knelt before her, and each took an hand of her and fell to kissing it, and she felt their hands that they were firm and their lips that they were soft and warm, and they were doubtless alive and real.  Then spake one of them and said:  Hail our lord!  How can words say how we rejoice in thy coming this happy morn!  Now do all we give ourselves to thee as thy slaves to do as thou wilt with.  Yet we pray thee be merciful to us and our longings.

Therewith all the sort of them knelt down on the grass before Birdalone and joined their hands as praying to her.  And Birdalone was full ill at ease, and wotted not where she was.  But she said: Hail! and good days and fulfilment of wishes unto you, fair damsels! But tell me, is this the Isle of Kings, as I deemed; for strange it is for me to see ye womenfolk here?

Said she who had spoken afore:  Yea verily this is the Isle of Kings; but long ago are the kings dead, and yet they sit dead in the great hall of the castle yonder, as thou mayst see if thou, who art a man and a valiant warrior, durst follow up yon mountain path thereto; but we, weak women and little-hearted, durst not go anigh it; and we tremble when whiles a-nights cometh down thence the sound of clashing swords and clattering shields, and the cries of men in battle.  But, praise be to the God of Love, nought cometh down from thence unto us. Therefore do we live peaceful lives and pleasant here, lacking nought but thee, lord; and lo now thou hast come unto us, and we are happy in our inmost hearts.

Now was Birdalone perplexed and knew not what to do; but at last she said:  Gentle maidens, I pray you pardon me, but I must depart straightway; for I have an errand, and life or death lieth on it.  In all else than my abiding here may ye have your will.

Therewith did she move a little way toward her ferry; but forthwith all they brake out weeping and wailing and lamenting, and some of them came up to Birdalone and cast themselves down before her, and clasped her knees, and took hold of her skirts, and besought her piteously to abide with them.  But she put them aside as well as she might, and stepped aboard the Sending Boat, and stood amidst it waiting on their departure; but they went not, and stood along on the lip of the land crying out and beseeching with much clamour.

Then Birdalone waxed somewhat wrath at their noise and tumult, and she drew forth her knife and bared her arm and let blood from it. But when they saw the whiteness and roundness of it, and how fine and sleek it was, straightway they changed their tune, and cried out:  A woman, a woman, a fool of a woman! and they laughed in scorn and mockery.  And the speaker of them said:  Now there is but one thing for thee to do, and that is to come forth from thy boat and strip off thy stolen raiment, and we shall make thee as fine as ourselves, and thou shalt come with us, and with us abide the coming of our lord. Nay, thou art so fair and lovely, that thou shalt be the Lady and Queen of us, and we will do after thy commands, and thou mayst chastise us if we fail therein.  But now if thou wilt not come forth of the boat uncompelled, we shall pluck thee forth of it.

And therewith she set her foot on the gunwale of the boat, and two or three others did the like.  But now had Birdalone her sword naked in her hand, and she waxed as red as blood, and cried out:  Forbear I bid you!  Yea verily I am a woman; but I will not take this offer either, whereas I have an errand, as I told you.  And so stern it is, that if ye now let my departure I will not spare to smite with this sword whoso first cometh aboard my ferry, and though I be not a man, yet shall ye find that in this matter I shall be little worse, whereas I am armed and ye be naked.

Then they drew back and stood gibing and jeering at her; but she heeded it no whit, but reddened stem and stern of the Sending Boat, and sang her spell, and forth glided the ferry, while the damsels stood and stared astonished.  As for Birdalone, as she sped on her way she might not refrain her laughter.  Thus she wended the wet highway.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_12]

CHAPTER XII. BIRDALONE COMETH AGAIN TO THE ISLE OF QUEENS, AND FINDETH A PERILOUS ADVENTURE THEREIN

It was not yet daybreak when Birdalone came ashore again, and the moon was down, and it was dark; wherefore she durst not go up on the land, but lay down in the ferry and fell asleep there.  When she woke again it was broad daylight, the sun was up, and a little ripple was running over the face of the water.  She stepped ashore straightway, and looked up the land and to the right hand and the left, and saw at once that it was indeed the Isle of Queens, and the house stood trim and lovely as of old time; then she longed somewhat to tread the green meadow a little, for yet young was the day, and she saw nought stirring save the throstle and a few small beasts.  However, she said to herself that she would go nowhere nigh to the goodly house wherein abode those images of death.  Yet her body longed so sore for the springtide freshness of the grass, and was so bewooed of the flowery scent thereof, that though she durst not go unarmed, she did off her footgear and went stealing softly barefoot and with naked legs over the embroidered greensward, saying aloud to herself:  If run for the ferry I needs must, lighter shall I run so dight.

Nonetheless, she had gone but a little way ere a terror took hold of her, though she saw no child of Adam anigh, and she turned and ran back swiftly to her old place and sat down under a twisted oak-tree hard by the Sending Boat, and abode there panting and quaking, and scarce daring to look up from the grass for a while.  Then her heart came back to her, and she laughed, and said to herself:  I am a fool, for I need fear nought on this Isle of Queens save women like myself.

Yet she sat there a little while longer without stirring; then she stood up and looked keenly around, and, as aforesaid, exceeding far- sighted she was; but still she saw neither man nor maid nor suckling child.

Then her eyes sought the lips of the lake, and rested on a little bight some stone's throw ahead of the Sending Boat, where, a little back from the water, slim willows made a veil betwixt the water of the meadow; and she looked, and saw how pleasant a place it were for a one to stand and look on the ripple just left, while the water dripped from the clear body on to the grass.  And her bare feet fell to telling her clad sides of the sweet coolness of the water, and waited for no naysay, but lightly bore her toward the willowy bight. And when she was there, she did off her sallet and ungirt her, and laid her sword on the grass, and did off her surcoat and hauberk, and so was a woman again in one white coat above her smock.  Then she looked heedfully betwixt the willow-boughs, and saw no more than before, nought but a little whitethorn brake, now white indeed with blossom, some fifty yards landward from where she stood.  So she laughed, and did off her other raiment, and slid swiftly into the water, that embraced her body in all its fresh kindness; and as for Birdalone, she rewarded it well for its past toil by sporting and swimming to her full.

Then she came forth from the water, and clad herself in no great haste, and did on her hauberk and sallet and sword, and so went back to her place, and sat down and began to do on her foot-gear.

But as she looked up from her work a moment, lo! a tall man coming toward her, and just about the willows whereby she had bathed.  Her heart beat quick and her face changed, yet she hastened, and was shod and stood up in knightly array by then he stayed his steps some five paces from her, and gave her the sele of the day in courteous wise; and she strove to think that he had not seen her, or at least noted her otherwise dight; yet her heart misgave her.

He was a grizzled-haired man of over fifty summers by seeming, but goodly enough and well-knit; he was clad in a green coat more than a little worn, but made after the fashion of knighthood; he had nought on his head but an oak-chaplet, and no weapons but a short sword by his side and a stout staff in his hand.

She gave back his greeting in a quavering voice; and he said: Welcome again, young man.  Art thou come to dwell with us?  Truly thou art trim now, but ere some few months thine attire will be not so much fairer than ours, and thine hauberk will be rusted, for here be no joyous tiltings nor deeds of arms, and no kind ladies to give the award of honour, so that if we fight amongst ourselves it will be because we have fallen out, and spitefully.  Yet (and he laughed, mockingly, as she thought) thou mayst bring us luck, and draw some fair damsels unto us, for that is what we await in this isle, which is barren of their fair bodies, despite of its deceitful name.

Thereat Birdalone reddened, deeming that he divined her womanhood, but she enforced her to speak hardily, and as manly as she might, and said:  Yea, fair sir, and if I be the God of Love, as thou deemest, and not merely a poor squire (Louis Delahaye, at thy service), how many damsels shall I send thee if there must needs be one to each man of you?  Quoth he:  Thou must make up the tale to a score or more, or some of us must lack.  Sooth to say, at this time thou needest not haste overmuch for all the tale, whereas there is but one other of the company near at hand, a mere foolish young man; the others are gone to the leeward side of the isle, to fetch us venison and fish, both of which are more plenty there than here; wherefore are we two somewhat lonesome in this stead, all the more as we be over-nigh to the sorcery in the great house, which we durst not enter; for though nought cometh out thence down unto us, yet hear we a-night-tides, first songs, and then cries and shrieking, come out therefrom.

Then he stayed his speech, and drew a little nigher to Birdalone, and then grinned, and said:  Forsooth we can spare him, we twain.  And he looked on her hard, and the colour came into her cheeks, and she laughed uneasily, as a dainty lady when she heareth some unmeet tale.

But again the old carle drew nigher to her, and said:  Thou seemest to have a good bow and store of arrows; if thou wouldst lend them to me for a little, and come with me into the wood hard by, I might shoot thee some venison with little toil to thee; whereas, forsooth, thou lookest scarce like one who is meet for over-much toil.  Again she reddened, and spake nought this time; and he said:  Deem not there be no deer this end of the isle because I said that the others were gone to fetch home venison; only the deer be tamer there and more, and we have but evil shooting-gear, whereas thou art well found therein.  Wilt thou not come? we shall have merry feast after the hunt.

Now had Birdalone come to her wits again, and she answered like a merry youth, with a flavour of mockery in her speech:  Fair sir, thou shalt not deem that I need much help in slaying the dun deer; for I do thee to wit that I shoot not ill in the bow; neither am I heavy- footed.  But I will not hunt in your park to-day, for I have an errand which calleth me away, so that I shall depart hence presently. Besides, wise elder, there is thine errand to see to; and if I be the God of Love, as thou sayest, I must not keep thee and thy valiant fellows languishing mateless; so with thy leave I will now depart, that I may send you a score of fair damsels for your company.

And she turned about and made a step toward her boat; but the carle drew nearer, laughing; and he said:  Truly sayest thou that thou art not heavy-footed, for never saw I feet lighter or fairer than glided over the meadow e'en now; nor a fairer body than came like rosy- tinted pearl fresh out of the water while I lay hidden in yonder thorn-brake that while.  Wherefore trouble not thyself to bring any more damsels than thyself, fairest Goddess of Love, for thou art enough for me.

And therewith he ran forward, and stretched out a hand to her; but in that nick of time had she her sword naked in her hand, and the carle drew back before the glitter thereof, and cried out:  Ho, ho! is it to be battle, my mistress?  Deemest thou that thou wilt slay me as lightly as the dun deer, and thou with thy bow unstrung at thy back? Now shall I show thee a trick of fence; but fear not that I shall hurt thee to spoil thee.

He advanced on her with his staff aloft, and her heart failed her, and she quaked, and lightly he beat down her guard and did the sword out of her hand; and again he turned on her to take her, but she sprang aside and ran from him, but ran landward perforce, as he was betwixt her and the boat; and he followed heavily, and had nought to do in the race.

But she had not gone a two-score yards ere she heard a great shout, and another man came running over the meadow; a slim young man was this, and worse of attire than the old carle, for so tattered was his raiment that he was half naked; but he was goodly of fashion, fresh- coloured and black-haired.  Birdalone stayed her feet when she saw him, for though she doubted not to outrun him, yet whither should she run, since her ferry was behind her?

So the young man came up to her, and the old carle met him all panting, and the young man said:  How now, Antony! what battle is this? and wherefore art thou chasing this fair knight?  And thou, fair sir, why fleest thou this grey dastard?

Said Antony:  Thou art but a young fool, Otter, this is no man, but a woman, and I have taken her, and she is mine.

Well, said Otter, I say she is as much mine as thine; nay, more, if she will give herself unto me.  But if she will not, she shall go whither she will in thy despite.  Or art thou a woman?

Yea, yea, said Birdalone; and I pray thee, by thy mother's head, suffer me to depart; for heavy and full of need is the errand that I am about.

Go thou shalt then, said Otter; lead back to thy place, and I will walk with thee.  So did they:  and Birdalone went beside the young man quaking; but he put out no hand unto her; and sooth to say, she deemed that she had seldom seen so fair a young man, but it were Arthur or Hugh.

Now he, as Antony, was girt with a short sword, but he let it be in its sheath; and as they went, Antony drew his blade again, and hove it up to smite Otter, but as it befell Birdalone saw him, and turned round sharp upon him and gat hold of his wrist, and therewith Otter turned also, and caught the old carle by the nape as he turned away, and put a foot before his and shoved mightily, so that he went noseling to the earth.

Then turned Otter about again, laughing, and he said to Birdalone: By Saint Giles! thou art well-nigh too valiant for a woman, and I would that we two might be together; and then between us we might achieve the adventure of the dead ladies up yonder.  She hung her head, and said:  Fair sir, it may not anywise be; yet I thank thee, I thank thee.

So came they to the water-side and the Sending Boat, and Birdalone stayed her feet there, and the young man said:  What is this keel, that seemeth unto me as if it were a ferry for malefactors wending to a death of torment, so grey and bleared and water-logged and sun- bleached as it is, and smeared over with stains of I know not what?

Said Birdalone:  Such as it is, it is my ferry over the water to where I would be.  Strange! said Otter; to my mind it is like to our fortunes on this isle, we who were once knights and merry squires and are now as gangrel men, and of ill conditions, thinking of nought save our first desires, even those which we share with the wolf and the kite.

She said:  But art thou of evil conditions, thou who hast just delivered me from trouble?  He smiled grimly:  Damsel, said he, I have not delivered thee yet from me, though I have from him.  But tell me, art thou a sorceress?  Not a black one, said Birdalone; but I will tell thee at once that I have been bred by a witch most mighty, and some deal of lore have I learned.  And therewith she told him of the Sending Boat, and how she would have to speed it on the way.

He looked on her a little and then turned away, and saw her sword lying on the grass; so he went to it and picked it up and brought it to her, and said:  Thou mayst yet need this keen friend.  So she took it and thrust it back into the scabbard, quaking somewhat because of him; so feeble and frail as she felt before him.  Then he said:  If thou deemest thou hast somewhat to reward me for, I have a boon to ask of thee, and granting that, we shall be quits again.  Yea, she said faintly, and what is the boon?  He said:  Art thou pressed to depart now, this minute?  Nay, said Birdalone, not for an hour if there be no peril here from other men, and . . . and . . .  And if I be true to thee and will let thee go? said he, laughing; hah! is that not thy word? fear not, I swear by thine eyes that thou shalt depart whenso thou wilt.  Now then, the boon I crave is, that thou wilt sit down here beside me and tell me the tale of thy life that has been. Said she:  It wearies me to think thereof; yet hast thou a right to crave somewhat of me, and this is not hard to grant.

And she sat down by him; but he said:  Do this also for me, take off thine headpiece, since now that we know thee for a woman it serveth thee nought.  So did she, and began her tale straightway, and told him all thereof, save as to the wood-wife, and he sat hearkening and watching her face; and when she had made an end, he said:  Now shall I ask none other boon of thee, though I long sore for it; but best it is that we sunder straightway, else maybe I might yet be for hindering thee.

Therewith he stood up, and Birdalone also, and he looked on her eagerly, and said:  I am now to bid thee farewell, and it is most like that I shall never see thee again, wherefore I will ask thee yet to let one thing come from thy mouth; for I deem thee the dearest of all women I have ever seen.  What shall I say? said Birdalone, smiling on him kindly; must thou needs put the word in my mouth? Thou hast been friendly with me here when need was to me of friendliness; wherefore I say, I would I might see thee again, and thou better bestead than now thou art.

The young man's face brightened, and he said:  Spake I not that thou wert the dearest of all?  This was even the word I would have put in thy mouth.  But now see thou, one goeth on from one thing to another, and I must now ask thee, is there aught which thou hast a mind to give me ere I depart, some keepsake which I durst not ask for?

She flushed red and said:  I will with a good heart give thee my bow and arrows for a keepsake; whereas the old carle told me that ye be ill furnished of shooting-gear.

And she would have taken her bow from her back, but he laughed aloud, and said:  Nay, nay, I will not have that; for there be those who gird them to a sword and know not how to use it, but few will cumber their shoulders with bow and quiver who cannot shoot therewith; I deem it like that thou art a fell bowman.  Keep thy bow therefore, and if thou wilt go without any other gift, even so be it.

And he made as if he would turn away; but she put forth both her hands and took his in them, and lifted up her face and kissed him kindly, and then turned away to her ferry; while Otter stood still and said in a merry voice:  Now is it better than well, for thou art in all ways what I would have thee, and there is nought like unto thee.  And therewith he turned away and departed ere Birdalone had stepped into the Sending Boat, and she blushing like a rose the while.  Then she did due sacrifice to the wight of the witch-ferry, and sped on her way without any hindrance.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_13]

CHAPTER XIII. COMING TO THE ISLE OF THE YOUNG AND THE OLD, BIRDALONE FINDETH IT PEOPLED WITH CHILDREN

Midst all this had worn some hours, but yet it was barely noon; wherefore it was yet dark by then Birdalone made the Isle of the Young and the Old; so she stepped out of the boat, and lay down on the grass and abode the dawn sleeping.  And she awoke with the clatter of shrill voices, and she rose up and looked, and lo a multitude of children all about her, both men and women children, and, as it seemed, from five years old upward to fifteen.  They cried and crowed merrily when they saw her stand up, and pressed on her to see her the nearer and to touch her hands or her raiment.  They were but little clad, and the younger ones not at all, but were goodly younglings and merry.  So great was the noise they raised, that loud were the thunder which had not been hushed thereby; and Birdalone stood looking on them, smiling, and knew not what to do.  Anon she turned to a tall thin lad of some fifteen winters, and said unto him: Wilt thou now take me unto the house, and the place where dwelleth the old man?  Quoth he:  I neither know of an old man, nor rightly what it means, the word.  Am not I old enough for thee?  I am the oldest of these here.  But belike thou art hungry; wherefore if thou come to the place where we sleep a-nights, and where we shelter us from the storm and the rain when need is, I will give thee to eat; for we have both bread and milk and cheese, and raisins of the sun.

So he took her hand and led her along, and asked her by the way concerning her armour and weapons, and of the fashion of battle, and she told him thereof what she would.

Thus came they to the place where erst had been the cot under the ruin of the great ancient house; but now was gone all that ruin and the great grey walls, though the cot was left; and all about it were low bowers built of small wood and thatched undeftly.  But the lad smiled when he saw it, as if the sight thereof made him happy; and he said:  All these have we made since I have dwelt here, and no other home have I known.

And he led her into the cot, and set her down to eat and to drink, and through the open door she could see the children swarming, and they that were nighest thrusting each other this way and that to catch a sight of her.

Now she said:  Fair child, how gattest thou this victual if there be no older folk to help you?  Said he:  We dig the ground and sow it, and the wheat comes up, and we reap it in harvest, and make bread of it; and we have goats and kine, and we milk them, and turn the milk with a little blue flower, which is fair to see.  And there are in this isle little hills where the grapes grow plenty; and some we eat and some we dry for store.  Lo thou, such be our ways for victual. But tell me, said he, thou sayest old, and I know not the word; art thou old?  She laughed:  Not very, said she, yet older than thou.

Said the lad:  Thou art fair and dear to look on, and thy voice is sweet; wilt thou not abide with us, and teach us what it is to be old?  Nay, said she, I may not, for I have an errand which driveth me on; wherefore I must be gone within this hour.

Forsooth, she was growing eager now to be done with her journey and come to the House under the Wood, whatever should befall her there. Moreover she deemed it would not be restful to her to abide among all these restless children, with their ceaseless crying and yelping:  if rest she might, she would rest, she deemed, in the Isle of Increase Unsought, if there were no ill things abiding there.

Wherefore now she arose, when she had sat hearkening the sound of the lad's prattle for a while, for as to the sense thereof she might not heed it over-much.  The youngling would not leave her, but led her, holding her hand, down to her ferry again; she kissed him in thanks for his meat, and he reddened thereat but said nought.  All the whole rout of little ones had followed her down to the water, and now they stood, as thick as bees on a honeycomb, on the bank, to watch her departure.  But if they were keen to see her doings before, how much keener were they when it came to the baring of her arm and the smearing of the Sending Boat.  To be short, so keen were they, and pushed and shoved each other so sturdily, that more than one or two fell into the water, and Birdalone was frighted lest they should drown; but they swam like ducks, and got on to the land when they would, which was not so very soon, for some of them hung unto the gunwale of the boat, and hove their faces up to look over into it, and left not hold till the ferry was fairly under weigh and beginning to quicken its speed.

So left Birdalone the isle, and nought befell her on the way to the Isle of Increase Unsought.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_14]

CHAPTER XIV. THE SENDING BOAT DISAPPEARETH FROM THE ISLE OF INCREASE UNSOUGHT, AND BIRDALONE SEEKETH TO ESCAPE THENCE BY SWIMMING

It was as before that Birdalone came to the shore of the isle while it was yet night; but the wizard keel was so loathsome to her, that she stepped out of it and laid her down on the land for what was left of the night; yet hard she found her bed, and neither grassy nor flowery.

For all that, she slept, for she was weary, and it was broad day and not very early when she awoke.  She stood up trembling, for she foreboded evil, so near as she was to the dwelling of her old mistress; and she looked up to where in time past was the fair and wicked house, and saw that all was changed indeed; for no longer was the isle goodly with meadow and orchard and garden, but was waste and bare, and nought grew on it save thin and wiry grass, already seeding even ere June was born, and here and there hard and ugly herbs, with scarce aught that might be called a flower amongst them.  Trees there were yet, but the most of them stark dead, and the best dying fast. No beasts she saw, nor fowl; nothing but lizards and beetles, and now and again a dry grey adder coiled up about a sun-burned stone.  But of great carrion flies, green and blue, were there a many, and whiles they buzzed about her head till she sickened with loathing of them. All this she found on her way as she went up toward the place where erst was the great perron.  But when she came to the top there was no sign either of the stairs or the house, or aught that ever was builded; there was nought but the bare bent top, ungrassed, parched by wind, scorched by sun, washed by rain.

She wandered about the isle, to places where she had not been herself, but which she deemed she might have known by the telling of the Green Knight's tale, had there been no change since those days; but now was all changed, and the whole isle was a mere waste, and withal poisonous of aspect to her mind, as if many corpses lay underneath the wretched stones of it.  Nevertheless, though it seemed so evil unto Birdalone, she lingered on it, wandering about till she was to-wearied, for she had no will to depart at such time as she would be like to come to her old abiding-place by night and cloud; wherefore she dallied with the time, and came not back to the haven of her ferry till it was nigh sunset, and the westering sun was in her eyes when she came there; and she said to herself that this was the cause why she might not see the Sending Boat.

So she cleared her eyes and looked on the thin grass awhile, and then down over the edge of the land, and still she saw not her boat.  She turned pale, and a pang of anguish went to her heart; but she walked a little east, deeming that perchance she had erred as to the place of the haven on that dull and empty shore; but yet there was no boat. Then she turned back wild with terror, and sought where erst she had missed it, and found neither boat nor the world's end.  And she deemed that there might be some devilish malice of the wight of the Sending Boat, to torment her with fear, and she walked along the land's edge up and down, and down and up, further each time, and still there was no boat.

Then she stood still and strove to think, and might not, nor might she do aught, but spread abroad her hands and moaned in her agony; for now indeed she felt herself in the trap; and she said that all her past life of hope and desire and love and honour was all for nought, and that she was but born to die miserably in that foul ruin of an isle envenomed with the memories of bygone cruelty and shame.

But in a little while she came somewhat to herself, and she said:  At least this hideous land shall not mock my dying anguish; I will give myself to the water and let it do with me as it will.

Therewith she cast off her helm and hauberk first, and her weapons, and her pouch with the treasure that could buy nought for her now, and thereafter all her raiment, till she was as naked as when she first came aland there that other time.  Again she moaned, and put up her hand to her bosom and felt a little gold box lying there betwixt the fragrant hills of her breasts, which hung to a thin golden thread about her neck; and a thought came into her mind, and she stooped adown and drew from her pouch flint and fire-steel, and then opened the said golden box and drew thence the tress which Habundia the wood-wife had given to her those years agone, and all trembling she drew two hairs from it, as erst she did on the Isle of Nothing, and struck fire and kindled tinder and burnt the said hairs, and then hung the golden box with the tress therein about her neck again; and she said:  O wood-mother, if only thou couldst know of me and see me, thou wouldst help me!

Thereafter she sought along the bank for bread which she had taken from her store that morning, and she found it, and compelled herself to eat of it for the strengthening of her body, and then she stood and abode tidings; and by then the sun had just sunk below the rim of the lake, and the stars began to twinkle, for the night was cloudless, and exceeding fair, and very warm.

No visible token came to her, but her heart grew stronger, and she seemed to see herself yet alive and in hope on the other side of the water; and she said:  Who wotteth what Weird may do, or where the waters may bear me? and there is no swimmer stronger than I.

So then without more ado Birdalone slipped into the water, which lay before her as calm and plain as a great sheet of glass, and fell to rowing with her arms and her legs as though she were but swimming from Green Eyot to the mainland, as so oft she had done in the other days.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_15]

CHAPTER XV. BIRDALONE LACKETH LITTLE OF DROWNING, BUT COMETH LATTERLY TO THE GREEN EYOT

On swam Birdalone, not as one who had a mind to drown her for the forgetting of troubles, but both strongly and wisely; and she turned over on to her back, and looked on the stars above her, and steered herself by them thitherward whereas she deemed was the land under the wood.  When she had been gone from the evil isle for an hour or so, there rose a fair little wind behind her, which helped her forward, but scarce raised the water more than a little ripple.

Still she swam on, and it was some three hours she began to weary, and then she floated on her back and let the wind and water have its way with her; and now the night was as dark as it would be ere dawn.

Thus it went for another hour, that whiles she swam on and whiles she floated; and now her heart began to fail her, and the great water was no longer unto her a wet highway, but a terrible gulf over which she hung fainting.

Nevertheless she did not give up doing what she might:  she floated supine a long while, and then, when she had gathered a little strength, turned over again and struck out, still steering her by the stars.  But she had scarce made three strokes ere her arms met something hard and rough; and at first in her forlornness she deemed she had happened on some dread water monster, and for terror of it she sank down into the deep, but came up presently blinded and breathless, and spread abroad her arms, and again they came on the thing aforesaid, and this time found that it was nought alive, but the bole of a tree sitting high out of the water.  So she clomb up on to it with what might she had left, and sat her down, and saw in the dim light that it was big, and that there was a fork betwixt two limbs reaching up into the air, and she thrust herself in between these two limbs and embraced one of them, so that she might scarce tumble off; and a great content and happiness came over her that she had thus escaped from the death of the deep; but therewithal weariness overcame her, and she slept, whether she would or not; and the bole went on over the waters no slower than might have been looked for, whether it were by the pushing on of the south wind, or by the hand of Weird that would not have her die.

Long she slumbered, for when she awoke it was broad day and the sun was shining high in the heavens, and she cleared her eyes and looked around, and saw before her the land, but yet blue in the offing.  And the tree-bole was yet speeding on towards the shore, as if it were being drawn there by some bidding of might.

Now indeed grew Birdalone happy, and she thought if any had helped her it must have been the wood-mother once again; and she said to herself that she should soon meet with that helper; nor heeded she that she was naked and unfurnished of any goods, whereas she deemed indeed that it was but to ask and have of her friend.

For a while indeed she knew not whither she was wending, and if her face were verily turned toward the land under the wood; but as the morning wore the blue distance began to grow green, and then she saw that a great wood was indeed before her, and thereafter, as it cleared yet more, she knew the land she was nearing for the meadows of the House under the Wood, and it was not long thence ere she saw clear and close Green Eyot and Rocky Eyot, though the house was yet hidden from her by the green shores of the first of those two isles.

Shortly to tell it, her tree-bole floated with her past the outer ness of Green Eyot, and came ashore in that same sandy bight where erst she was wonted to make her body ready for the water.  She stepped ashore all glad to feel the firm warm sand underneath her foot-soles, and as one drunk with joy she was when the tall flowery grass of the latter May was caressing her legs as they shook the seed-dust off the bents, and smote the fragrance out of the blossoms; and she might scarce at first lift her eyes from their familiar loveliness.  Glad she was indeed, but exceeding worn and weary with the long voyage, and all the longing and fear and hope which had encompassed her that while.  She lifted up her eyes but once, and saw the witch's house standing where it was wont, but no shape of man moving about it; then she turned aside to a little brake of thorn and eglantine in the meadow hard by, and laid her down on the grass in the shade thereof, and almost before her head touched the ground she fell asleep, and slept there long and peacefully.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_16]

CHAPTER XVI. BIRDALONE FINDETH HER WITCH-MISTRESS DEAD

It was some while after noon when she wakened, and the sun was shining bright and hot.  Somewhat she felt the burden of fear upon her, even before she was fully come to herself, and knew not what it was that she feared; but when she called to mind that it was even the meeting with her old mistress, her flesh quaked indeed with the memory of bygone anguish, but valiantly she arose and faced the dwelling of the witch despite her naked helplessness.  As she went she looked up unto it, and saw no smoke coming from the chimney, but marvelled little thereat since it was not yet cooking-time and the weather hot.  She drew nigher, and saw someone sitting on the bench without the door whereas the witch was wonted; and her heart beat quick, for she saw presently that it was none other than her mistress.  Moreover, near to her stood three of the milch-kine lowing uneasily and as in reproach, even as such beasts use when their udders be full and they desire to be milked.

Birdalone stayed a minute, and her legs nigh failed her for fear, and then because of the very fear she hastened on till she came within ten paces of the said witch; and sore she missed her bow and arrows, and the cutting blade of her feigned squirehood, lest the carline should arise and come raging and shrieking at her.

Then spake Birdalone in no feeble voice, and said:  Dame, I am come back unto thee, as thou seest, in even such plight as I fled from thee; and I have a mind to dwell in this land:  what sayest thou? The witch neither moved nor spake at her word; and the kine, who had held silence when she first came up, and had turned from her, fell to their peevish lowing again.

Birdalone drew a step nigher, and said:  Dost thou hear me, dame, or art thou exceeding wroth with me, and art pondering what vengeance thou wilt take on me?  Still no answer came from the carline, and the kine kept on lowing now and again.  Once more Birdalone drew nigher, and spake loudly and said:  Tell me at least, is it peace between us or unpeace?

But now when she looked she saw that the eyes of the witch were open and staring, and her lips white, and her hands hard writhen; and she cried out and said:  Is she dead? or will she waken presently and beat me? surely she is dead.  And she put forth her hand and touched her face, and it was stone-cold; and she found that she was dead beyond any question.

Then was a great weight lifted off her heart, and she turned about and looked on the meadows and up to the trees of the wood and down to the rippling stream before her, and fair and sweet and joyous were they gotten unto her; and she looked at the kine who were drawing up towards her, and she laughed merrily, and went to the out-house hard by and took forth a milking-pail and a stool and fell to milking them one after the other, and the beasts went off down the meadow lowing in a changed voice, for joy to wit, this time.  But Birdalone knelt down and drank a long draught of the sweet warm milk, and then arose and went swiftly into the house, and saw nought changed or worsened so far as she could see.  There was her own bed in the corner, and the mistress's, greater and much fairer, over against it; and the hutch by the door wherein the victual was kept:  she opened it now, and found three loaves there on the shelf, and a meal-tub down below, and she took a loaf and broke it and fell to eating it as she walked about the chamber.  There was her bow standing in a nook beside the hutch, and the quiver of arrows hanging on the wall above it.  There was the settle lying athwart from the hearth; and she smiled, and fitted her wrists to the back of the carven bear which made its elbow, whereto the witch was wont to tie them when she chastised her.

Then she went to the coffers that stood against the wall behind it, and threw up the lid of one of them, and found therein a smock or two of her own, yellowed by the lapse of time, and her old grey coat, ragged as it was when last she wore it, and now somewhat moth-eaten withal; and she drew forth both smocks and coat and laid them on the settle.  Then she opened another coffer, and therein were gay and gaudy gowns and gear of the witch's wear; but lying amongst them, as if the witch had worn them also, her green gown and shoon which her own hands had broidered.  But she said:  Nay, ye have been in ill company, I will wear you not, though ye be goodly, at least not till ye have been fumigated and hallowed for me.

Therewith she turned back to the settle and did on her her old smock and her ragged grey coat, and said:  To-day at least will these be good enough for to-day's work.  And she knit her brow withal, and walked with a firm step out-a-doors and stood a while gazing on the dead corpse of her enemy; and she thought how that here was that which once was so great a thing unto her for the shaping of her life- days, and which so oft came to her waking thoughts after she had escaped from her hands, (though, as aforesaid, she seldom dreamed of her a-night-time), and moreover an hour ago she yet feared it so sore that she scarce might stand for the fear of it; and now it was nought but a carven log unto her.

But she told herself that the work was to be done; so she dragged the body away thence, and across the brook, and a little way into the meadow, and then she went back and fetched mattock and spade from the outhouse, where she knew they lay, and so fell to digging a grave for the corpse of her dead terror.  But howso hard she might toil, she was not through with the work ere night began to fall on her, and she had no mind to go on with her digging by night.  Wherefore she went back into the house, and lighted candles, whereof was no lack, and made her supper of the bread and the milk; and then sat pondering on her life that had been till the passion arose in her bosom, and the tears burst out, and long she wept for desire of others and pity for herself.  Then she went to the bed she had been erst wont to, and laid her down and fell asleep.

And her mistress walked not, nor meddled with her peace; nor did Birdalone so much as dream of her, but of her mother and Master Jacobus in the fair city of the Five Crafts; and in her sleep she wept for thinking of them.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_17]

CHAPTER XVII. BIRDALONE LAYETH TO EARTH THE BODY OF THE WITCH, AND FINDETH THE SENDING BOAT BROKEN UP

When morning was, Birdalone awoke, and felt a weight upon her heart, and called to mind the task which lay before her.  So she arose and clad herself, and went straight to the grave begun, and toiled hard till she had digged it out deep, and sithence she dragged the witch thereinto and heaped the earth upon her.  Then she bathed her in the nighest pool of the brook, and went back into the house and made her breakfast on the bread and milk, and it was then about mid-morning. Thereafter she went about the house, and saw to the baking of bread, and so out to the meadow to see to the kine and the goats, and then stored the milk for making butter and cheese, and did in all wise as if she were to dwell long in that stead; but thereafter she rested her body, whiles her thought went wide about.  But she said to herself that she would not go up to the Oak of Tryst to meet the wood-mother that day, but would abide the night, in case aught befell that she should tell her.

But when the sun was getting low she roused herself and went out, and walked about the meadow, and hearkened to the birds' song, and watched the kine and the goats as they fed down the pasture; and now a soft content came over her, that all this was free unto her to hold in peace, and to take her pleasure in, as much as one lone child of Adam might do.

At last she wandered down to the sandy bight of the lake and stood gazing on Green Eyot, where the osiers and willows were grown wild and long in all these years, and she said that she would swim over to it on the morrow.  But now her feet took her eastward thence toward the haven of the Sending Boat amongst the alders; for in her heart she would fain know if there were any tidings for her.

So she went softly along the path by the water, where she had sped so swiftly that last time, and came at last to the creek-side, and looked down on to the water somewhat timorously.  There then she saw what she deemed was the very boat itself lying as she had known it; but when she looked again she saw that it lay from stem to stern all loose staves with the water betwixt, and the thwarts and ribs all sundered and undone, so that never again might it float upon the waves.  Then she said in a soft voice:  Art thou dead then, as thy mistress is dead? was it not so that thou wert at the point of death, and she also, when thou failedst me at the Isle of Increase Unsought? No voice came to her as she spake; and she said again:  Must I then bury thee as I have buried thy mistress?  Nay, that will I not until thou compellest me; belike in a short while little of the staves of thee shall be left now that the life is out of thee.  Let thy ghost and hers foregather if ye will.

As she spake the last word, she saw a stir about the stern which lay furthest in up the creek, and while she quaked with failing heart, lo! a big serpent, mouldy and hairy, grey and brown-flecked, came forth from under the stern and went into the water and up the bank and so into the dusk of the alder-wood.  Birdalone stood awhile pale and heartsick for fear, and when her feet felt life in them, she turned and stole away back again into the merry green mead and the low beams of the sun, pondering whether this evil creature were the fetch of the wight who drave the ferry under the blood of the sender.

So she hastened back again to the house, and lit a fire on the hearth, and fell to cooking her somewhat of grout to her supper; and she watched the fire, thinking withal:  Now if some poor soul be abroad, they may see the smoke and seek hither, and I may comfort them with food and shelter and converse; or when night darkens, they may see the litten windows and come to me; wherefore shall the fire burn yet and the candles be lighted, for as warm as is the evening, even as if it were Yule-tide and the snow deep without, and the wind howling in the woodland trees.  And therewith she wept for longing of them that she loved.

But in a little she dried her tears, and reproached herself for her much softness; and she ate her supper when she had lighted a candle (for it was now dark), and again sat looking at the hearth, till she said:  Now am I getting soft again, and who knows but my softness may tempt the ghosts to come in to me.  I will give my hands somewhat to do.

Therewith her eye caught sight of the rents and rags of her old grey gown, and she smiled somewhat ruefully as she called to mind her gallant knight's array, which lay now on the shore of the evil and ruined isle; and her goodly attire of the days of the Five Crafts; and the rich raiment wherein her friends of the Castle of the Quest had clad her.  Then she arose and sought needle and thread and some remnants of green cloth, and did off the ragged coat and fell to patching and mending it, and so sat at her work in smock-sewing till the night was old and she was weary and sleep overcame her, and she lay down in her bed and slept dreamlessly till the sun was high next morning.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_18]

CHAPTER XVIII. THE WOOD-MOTHER COMETH TO BIRDALONE AND HEARETH HER STORY

Now Birdalone arose and bathed her and broke her fast, and then went about her work with the beasts and the dairy; but all that time seemed long to her till she had bow in hand and quiver on back, and was wending her way to the Oak of Tryst; and swift were her feet and her heart beat quick with hope of pleasure.

Forsooth no long tarrying had she, for scarce had she set her down beneath the oak, ere the wood-mother came forth from the thicket even as the first time when Birdalone saw her, and presently she had her arms about Birdalone and was kissing and clipping her.  Then they sat down together in the shade of the great tree, and the wood-mother made much of her friend with few words and those but simple, while Birdalone wept for joy.

At last spake Birdalone:  Wood-mother, my dear, I look in thy face, and I see thee that thou art nowise changed, so that thou callest to my mind the Birdalone that met thee here when she was straying from the House of Captivity like to a bird with a string to its leg.

Habundia smiled on her and said:  So it is that now thou lookest older than I.  Rounder and fuller is thy body, and thy limbs greater and fairer, and thy flesh sleeker; lovelier art thou in all wise, and such as I have thought of thee during these years, save that thy face is grown wiser and sadder than might be looked for.  Mother, she said, I am grown older than I should be by the tale of the years, for I have had joy and grief, and grief and joy, and grief again; and now that the years have worn, the grief abideth and the joy hath departed, save this joy of thee and the day of the meeting I have so often thought of.

Said the wood-wife:  Were I to hear the story of thee, I deem it most like that I would fain buy thy joy with thy grief, both that which has been and that which is to come.  And now I will ask thee right out to tell me all thy tale, as much as thou canst; and all thou canst tell to me, who am thine other self:  and I wot moreover that thou hast not told of me to any whom thou hast met in the world since we were last together:  is it not so?  In faith and in troth so it is, said Birdalone.  Said Habundia, after she had looked hard on Birdalone a while:  Now there is this I find in thee, that though thou callest me wood-mother still, thou art not my daughter as thou wert erewhile, nor I thy mother; and I know not whether to be glad or sorry thereof, since thou art even as much my friend as ever thou wert.  But much do I rejoice herein that thou hast not told any one soul of me.

Said Birdalone:  I must tell thee that part of the tale I shall tell thee is how I have found my mother in the flesh, and loved her sorely; and then I lost her again, for she is dead.

Quoth the wood-wife, smiling on her lovingly:  Then should I be even more thy mother than erst I was:  there will be something else in thy tale, sweetling.

Then Birdalone flushed very red, and she smiled piteously in Habundia's face; but then she put up her hands to hide the change therein which the anguish of longing wrought, and her shoulders shook and her bosom heaved, and she wept bitterly; but the wood-wife still looked on her smiling, and said softly at last:  Yea, how sweet it were to be grieved with thy pain.

But in a while Birdalone grew calm again and the very smile blossomed out in her face, and they kissed together.  Then Habundia rose up and looked on her, and said at last and laughed out withal:  One thing I must needs say, that thou hast not fetched thee raiment of price from the knighthood and the kings' houses; or have I not seen thy grey coat of old time, while thou wert living amidst the witch's cruelty? Yea forsooth, said Birdalone; thou needest not to ask this.  Verily not, said Habundia, nor why thou art not clad in the fair green gown which thou didst broider; for whiles I have seen the witch flaunting it on the wooden ugly body of her, and thou wouldst not wear it after she had cursed it with her foulness.  Is it not so?  Yea, it is even so, said Birdalone; dost thou love me the less therefor?  Habundia laughed again:  Were I a man of Adam's sons, said she, I might make thee many words on the seemliness of thy short coat, and the kindness of it, that it will be for ever slipping off one or other of thy shoulders.  But now am I at least enough thy mother, and thou art dwelling even so much in my house, that the next time we meet (and that shall be to-morrow) I shall fetch thee raiment which shall make us forget that thou camest back again to this land as naked as thou didst depart thence.

Birdalone reddened and hung down her head, but the wood-mother sat down beside her and kissed her and said:  But now forget all save thy tale, and tell all as closely as thou mayest, for I would lose nought thereof.  Yea, said Birdalone; and where shall I begin?  Said Habundia:  I know nought thereof save the beginning, that thou fledst away naked and escaped the witch; and the ending, to wit, that the Sending Boat failed thee at the last of the Wonder Isles, and that thou calledst on me not wholly in vain, whereas the witch was dead, and therefore there was nought to stay me from sending thee one of my trees and the wight thereof (whom belike I may show to thee one day) to save thee from the bottom of the deep water.

At that word Birdalone threw herself on the wood-wife and clipped and kissed her, and thanked her for the helping with all the dearest words she might.  But the wood-mother laughed for joy, and stroked her cheeks and said:  Now I deem thee my daughter again, whereas thou thankest me with such sweet passion for doing to thee as a kind mother needs must without any thought thereof.  And I bid thee, my dear, never again to go so far from me as that I may not easily help thee and comfort thee from out of my realm wherein I am mighty.  And now tell me all in thy dear speech.

Therewith Birdalone began her story without more ado, even as ye have heard it afore.  Yea and many more things than we can set down did she tell, for full filled she was with the wisdom of the wood.  And between whiles the wood-mother fed her with dainty meat and drink, such as Birdalone had never erst tasted the like of.  And by then she had got so far as her flight from the Isle of Increase Unsought, the sun was set and the twilight begun.  And the wood-wife said:  Now shalt thou go home to thine house; and have no fear of witch or evil thing, for I am not far from thee and will watch over thee.  Sweet is thy tale, my daughter, and dear are thy she-friends; and if ever it may be that I may do them any pleasure, fain were I; and that especially to thy Viridis, who meseemeth is both sweet and wise even as thou thyself art.  Nay, dost thou begrudge my loving her?  Nay, nay, said Birdalone, laughing; but I rejoice in it.  And hereafter when I tell thee how sorely they paid for helping me, I will bid thee to love them yet more than now thou dost.  Therewith they parted, and Birdalone came to her house; and on the way she made as it were a feigned tale in mockery of her old trouble, that there would be the witch-mistress awaiting her to whip her.  So that when she came to the door she was half frighted with her own mock, lest the witch might now at last have taken to walking.

But all was quiet when she entered with the last of the twilight, and she rested that night in all peace, as in the best of her days in the Five Crafts.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_19]

CHAPTER XIX. HABUNDIA HIDETH BIRDALONE'S NAKEDNESS WITH FAERY RAIMENT

Next morning Birdalone tarried about the house as little a while as she might, and then went hastening up to the wood; and when she came within sight of the Trysting Tree, lo! there was Habundia before her, and the hands of her busy turning over goodly raiment, so that it was well-nigh as if the days had gone back to the time of the Captivity, and the sitter under the oak was Birdalone herself dealing with her half-finished gown.

Joyously they met and embraced each other, and then spake the wood- wife:  Now, thou darling of the world, I have been no worse than my word, and if thou durst wear web of the Faery thou shalt presently be clad as goodly as ever thou wert down there amongst the knighthood; and then thy tale, my dear, and, if it may be, the wisdom of the barren wood-wife set thereto.

And therewith she laid on Birdalone's outstretched arms the raiment she had brought with her, and it was as if the sunbeam had thrust through the close leafage of the oak, and made its shadow nought a space about Birdalone, so gleamed and glowed in shifty brightness the broidery of the gown; and Birdalone let it fall to earth, and passed over her hands and arms the fine smock sewed in yellow and white silk, so that the web thereof seemed of mingled cream and curd; and she looked on the shoon that lay beside the gown, that were done so nicely and finely that the work was as the feather-robe of a beauteous bird, whereof one scarce can say whether it be bright or grey, thousand-hued or all simple of colour.  Birdalone quivered for joy of the fair things, and crowed in her speech as she knelt before Habundia to thank her:  then in a twinkling had she done off her beggar's raiment, and then the smock clung about her darling nakedness, and next the gown was shimmering all over her, and the golden girdle embraced her loins as though it loved them worthily; and Birdalone looked to the wood round about her and laughed, while Habundia lay in her place and smiled upon her with gentle loving- kindness.

But in a little while was Birdalone sobered; for the thought of how fair she should look to the eyes of her beloved when she was shown unto him on the day of days, thrust her light and eager pleasure aside; and she took up her shoes from the ground (for she had not done them on), and sat down beside the wood-wife and fell a-toying with the marvel of them; and thus without more ado began her tale again, whereas she had left it last even, when she had told of how the Sending Boat was speeding her over the waters toward the Isle of the Young and the Old.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_20]

CHAPTER XX. BIRDALONE TELLETH HABUNDIA OF HER LOVE FOR ARTHUR, AND GETTETH FROM HER PROMISE OF HELP THEREIN

Long they sat there that day, and until the sun was down, and by then had Birdalone little to tell of her story, for she was gotten therein to the days of the Five Crafts.  Many times had she wept and turned to Habundia for solace as she told, not without shame, but without any covering up, all the tale of her love for Arthur the Black Squire, and how she was surprised by the love of him, and of his wisdom and grace and loveliness.  And the wood-mother was ever as sweet and kind unto her as could be; yet might another than a lover have seen that much of all this was strange unto her, and she looked upon Birdalone as a child who has broken her toy, and is hard to comfort for the loss of it, though there be a many more in the world. But when it grew dusk as aforesaid, and it was time to part, she spake to Birdalone, and said:  True it is, my child, that thou hast lived long in these six years time; neither do I wonder at the increase of thy beauty, and the majesty thereof; for fair is the life thou hast lived, although thou hast been grieved and tormented by it at whiles.  And now I know what it is for which thou longest; and herein again will I play the mother unto thee, and seek about to fetch thee that thou wouldst have; so be not over-anxious or troubled; and thou mayest be good herein, as my fair child should be; for this I have noted in thee, that Love is not so tyrannous a master but that his servants may whiles think of other matters, and so solace their souls, that they may live despite of all.

Now was Birdalone arisen, and stood before her friend confused and blushing.  But Habundia put her two hands on her shoulders and kissed her, and said:  Go home now and sleep, and come again to-morrow and let us hear the last of thy tale; and when that is done, maybe I shall be able to do something for thine avail.

So they parted, and on the morrow Birdalone came again and told the remnant of her story, which was not so long now that the Black Squire was out of it.  And when she had done, Habundia kept silence awhile, and then she said:  One thing I will tell thee, that whereas erewhile it was but seldom indeed that any son of Adam might be seen in the woodland here, of late, that is, within the last three years, there be many such amongst us; and to our deeming they be evil beasts, more pitiless and greedy than any bear; and but that we have nought to do with them, for they fear us and flee from us, we should have destroyed them one and all.  And now that I have heard all thy story, it seemeth unto me not so unlike but these may be the remnants of the bands of the Red Hold, and that they have drifted hither fleeing before the might of thy friends of the knighthood.  Wherefore now, trust me that I will look into this, but I must needs be away from here for a little; so hold thy soul in patience though hear thou nought of me, and dwell quietly at home for seven days' space, and then come hither and find me, farewell now, my child!

So they kissed and departed; and Birdalone went home to the house, and wore the days thereafter doing what was needful about the stead, and wandering through the meadows, and swimming the waters about Green Eyot; and the days were not unrestful unto her.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_21]

CHAPTER XXI. HOW THE WOOD-WIFE ENTERED THE COT, AND A WONDER THAT BEFELL THEREON

But when it was the sixth day since those two had met, Birdalone arose in the morning and stood in the door of the house, and she looked toward the bent which went up to the wood and saw one coming down it, and knew it for Habundia clad in her huntress' raiment and bearing something over the left arm, for her bow was in her right hand.  So Birdalone ran to meet her, and embraced and kissed her, and was merry over her, and said:  Dear mother, thou farest far from thy fastness to-day.  Said Habundia:  There is nought in the meadows now save the neat and the goats and thou; of none of that folk am I afraid.  But mayhappen thou shalt be afraid to come with me into the depths of the wildwood, for thither would I lead thee.  I will be afraid of nought with thee beside me, said Birdalone.  But come now and look upon the house that I have won for me.  And she took her hand and led her along; and the wood-wife said no more till they were across the brook and standing by the porch.

Then said Birdalone:  Thou hast a green gown over thine arm; is that also for me?  Yea, certes, said Habundia; the old rag which thou hast on thee, and which thou lovest so sore, is not fine enough for my company; and the glitter-gown I gave thee may be too fine for the thorns and the briars, and moreover thou mayst be over-easily seen if thou bear that broidered sunshine mid the boughs.  Wherefore go in now and do on this other coat, though the faery have made it, and then come out to me with thy bow and thy quiver, and I shall find thee sandal-shoon and girdle withal.

Nay, wood-mother, said Birdalone, hallow my house by entering it, and eat a morsel with me and drink the wine of the horned folk ere we go our ways.

Habundia shook her head and knit her brows somewhat as she looked hard on the house; then she said:  I know not, Adam's daughter; I have little to do with houses, and doubt if a house be safe for me. And this one that the witch builded! and belike she buried some human being at one of its four corners.  Tell me, fair child, sawest thou ever here at night-tide the shape of a youngling crowned with a garland straying about the house?

Nay, never at all, said Birdalone.  Said the wood-wife:  Then maybe thou hast hallowed it with the wisdom and love of thee, and I may venture; and moreover I note that it is all builded of trees and the grass of the earth; and thou art free to use them by my leave.  But if aught befall of my coming under thy roof, heed it not too much, but think, whatsoever my aspect may be, I am thy wood-mother and wisdom-mother that loveth thee.  And I bid thee also wish with all thy might that my aspect may not change to thee.  Also, if I eat, thou wert best not to sign the meat as Adam's sons are wont.  Lead in then; for now am I grown wilful, and will enter whatever betide.

Birdalone marvelled at those words, but she fell to wishing strongly that her friend might not lose her lovely youthful shape either then or ever, and she took her hand, which trembled somewhat, and led her over the threshold; and when they were under the roof herseemed that the wood-mother dwindled in a wondrous way, though her face was as sweet and her limbs as shapely as ever; and she laughed shrilly yet sweetly, and spake in a thin clear voice:  Birdalone, my dear, wish strongly, wish strongly! though thou shalt see nothing worse of me than this.  And she was scarce three feet high, but as pretty as a picture.

Thereat indeed was Birdalone affrighted, but she wished all she might, and stooped down to kiss this little creature; and therewith again the wood-wife seemed to wax again as great and tall as ever she was, and her voice came full and strong again, as she laughed and said:  Now is it all over for this time, and I see how well thou lovest me; and I pray thee love me no less for this wonder thou hast seen in me.  But now it were better that I never go under a roof again.  And she took her arms about Birdalone and clipped her lovingly; and glad was Birdalone to feel her so strong and solid again.

Then they sat to the board and ate a simple meal of bread and cheese and wood-berries, and drank milk withal; and the wood-mother was merry, and the smiles danced over her face as she looked on Birdalone with all loving-kindness, so that Birdalone wondered what was toward; but so light-hearted and happy she grew, that she deemed it might be nought save good.

But when they had eaten, then Birdalone did off her old coat, which she said was meet enough for her daily toil, and did on the fair green hunting-gown and the sandal-shoon, and girt her with the fair girdle which Habundia had fetched her, and drew up the laps of her gown therethrough till her legs were all free of the skirts.  And Habundia looked on her, and laughed and said:  Now are these white and smooth legs as bad as the gleam-gown for the lying hid; but it may no better be, and thou must draw thy skirts down and stumble, if needs must be, when we come to the ambushment.

Birdalone reddened as she laughed at the word, and took down her bow and hung her quiver at her back and thrust her sharp knife into her girdle, and forth they went both of them, and were presently past the bent which went up from the meadows and in amongst Habundia's trees.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_22]

CHAPTER XXII. BIRDALONE WENDETH THE WILDWOOD IN FELLOWSHIP WITH HABUNDIA

Now as they went their ways lightly through the wood, spake Habundia and said:  Birdalone, my child, fair is the gold ring with the sapphire stone that the third finger of thy right hand beareth; seldom have I seen so fair a stone as that deep blue one; hangeth any tale thereby?  Said Birdalone:  Did I not tell thee thereof, wood- mother, how that my beloved who is lost gave it unto me the very last time I saw him, woe worth the while?  Nay, said Habundia, I mind not the tale.  But deemest thou he would know it again if he saw it? Yea, surely, said Birdalone, hanging her head; for when first he gave it, the gift was not to me, but to another woman.  And she held her peace, and went on with hanging head and all the glee faded out of her a while.

At last she turned to Habundia, and said:  I have now bethought me to ask thee whither we be going and on what errand; for at first I was so glad at heart, I know not why, and it was so merry to be wending the wood with thee freely, that I had no thought in me as to whither and wherefore.  But now wilt thou tell me?

Said the wood-wife:  How if I were to tell thee we were going a- hunting?  Birdalone said:  Then I should ask thee what like the quarry were.  And suppose it were men? said the wood-wife.  Birdalone turned somewhat pale.  My mother, she said, if we be going against some of those men of the Red Bands, I am not happy over it.  I am no warrior, and fear strokes.  Said Habundia, laughing:  Yet art thou a fell archer; and thou mayest shoot from an ambush of the thick leaves, since June is in to-day.  But neither would I slay or hurt any man, said Birdalone, but it were to save me from present death.

Habundia looked on her with a sly smile and said:  Well maybe though we take cover and get within wind of our quarry thou shalt not need to speed an arrow to him.  Have patience therefore.  For this is a strange beast which I have marked down; he is not ill to look on, and his voice, which we may well hearken, for whiles he singeth, is rather sweet than surly.  What meanest thou, mother? said Birdalone, growing red and then paler yet; what man is it? since thy calling him a beast is a jest, is it not?

Nay, said Habundia, I neither name him nor know him; only I deem him by no means to be one of the Red Band.  For the rest, he may be a man in a beast's skin, or a beast in a man's skin, for aught I know; whereas he seems, so far as I have seen him, to be not wholly man- like or wholly beast-like.  But now let us hold our peace of him till we be come nigher to his haunt.

So they went on their way, and Birdalone said but little, while the wood-wife was of many words and gay.  They made all diligence, for Birdalone was not soon wearied, and moreover as now she was anxious and eager to see what would befall, which she might not but deem would be something great.

They went without stay till past noon, when they were come to a little shady dale wherethrough ran a clear stream; there they rested and bathed them, and thereafter sat under the boughs and ate the dainty meat which the wood-wife provided, howsoever she came by it; and when they had rested a while, the wood-wife turned the talk once more unto Arthur the Black Squire, and would have Birdalone tell her all nicely what manner of man he was; and Birdalone was nothing loth thereto; for had she her will she had talked of him day-long.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_23]

CHAPTER XXIII. THE WOOD-WIFE BRINGETH BIRDALONE TO THE SIGHT OF ARTHUR IN THE WILDWOOD

Now they go on again, no less speedily than before, and rest but little, until it was hard on an hour before sunset.  And now Habundia began to go warily, as if they were come anigh to their journey's end and the thing that they sought.  They were come by now to a long bent of the forest well grown with big-boled oak-trees, not very close together, so that short fine greensward was all underneath them; and Habundia went heedfully from bole to bole, as if she would be ready to cover herself if need were; and Birdalone went after her, and was now flushed of face, and her eyes glittered, and her heart beat fast, and her legs trembled under her, as she went running from tree to tree.

So came they nigh to the crown of the bent, and before them were the oak-trees sparser and smaller as they went down the further side, which seemed by their sudden shortening to be steeper than the hither side; and betwixt them showed the topmost of thorn and whitebeam and logwood, intertwined with eglantine and honeysuckle and the new shoots of the traveller's joy.  There the wood-wife put forth her hand to bid Birdalone stay, who came up to her friend and stood before her eager and quivering:  and anon came the sound of a man's voice singing, though they could hear no words in it as yet amidst the rustle of the trees and the tumult of song which the blackbirds and throstles raised in the dale below them.

Then spake the wood-wife softly:  Hearken, we are right and the time is good, our beast is giving tongue:  now below us is the bent-side steep, and goeth down into a very little dale with a clear stream running amidst; and therein is the very lair of the thing that we are hunting.  Wherefore now let us slip warily down between the bushes till we get close to the bottom, and then belike we shall see the very creature quite close, and we shall then consider and think what we shall do with him.

Birdalone had no voice wherewith to answer her, but she stole quietly along by her side till they came to the bank of the dale and plunged into the thicket that flourished there, and fell to threading it, making them as small as might be.  But ere they had gone but a little way the wordless song of what was below had ceased, and they heard the sweet tingle of the string-play, and the wood-wife stayed her to hearken, and the smiles went rippling over her face and she beat time with her fingers; but Birdalone, she stared wildly before her, and would have scrambled down the bank straightway at all hazards, for that string-play was a melody of the Castle of the Quest, but Habundia withheld her by the arm.  And then suddenly the music died, and there came up a voice of wailing and lamenting, and Birdalone put her hands and held the palms tight against her ears, and was at point to cry out aloud herself; but Habundia drew a hand of her down and whispered into her ear:  Child, child, make thyself strong and forbear, and then perchance joy may come to thee; hold thy peace and come softly along with me!

So Birdalone forbore, and strove with her passion, though the sobs rent her bosom for a while; and by then the loud lamenting waned and was done, and the sound of sobbing came up from below, as it had been an echo of Birdalone's grief.

Then Habundia drew her on again till they saw the level of the dale and its stream piecemeal betwixt the leaves, and they had a glimpse of a man on the hither side of the stream; and again they went lower, till they were well-nigh on a level with the greensward of the dale; and as Birdalone knelt with head bent low, and her hands covering her eyes, the wood-wife put away from before her the thick leaves of a hazel-bush, and whispering said:  Child, child! look forth now and see what is before thee, and see if thou knowest him, or if he be strange to thee, and thy mother hath done nought for thee when all is said.

Birdalone looked up, pale and wild-eyed, and into the dale, and saw a man sitting on the grass by the stream-side with his head bowed down on to his knees and his face covered with his hands; he was clad but in two or three deerskins hung about him, with a strip of skin for a girdle, wherein was thrust a short sword; his brown hair hung down long and shaggy over his face.  Close by his side lay a little harp, and further off a short spear roughly hefted with an ash-staff.  He was beating the earth with his feet and writhing him about over them. And Birdalone looked, and her breath well-nigh failed her.  For presently he sat more quietly, and lifted up his head, and she saw his face that it was Arthur, her beloved; and now she durst not move lest he should spring up and flee away; and the mingled pain and longing within her was sweet indeed, but well-nigh deadly.

Now his hand sought round to his harp, and he took it in his arms and fondled it as it were, and his fingers went among the strings, and anon the voice of it came forth, and it was nought changed from the last time it spake, and Birdalone hearkened breathlessly, till the melody died again and Arthur looked about him and raised his face as a dog when it fares to howl.

Then Birdalone gave a great cry, and leapt forth out of the thicket and stood on the greensward with nought betwixt them two, and she stretched out her arms to her beloved and cried out:  O! no, no, no! do it not, I beseech thee, lest I deem that thou art all changed, and that the man and the dear heart beloved of thee has gone out of thee and left thee but a beast in a man's shape!

He leapt up as she spake, and thrust forward his head and looked fierce at her, and cried out:  What! art thou come again?  This is the second time I have seen thee, thou image of her that hath tormented me so long; of her that left me in my most need and hid herself away from me.  Hah! a man, sayest thou?  Did I not strive with it, and hold my manhood so long as I might; and at last it might no longer be, and I became a beast and a man-slayer?  But what avails it to talk with thee, since thou art but the image of her that hath wasted my life.  Yet perchance of the image I may make an end since I may not lay hand on the very destroyer herself; and, woe's me, how I loved her! yea, and do still; but not thee, O false image!

And forthwith he drew the blade from his girdle and sprang forward at Birdalone; and she cowered and cringed, but moved not else.  But therewithal the wood-wife came leaping through the bushes, and she nocked an arrow on her bended bow, and threatened him therewith, and cried out:  Thou man-beast, I will slay thee if thou hurt my child and my dear; so forbear!  Nay, I tell thee more, unless thou make her as glad at the sight of thee as I meant her to be, I will in the long run slay thee; so look to it.

He laughed and said:  What! there is another image of the love that wasted me, is there!  Nay, but by the Hallows, this new-comer is the first one, and the one who chattered at me is the second.  Or is it this, that all women now have the semblance of the evil one that has undone me, and there is nought else left?

And he stood staring at Birdalone and moved not a while; and she stood with her hands before her face cringing before him.  Then he raised his arm and cast the weapon far into the bushes of the bank- side, and then came forward and stood before Birdalone, and drew down her hands from her face and stared in the eyes of her, holding her by the two arms; and he said:  Thou hast forgotten now, belike, how fair a life we two might have lived if thou hadst not fled from me and spoiled me.

And thou! by the looks of thee, for thou art sleek and fair, though this moment thou art pale for fear of me, thou hast lived a happy life through all these years, with many a merry thing to think of: and dost thou deem that my life was happy, or that I thought of any merry thing, or of anything save my sorrow?  Dost thou doubt it? go ask the good spears of Greenford, or the Riders of the Red Hold, and the field of the slaughter!  If there was little joy there, less was there elsewhere.

He left go of her therewith and stood trembling before her, and she bowed down and put palm to palm and held them out to him as one who prays; and she knew not what she did.

Then he cried out with a lamentable cry and said:  O woe's me! for I have frighted her and scared the wit out of her, so that she knows not who I am nor what I would; and I would pray to her and beseech her to pity me, and not depart from me again or mock me with images of herself.

Then he went down on his knees to her, and he also joined his hands to pray to her; but it seemed as if she was stricken to stone, so wholly she moved not.  But for him, he sank his forehead to earth, and then he rolled over and his limbs stretched out, and his head turned aside and blood gushed out from his mouth.  But Birdalone shrieked out and cast herself on his body, and cried:  I have found him, and he is dead! he is dead, and I have slain him, because I was a timorous fool and feared him; and he was coming to his right mind and knew me for what I was!

But Habundia came and stood over them, and drew up Birdalone, and said:  Nay, nay, be comforted! for now he is thus, and the strength is gone out of him for a while, we may deal with him.  Abide, and I will fetch the blood-staunching herb and the sleepy herb, and then we will heal him, and he will come to his right mind and be a man again.

Therewith she hastened away and was gone but a little; and meanwhile Birdalone knelt down by her love and wiped the blood from him, and caressed his sword-hardened hands and moaned over him.  But when the wood-wife came back she put Birdalone aside once more, and knelt down by the squire and raised his head, and laid the blood-stauncher to his mouth and his heart, and muttered words over him, while Birdalone looked over her shoulder with her pale face; then the she-leech fetched water from the stream in a cup which she drew from her wallet, and she washed his face, and he came somewhat to himself, so that she might give him drink of the water; and yet more he came to himself.  So then she took the sleepy herb and bruised it in her hands and put in his mouth and again said words over him, and presently his head fell back and his eyes closed and he slept peacefully.

She stood up then and turned to Birdalone and said:  Now, my child, have we done all that we may do, save that we shall bring him to a place where the dew and the sun shall not torment him and sicken him; for he shall lie thus till the sun comes up to-morrow, or longer; and fear nor, for when he awaketh he shall be in his right mind, and shall know thee and love thee.  This I swear to thee by the earth and the sun and the woodland.

Said Birdalone, trembling yet:  O mother, but may I kiss him and caress him?  Yea, surely, said the wood-mother, smiling in her face, but be not too long over it, for lo! the last of the sun, and it were better that he be under cover ere the twilight falls.

Birdalone knelt down by her love quietly at that word, and fell to kissing him softly, and laid her cheek to his, and called him gentle names such as none can tell again without shame, till the wood-wife laid her hand on her shoulder and said kindly and sweetly:  Rise up now, for thou must make it enough for this present; thou shalt have time enough hereafter for more and much more.

So Birdalone arose and said:  How shall we bear him to his place? Shall I not take him by the shoulders and thou by the legs?  For I am stronger than thou after all these years.

Laughed the wood-wife:  Nay, little one, said she; thou knowest me not utterly as yet.  Thou shalt not bear him at all, nor any part of him; I am strong enough for more than that; see thou!  And she stooped down and took him up in her arms as if he were a little child, and stepped off lightly with him; but looked back over her shoulder and said to Birdalone:  But thou mayest walk by me and hold a hand of him as we go, though it will hinder me somewhat; but I know thine heart and would pleasure thee, my child.

Birdalone ran up to her and thanked her and kissed her, and took Arthur's left hand, while Habundia bore him on down the dale and out of it, and still along the stream till they came to a place where it was narrow on either side thereof, and a sheer rock came down so near to the water that there was but a strip of greensward three yards wide betwixt water and rock; and in the face of the rock was a cave wide enough for a man to enter by stooping somewhat.  Therein the wood-wife lightly bore Arthur, and Birdalone followed; and they found the cave dry and roomy within; there was a bed therein of dry heather and bracken, and thereon Habundia laid her burden, and said:  Now, my child, there is nought to do but abide till he comes to himself again, which may be some time to-morrow; and be of good cheer, for he will come to his right self, but he will be weak and humble; but I shall have meat and drink ready for him.  Now if thou wilt be ruled by me, thou wilt keep out of the way when he awakens; moreover, be thou not scared if I meet his awakening with another shape than that which thou hast known of me; for sure it is that it will trouble his wits over-much if again he seeth the two of us alike.  But fear not; for thy sake, my child, I will take no ugly shape, though it may well be less beauteous than thine.

I will do what thou wilt, mother, said Birdalone, for I see that thou art helping me all thou mayest; yet I beseech thee let me sit by him till the time of his awakening draweth nigh.

The wood-wife smiled and nodded yeasay on her, and they sat down, both of them, beside the sleeping man, and the day died into the night as they sat hearkening to the ripple of the brook and the song of the nightingales.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_24]

CHAPTER XXIV. THE WOOD-MOTHER CHANGETH HER FORM TO THAT OF A WOMAN STRICKEN IN YEARS

When the morrow came, there yet lay Arthur sleeping peacefully, and Birdalone awoke from the slumber which had at last fallen on her, and looked about her and saw not Habundia in the cave; so she arose and bent over Arthur and kissed him, and so went forth and stood in the door and looked about her.  And she was still dim-eyed with her just departed slumber and the brightness of the morning sunlight, and she scarce knew whether it were a part of a dream, or a sight that was verily before her, that she seemed to see one coming across the brook toward her, stepping heedfully from stone to stone thereof:  a woman stricken in years, but slim and trim and upright, clad in a gown of green cloth, with a tippet of some white fur.  When she was come on to the greensward she spake to Birdalone in a sweet voice, but thin with eld, and gave her the sele of the day; and Birdalone was somewhat afraid to see a newcomer, but she greeted her, drawing back a little from her shyly.  But the old woman said:  What maketh thee here, my daughter?  Dost thou not know that this is my land and my house, and that I am said not to be unmighty in these woods?

I pray thee pardon me if I have done amiss, said Birdalone; but here have I a sick friend, a young man, and I would pray thee suffer him to abide here in this cave a little longer; for there hath been also another friend, a woman, but she hath gone out while I slept, belike to gather simples, for she is wise in leechcraft, and is tending the sick man.  I pray thee humbly to suffer us lest we lose our friend.

As she spake, she heard the carline chuckle softly, and at last she said:  Why, Birdalone, my dear, dost thou not know me after all these years?  Look on me again, look! and thou shalt see that I am not so much changed from what thou sawest me last night.  I am still thine image, my dear, only I was the image of what thou wert, and now I the image of what thou shalt be when two score years and ten of happy life have worn for thee.  Tell me, am I now aught like to thy mother in the flesh?

How hast thou frighted me, mother, said Birdalone; I thought that my friend had forsaken me, and that perchance the new-comer was another witch like unto the old one, and that I was never to be at rest and happy.  But as to my mother in the flesh, nay, thou art not now wholly like unto her; and sooth to say I shall be fainer when thou hast thine own shape of me young back again, for I love thee not so much as now thou art.

The wood-wife laughed:  Well, she said, thou shalt not see over-much of me in this shape; and that the less because of something I shall now tell thee, to wit, that I have been thinking the matter over, and I would have thee leave us twain together alone before the young man awaketh.  I would have thee get thee home and abide him there; it shall not be long I promise thee; and this also, that he shall come home to thee sound in body and whole in limb.

Birdalone's countenance fell, and she said:  Why this second mind, mother? why, I pray thee?  Said Habundia:  I fear for thy love lest he be not strong enough to open his eyes upon thy face; but after he hath been a day in the woods, and I have spoken to him diversely and cheered him with the hope of meeting thee, he may well be strong enough to seek thee for a mile's length, and find thine house first and then thee.  So now wilt thou obey me?  Nay, if thou must needs weep, I will be gone into the thicket till thou hast done, thou wilful!  Birdalone smiled through her tears, and said:  I pray thee pardon my wilfulness, mother, and I will depart without turning back into the cave.  Nay, said Habundia, there is no need for so much haste as that:  I will in now, and do my leechdoms with the sick man. But do thou go across the stream, thou barefoot, and thou wilt find on the other side, by the foot of the quicken-tree yonder, honeycombs and white bread and a bicker of wild goats' milk.  Bathe thee then if thou wilt, and bring those matters over hither; and then shalt thou go in and kiss thy mate's sick face with thy fresh one, and thereafter shall we sit here by the ripple of the water and break our fast; and lastly, thou shalt go in and kiss again and then take to the road.  But tell me, deemest thou surely that thou canst find it again?  Yea, surely, mother, said Birdalone; I am wood-woman enough for that; and now I will do all thy will.  And therewith she stepped out lightly on to the greensward and sought up the stream till she found a smooth-grounded pool meet for her bath, and when that was done, she fetched the victual and came back to the wood-wife; then they two sat down together, and ate and drank while the water rippled at their feet.  But when they were done, Birdalone gat her into the cave again, and kissed the sleeping man fondly, and came forth lightly and stood a moment before the wood-wife, and said:  Tell me this at least, mother, when shall he be there?  To-morrow quoth the wood-wife; and, for my part, I would keep thee within doors and abide him there, lest there be trouble; for he may not yet be as strong as the strongest.  Birdalone hung down her head and answered not, but said presently:  Farewell, wood-mother, and be thou blessed.  Then she took up her bow and betook her lightly to the woodland way, and the wood-wife stood looking at her till the thicket had hidden her, and then turned back and went into the cave.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_25]

CHAPTER XXV. THE WOOD-WIFE HEALETH AND TENDETH THE BLACK SQUIRE

She stood over Arthur for a minute or two, and then stooped down and whispered a word in his ear, and presently he stirred on the bed and half opened his eyes, but straightway turned on his side, as if to gather sleep to him, but she took him by the shoulder and said in a clear voice:  Nay, knight, nay; hast thou not slept enough? is there nought for thee to do?  He sat up in the bed and rubbed his eyes, and his face was come to its wholesome colour, and his eyes looked out quietly and calmly as he looked about the cave and saw the wood-wife standing by him; and he spake in a voice which was somewhat weak, but wherein was no passion of rage or woodness:  Where am I then? and who art thou, dame?  She said:  Thou art in a cave of the woodland, and I am for one thing thy leech, and meseemeth thou desirest to eat and to drink.  He smiled and nodded his head; and she fetched him the milk, and he drank a long draught, and sighed thereafter, as one who is pleased; and she smiled on him, and fetched him the bread and the honey, and he ate and drank again, and then lay down and fell fast asleep.  And she suffered his slumber for two hours or so, and then awoke him again; and again he asked where he was and what was she, but she said as before.  And said she:  The next thing thou hast to do is to arise, as thou well mayest, and take this raiment, which is fair and clean, and go wash thee in the brook and come back to me; and then we will talk, and thou shalt tell me of how it was with thee, and peradventure I may tell thee somewhat of how it shall be with thee.  As she spoke she went to a coffer which stood in a nook of the cave, and drew forth from it a shirt and hosen and shoon, and a surcoat and hood of fine black cloth, and a gilded girdle and a fair sword, red-sheathed, and said:  These may serve thy turn for the present, so take them and don them, and thou shalt look like a squire at least, if not a knight.

So he arose as one in a dream and went out; but as he passed by her she saw something gleaming on his breast, and noted that it was Birdalone's fair sapphire ring which hung about his neck; so she smiled, and said under her breath:  Crafty is my dear daughter!  But that shall save me some words at least.  And she abided his return.

Anon he cometh back clad in the fair raiment, with the sword by his side; and the wood-wife smote her palms together and cried out:  Now indeed thou art fair and well-liking, and a fair lady might well take pleasure in beholding thee.

But his brow was knit, and he looked sullen and angry, and he said: What is all this play? and where gattest thou this ring which I found e'en now about my neck?  And who art thou, and why have I been brought hither?

His eyes looked fiercely on her as he spake, holding out his palm with the ring lying thereon.  But the wood-wife answered:  Many questions, fair youth! but I will tell thee:  the play is for thine healing and pleasure, whereas both sick hast thou been and sorry.  As to the ring, it is thou hast got it and not I.  But I will tell thee this, that I have seen it on the finger of a fair damsel who haunteth the woodland not far hence.  As to what I am, that were a long tale to tell if I told it all; but believe this meanwhile, that I am the lady and mistress of hereabouts, and am not without power over my folk and my land.  And as to why thou wert brought hither, I brought thee because I had no better house handy for a sick man to lie in.

Then Arthur stood a long while considering the ring that lay on his palm, and at last he put his hand on the wood-wife's shoulder, and looked into her face beseechingly, and said:  O mother, if thou be mighty be merciful withal, and have pity on me!  Thou callest me a youth, and so I may be in regard to thee; but I tell thee it is five long years and there hath been no other thought in my heart but what was loathsome to me, and it hath worn and wasted my youth, so that it waneth and withereth and is nought.  O, if thou be mighty, bring me to her that I may see her at least one time before I die.  And therewith he fell down on his knees before her, and kissed the hem of her gown, and wept.  But she drew him up and looked on him with the merry countenance of a kind old woman, and said:  Nay, nay, I am not so hard to be won to thy helping that thou needest pray so sore and weep:  here need we tarry no longer, and if thou wilt come with me we shall go seek the damsel who bore this ring, though how it should come to thee why should I know?  Neither do I know if the said ring- bearer be the one woman whom thou needest.  But I will tell thee at once that she is a dear friend of mine.

Then Arthur threw his arms about her, and kissed her cheeks and blessed her, while she laughed on him and said:  Nay, fair sir, if thou wilt do so much with the withered branch, what wilt thou with the blossom of the tree?  And he was abashed before her, but hope made his heart to dance.

So the wood-wife took up her bow, slung her quiver at her back, and girt her short sword to her, and then led him forth, and so into the thicket out of the dale and forth into the oaken bent, and lightly she led him thereafter through the woodland.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_26]

CHAPTER XXVI. THE BLACK SQUIRE TELLETH THE WOOD-WIFE OF HIS DOINGS SINCE BIRDALONE WENT FROM THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST

As they went Habundia said to Arthur:  Now shalt thou talk and tell for the shortening of the way, and let us know somewhat of thy story. But first I must tell thee, for thou mayest not know it, so witless as then thou wast, that yesterday we found thee down in the dale yonder, playing the string-play sweetly indeed, but otherwise dight like a half beast more than a man, so that we wondered at thee and pitied thee.

Arthur knit his brows as if he strove with some memory and might not master it; then he said:  Thou sayest We, who then was the other? Said Habundia:  I had a dear friend with me.  Quoth he:  And did she pity me also?  Yea, said the wood-wife, else scarce had she been a friend to me.  O let us on swiftly, said Arthur, so long as the time may be!  And they quickened their pace and ate up the way speedily.

Presently spake the wood-wife again:  Now for the tale of thee, fair sir; yet will I shorten it somewhat by telling thee that I know thy name, that thou art Arthur the Black Squire of the Castle of the Quest.  He stared at that word, and said:  How knewest thou this? how couldst thou guess it, who hast never seen me erst?  A friend told me, said she; too long it were as now to tell thee thereof.  Rather do thou tell me how thou didst fare when ye found thy friend gone from the castle that time ye came home from the winning of the Red Hold.

Arthur stared astonished, and said:  What is it?  Dost thou verily know my love? or art thou a sorceress and knowest somewhat of me by spell-work?  I am somewhat more than a sorceress, may-happen, said the wood-wife; but heed it not, since I am thy friend to-day, but tell me what I ask, that I may have all the tale of thee; it will serve for the shortening of the way.  Said Arthur:  And who but I needeth it as short as may be? so stand we not loitering here, and I will talk as we wend on speedily.

On they sped therefore, and said Arthur:  How did I fare? as one stunned, mother, and knew not what had happened; and when I heard their babble of how she had done wrong here and right there, I was driven half mad by it, so that I hastened back to the Red Hold, and became the captain of Greenford, to hunt down their scattered foemen; for I said to myself that needs must I rage and slay, and that were worser amongst my friends than mine unfriends.  What then? that business came to an end; though all the ill men were not slain, but all were driven away from the parts of Greenford; and sooth to say they durst not come anywhere nigh where they heard of me.  Then became each day like every other, and the thought of my hope and my despair ate mine heart out, and I was of no avail unto any.  Now it so happened, amidst my many battles and chases, I had hunted the bands of the Red Hold into the northwest marches of the woodland; and I noted that even they, howsoever hard bestead, and the worst of men to boot, would scarce at the first be driven into the thickets thereof, though at last, whether or no they have made covenant with the devils, there I know not, they have betaken them to the depths of the wood and have borne off women from the dwellings and got children on them, and are like to breed an evil folk.  That then I noted that this Evilshaw was a dwelling loathed and desert, and little like it was that any would meddle with me there.  Three years had worn since I was cast away at the Castle of the Quest by her that loved me, who must needs sacrifice both her and me to the busy devil of folly; and I also deemed that if I sought for her I should not find her; and yet more forsooth, that if I found her she would be as hard unto me as when she fled from me.  And as for me, I was gotten hard and crabbed, and no man, if his heart would let him, would have aught to say to me.  So I gat me away from the Red Hold, as I had from the Castle of the Quest, and I gave out that I would enter into religion, and forbade any man to follow me.  Neither did any desire it.  First of all I set me down at the very outskirts of the woodland, and raised me a bower there, rude and ill-shapen.  Few folk came anigh me, and yet some few, charcoal-burners, and hunters of the edges of the wood, and suchlike.  These deemed me a holy man, whereas I was but surly. Somewhat also they feared me, whereas in some of their huntings or goings and comings after prey I had put forth all my strength, eked out by the lore of knighthood, which was strange to them.  One man there was of them who was fashioned of the minstrel craft by nature, and who forgathered with me specially, till we became friends, and he was a solace to me, with his tales and his songs of a rougher people than I had been wont to deal with.  But when I had been in that place for two years he died of a sickness, and I was left lonely, and my soreness of heart fell upon me till I scarce knew what next I should do.  So I fared away yet deeper into the wildwood, taking with me the harp which my friend had given me before he died.  It was summer, and I wandered about ever deeper into the wood, until belike I had scarce been able to win out of it if I had tried.  At last, when the autumn came, I built myself again some sort of a bower in a clearing of the wood wherein was water, and the resort of plenteous venison.

What befell next?  My mind is not over-clear concerning it all, for I was now becoming more of a beast than a man.  But this I know, that some men of the bands whom I had chased happened on me.  They knew me not for their old foeman, but of their kind it was to torment and slay any man whom they might lightly overcome.  Yet was not the battle so over-light but that I slew and hurt divers of them ere they got me under and stripped me and bound my hands and tormented me, after the manner that the devils shall do with them when they shall go to their reward.  Yet somehow I lived, though they deemed me dead, and I crawled away thence when they were gone; and somehow I was healed of my body, but I was confused of my wit thereafter, and now can call to mind but little of what befell me as I strayed from place to place, save that I remember I was hapless and heart-sore ever: and also meseemeth that I saw visions at whiles, and those who had been in my life before these things, their images would come before me to mock me as I sat singing whiles and whiles playing the string- play (for my harp I bore ever with me); and whiles I bewailed me, and called for help on them that would not or might not help me.  And now I may not even tell the years of my abiding in the desert, how many they be.  But I pray thee let us on more swiftly yet.

Said the wood-wife:  Thou hast told me but little of thy life, Black Squire, but it is enough maybe; and I see that thou mayst not tell me more because thou hast thy mind set on what may betide thee when this day is over.  But thou must know that thou hast come into the wood of Evilshaw, wherein, besides those savage men who quelled thee and their like, there be uncouth things no few, and wights that be not of the race of Adam; wherefore no great marvel is it that thou sawest visions, and images of them that were not by thee.  Yea, said he, but one vision had I that confused and overcame me more than all others, and meseemeth that came to me not long ago.  For first I saw the shape of her that my soul desireth ever, and it wept and lamented for me; and then for a little I seemed as if I were coming forth from my confusion of wit; when lo! there issued from the thicket another image of my beloved and blamed me and threatened me.  God wot good cause there was of the blame.  But tell me, mother, since thou callest thyself wise, what may this portend?

The wood-wife laughed:  Since I am wise, said she, I will foretell thee good days.  And now we will talk no more of thee or thy love or thy sorrow, but since thou wilt so fiercely devour the way, I will tell thee a tale or two of this wood and its wights to save us from over-much weariness.

So did she, talking and telling as they went; and she went on a pace before him, and howsoever long or hardly he might stride he might not overgo her.  And so fast they went, that they were within a little way of the Oak of Tryst a good while before the sun had set, though they had set out from the cave three hours after the hour when Birdalone and the wood-wife had left the House under the Wood on the yesterday.  They had come to a steep rock that rose up from a water's side, and the wood-wife bade stay, whether Arthur would or no, and she made him eat and drink, bringing the victual and wine from out of a cleft in the said rock.  And she held him there till the night was come and there was a glimmer of the rising moon in the east, and he was ill at ease and restless; but still she held him there till the moon rose high and shone upon them, and the shadows of the oak-boughs lay black all around.

Then she bade him arise, and let him on to the Oak of Tryst, yea and somewhat beyond it toward the great water.  Then she spake to him: Black Squire, I am now come home, and will lead thee no further; I was deeming that we should have slept in the wood a good way from this, and then would I have brought thee on thy way to-morrow morning; but the eagerness of thine heart hath made thy feet so speedy, that we be here somewhat rathe, and yet I am not ill-pleased therewith.  Then she turned him about and said:  Look down the bent and tell me what thou seest.  He said:  I see the boles of goodly trees, and betwixt them the gleaming of a great water.  She said:  Go thitherward then while the moon is yet at her brightest, and thou shalt presently come to wide meads lying along the water, and a stream running through them.  Enter then into the meads and look about thee, and thou shalt see a little house (there is none other nigh) standing just across the said stream; go up thither boldly and crave guesting from whomsoever thou shalt find there, and maybe things shall go after thy mind.  More than this I may not do for thee.  Farewell then, and if thou wilt thou mayst meet me again; that is to say, that which is verily me:  but it is like that this shape which hath been striding on with thee daylong thou shalt not see any more.

He looked on her wondering, for she seemed to grow goodly and stately before his eyes.  But even as he stretched forth his hand to take hers, she turned about suddenly and fared into the wood out of his sight, wending full as swiftly as might have been looked for.  Then he drew his sword and turned his face from the wood, and went down toward the water.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_27]

CHAPTER XXVII. SIR ARTHUR COMETH TO THE HOUSE UNDER THE WOOD

So came Arthur into the meadows, and went eagerly but warily over the dewy grass.  And here and there a cow rose before him and went bundling down the mead a little way, and the owls cried out from behind him, and a fox barked from the thicket's edge.  Then he found himself on the stream-side, and he stayed and looked from side to side, and lo! on the other side of the stream a little house that looked familiar to him as a yeoman's dwelling in the builded lands, and the thatch thereon shone under the moon and its windows were yellow with candle-light; and so homely it seemed to him, that he thrust his sword into the sheath and lightly crossed the brook, and came to the door and laid his hand upon the latch and lifted it and shoved the door, and all was open before him.

His eyes, coming from the night, dazzled with the bright light of the candles, but he saw a fair woman rising up in her place, and he said: May a traveller in the woodland be welcome here to-night, dealing with all in all honour?

But the woman came toward him holding out her two hands, and ere he could cry out that he knew her, she had thrown herself upon him, and had cast her arms about him and was kissing his face, and murmuring: O welcome indeed! welcome, welcome, and welcome!  And so sore did his past grief and his desire move him, that he was weak before her, and held down his hands and let her do.  And both those were breathless with wonder and joy and longing; and they stood aloof a little in a while and looked on each other, she with heaving bosom and streaming eyes, and he with arms stretched forth and lips that strove with his heart's words and might not utter them; but once more she gave herself to him, and he took her in his arms strongly now, so that she was frail and weak before him, and he laid his cheek to her cheek and his lips to her lips, and kissed her eyes and her shoulders and murmured over her.  And then again they stood apart, and she took him by the hand and led him to the settle, and set him down by her, and herself by him; and a while they said nought.  Then she spake as one who had come to herself and was calm, though her heart was aflame for love:  Tell me, love, when thine hand was on the latch didst thou look to find me here in this house? for thine hand it was that waked me; I heard not thy foot before the threshold, for I was weary and slumbering.  Alas! that I lost the sound of thy feet!  He spake, and his voice sounded false unto him, as if it came from another's mouth: I wot not; the woman that led me nearby seemed to bid me hope.  Then he said:  Nay, the sooth is that I should have died if I had not found thee here; I have been sick so long with hoping.

Again were they silent till she said:  I would that I had heard thee crossing the brook.  But the wood-wife bade me look for thee no earlier than to-morrow; else had I time enough; and I would have made the house trim with the new green boughs, and dighted our bed with rose blooms; and I would have done on me my shining gown that the wood-wife gave me.  For indeed she was but clad in her scanty smock and nought else.

But he laid his head on her bosom and kissed her all about, and said: Nay, my own love, it is well, it is better.  And she murmured over him:  O friend, my dear, think not that I had will to hide me from thee.  All that is here of me is thine, and thine, and thine.

And she took his hand and they arose together, and she said:  O friend, I fled from thee once and left thee lonely of me because I deemed need drave me to it; and I feared the strife of friends, and confusion and tangle.  Now if thou wilt avenge thee on me thou mayest, for I am in thy power.  Yet will I ask thee what need will drive thee to leave me lonely?

He said:  The need of death.  But she said:  Mayhappen we shall lie together then, as here to-night we shall lie.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_28]

CHAPTER XXVIII. FAIR DAYS IN THE HOUSE OF LOVE

On the morrow it was sweet times betwixt those twain, and what was hard and fierce of their love they seemed to have put behind them.  A dear joy it was to Birdalone that day to busy herself about the housekeeping, and to provide whatsoever seemed now, or had seemed to her in her early days, to be dainties of their meadow and woodland husbandry, as cream and junkets and wood-fruit and honey, and fine bread made for that very occasion.

Withal she was careful as a mother with a child that he should not over-weary himself with the sun of the early summer, but rather to follow the brook up into the wood and lie adown in the flecked shadow and rest him wholly, as if there were nought for him to do but to take in rest all that was done for his service, both by the earth and by the hands and nimble feet of Birdalone.  And as she was wilful in other ways of her cherishing, so also in this, that for nought in that daylight would she go anywise disarrayed, nay not so much as to go barefoot, though he prayed her thereof sorely, and told her that fairer and sweeter she was in her smock alone than in any other raiment.  For in the morning she went in her woodland green let down to her heels, and when the day wore towards evening, and the wind came cool from over the Great Water, then she did on her wonder- raiment which the wood-wife had given her, and led Arthur over the meadows here and there, and went gleaming by the side of the black- clad man along the water's lip.  And they looked forth on to Green Eyot and Rock Eyot, and stood by the shallow bight where she had bathed those times; and they went along to the dismal creek where the Sending Boat was wont to lie, and where yet lay the scattered staves of it; and then along the meadow-land they went from end to end, resting oft on the flowery grass, till the dews began to fall and the moon cast shadows on the greensward.  Then home they fared to the house; and again on the way must Birdalone feign for their disport that the witch was come back again, and was awaiting her to play the tyrant with her; and Arthur fell in with her game, and kissed her and clipped her, and then drew his sword and said:  By All-hallows I shall smite off her head if she but lay a finger on thee.

So they played like two happy children till they came to the door of the house, and Birdalone shoved it open, and they two looked in together and saw nought worse therein save the strange shadows that the moon cast from the settle on to the floor.  Then Birdalone drew in her love, and went about lighting the candles and quickening a little cooking fire on the hearth, till the yellow light chased the moon away from the bed of their desire.

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_29]

CHAPTER XXIX. THOSE TWAIN WILL SEEK THE WISDOM OF THE WOOD-WIFE

Again next day was their life such as it had been the day before; and as they lay in cool shadow of a great oak, Birdalone fell to telling Arthur all the whole story of her dealings with the wood-wife, and how that she had so loved her and holpen her, that through her love and her help she had escaped the witch and her snares, who would have turned her into a half-devil for the undoing of manfolk.  And how that the said wood-wife had never appeared to her but as an image and double of herself, save on the time when she played the leech to him. Then she told him how all had gone when the wood-wife had sought him out for the fulfilment of their love, and of the dreadful day when they had come upon him out of his wit and but little manlike.

Then she asked, would he, within the next day or two, that they should go see the wood-wife together and thank her for her help, and bring him within the ring of her love and guarding; and he yeasaid it with a good will.

After this she would have him tell her of how things had gone with him since that evil day when he had come home from the Castle of the Quest and found her gone.  So he told her somewhat, and of his dole and misery, and his dealings with the foemen of Greenford; but yet scantly, and as one compelled; and at last he said:

Dear love, since thou art cossetting me with all solace of caresses, I pray thee remember my trouble and grief, how sore they were, and do with me as with a sick man getting well, as I wot surely thou wouldest do; and do thou that which is at this present the softest and merriest to me, and that forsooth is, that thou shouldest talk and tell, and I should hearken the sweetness of the music, and only here and there put in a word to rest thee and make thy tale the sweeter.

She laughed with love on him, and without more ado fell to telling everything she might think of, concerning her days in the House of Captivity, both when she was but a bairn, and when she was grown to be a young woman; and long was she about the tale, nor was it all done in one day; and a multitude of things she told him which are not set down in this book.

In the evening when they were going again to and fro the meads, it was other talk they fell on, to wit, of their fellows of the Quest, both of Sir Hugh and the three lovely ladies:  and now was Arthur nought but kind when he spake of Atra, nor spake Birdalone otherwise; but she said:  I shall now say a hard word, yet must thou bear it, my loveling, since we twain are now become one, and have but one joy together and one sorrow.  Deemest thou that Atra is yet alive?  Sooth it is, said Arthur, it may well be that I have slain her.  And what may we do by her if ever we fall in with her alive? said Birdalone. I wot not, said Arthur; some would say that we have done penance for our fault, both thou and I; and what other penance may we do, save sundering from each other?  And by God above I will not.  By thine head and thine hands I will not, said Birdalone.

So said they; but therewith their eyes told tales of the fair eve and the lovely meadows, and the house, the shrine of the dear white bed no less sweet to them than erst; but then presently Birdalone stayed her love, and took her arms about him, and each felt the sweetness of the other's body, and joy blossomed anew in their hearts.  Then fell Arthur to telling of the deeds and the kindness of Baudoin, whom never again they should see on the earth; and they turned back home to the house, and on the way spake Birdalone:  This is what I would we should do:  whereas I have sought thee and thou me, and we have found each other, whereas ye sought me when I went astray in the Black Valley of the Greywethers, and before, when ye three sought your own loves, now I would that we should seek our fellows and have joy in them, and thole sorrow with them as in days gone by.

Spake Arthur:  Dear is the rest with thee in this wilderness; yet were it a deed of fame, and would bring about a day of joy, might we find our friends again, and knit up the links of the fellowship once more.  But thou the wise and valiant! belike thou hast in thine head some device whereby this might be set about.

Birdalone said:  Simple is my device, to wit, that we ask one who is wiser than I.  Let us tarry not, but go to-morrow and see the wood- wife and talk with her concerning it.  Then she smiled upon him and said:  But when thou seest her, wilt thou be aghast if she come before us in my shape of what I was five years agone, or six?

Nay, nay, he said, thou art not so terrible as that; not very far do I run from thee now.  And therewith they kissed and embraced, and so entered the House of Love.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_30]

CHAPTER XXX. THEY HAVE SPEECH WITH HABUNDIA CONCERNING THE GREEN KNIGHT AND HIS FELLOWS

When the morrow was they arose and went their ways toward the wood, and Birdalone in her hunter's coat, quiver at back and bow in hand. They came to the Oak of Tryst, and Birdalone was at point to call on the wood-wife by the burning of a hair of hers, when she came lightly from out the thicket, clad as Birdalone, and her very image.  She stood before them with a glad countenance, and said:  Welcome to the seekers and finders.  But Arthur stepped forth and knelt before her, and took her right hand and kissed it, and said:  Here I swear allegiance to thee, O Lady of the Woods, to do thy will in all things, and give thee thanks from my heart more than my tongue can say.

Quoth the wood-wife:  I take thine allegiance, fair young man, and mine help shalt thou have henceforward.  Then she smiled and her eyes danced for merriment, and she said:  Yet thy thanks meseemeth for this while are more due to the wise carline who brought thee through the woods two days ago, and only left thee when the way was easy and clear to thee.

Lady, said Arthur, I know now how great is thy might, and that thou canst take more shapes than this only; and humbly I thank thee that for us thou hast taken the shape that I love the best of all on the earth.

Said the wood-wife:  Stand up, Black Squire, and consider a little what thou wouldst have me do for thee, while I have speech with mine image yonder.  And therewith she came up to Birdalone, and drew her a little apart, and fell to stroking her cheeks and patting her hands and diversely caressing her, and she said to her:  How now, my child, have I done for thee what I promised, and art thou wholly happy now? O yea, said Birdalone; if nought else befell us in this life but to dwell together betwixt the woodland and the water, and to see thee oft, full happy should we be.

Nevertheless, said Habundia, art thou not come hither to ask somewhat of me, that ye may be happier?  So it is, wise mother, said Birdalone; grudge not against me therefor, for more than one thing drives me thereto.  I will not grudge, said the wood-wife; but now I will ask thy mate if he has thought what it is that he will have of me.  And she turned to Arthur, who came forth and said:  Lady, I have heard thee, and herein would we have thee help us:  There were erst six fellows of us, three caries and three queans, to whom was added this sweetling here; but one of them, to wit the Golden Knight, was slain, and for the rest . . .  Yea, I know, said the wood-wife; my child here hath told me all; and now ye wot not where they are or if they be yet alive, all or any of them.  Now is it not so that ye would seek these friends, if it were but to greet them but once, and that ye would ask of the wise wood-wife help to find them?  Is there any more of the tale?  Nay, lady, said Arthur.

Said she:  Well then, that help shall ye have, were it but for the sake of that little Viridis whereof my child hath told me.  Wherefore abide tidings of me for a fourteen days, and seek not to me ere then; and meantime fear not, nor doubt me, for many messengers I have, and ever may I do somewhat if the end of the tale is to be told in these woodlands:  and I deem these friends will not be hard to draw hither, for it is most like that they be thinking of you and longing for you, as ye for them.  And now I will depart on my business, which is yours, and do ye be happy to-day in the woodland, and to-morrow in the meadows and by the water; and let no trouble weigh down your happy days.

Therewith she flitted away from them, when she had kissed them both. But when she was gone they fared away together deep into the wood, and were exceeding merry disporting them, and on their return they gat them venison for their meat, and so came back to the House of Love when the moon was up and shining brightly.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_31]

CHAPTER XXXI. HABUNDIA COMETH WITH TIDINGS OF THOSE DEAR FRIENDS

Wore the days thenceforth merrily; and one day it was delight in the wide meads, and another they went a long way west along the water- side, and so into another meadow-plain, smaller than their home- plain, which Birdalone had never erst come into; and three eyots lay off it, green and tree-beset, whereto they swam out together.  Then they went into the wood thereby in the heat of the afternoon, and so wore the day, that they deemed themselves belated, and lay there under a thorn-bush the night through.

Another day Birdalone took her mate over on to Green Eyot and Rock Eyot, and showed him all the places she was used to haunt.  And they had their fishing-gear with them, and angled off the eyots a good part of the day, and had good catch, and swam back therewith merrily. And Birdalone laughed, and said that it seemed to her as if once again she were ransoming her skin of the witch-wife by that noble catch.

Divers times also they fared into the wood, and thrice they lay out the night there in some woodlawn where was water; and on one of these times it happed that Arthur awoke in the grey dawn, and lay open-eyed but not moving for a little; and therewith he deemed he saw the gleam of war-gear in the thicket.  So he kept as still as he might, but gat his sword out of its sheath without noise, and then leapt up suddenly, and sprang thitherward whereas he had seen that token, and again saw armour gleam and heard some man crashing through the underwood, for all was gone in one moment.  So he woke up Birdalone, and they bended their bows both of them, and searched the thicket thereabouts heedfully, arrow on string, but found nought fiercer than a great sow and her farrow.  So came the full day, and they gat them back to their meadows and their house; but thereafter were they warier in going about the woodland.

In all joyance then wore the days till the fifteenth, and in the morning early they went their ways to the Oak of Tryst, and had no need to call Habundia to them, for presently she came forth out of the thicket, with her gown gathered up into her girdle and bow in hand.  But she cast it down and ran up to Birdalone, and kissed her and clipped her, and then she took a hand of Arthur and a hand of Birdalone, and held them both and said:  My child, and thou dear knight, have ye still a longing to fall in with those friends of yours, and to run all risk of whatsoever contention and strife there may be betwixt you thereafter?  Yea, certes, said Arthur; and even so said Birdalone.  Well is that then, said the wood-wife; but now and for this time, ere I help you, I shall put a price upon my help, and this is the price, that ye swear to me never wholly to sunder from me; that once in the year at least, as long as ye be alive and wayworthy, ye come into the Forest of Evilshaw, and summon me by the burning of a hair of mine, that we may meet and be merry for a while, and part with the hope of meeting once more at least.  And if ye will not pay the price, go in peace, and ye shall yet have my help in all other matters that may seem good unto you, but not in this of joining your fellowship together.  How sayest thou, Birdalone, my child?  How sayest thou, Black Squire, whom, as meseemeth, I have delivered from a fate worse than death, and have brought out of wretchedness into bliss?

Spake Birdalone:  Had I dared, I would have bidden thee to swear to me even such an oath, to wit, that thou wouldst never wholly sunder thee from me.  How then may I not swear this that thou biddest me, and that with all joy and trustiness?

Spake Arthur:  Lady, had I no will to swear oath for thy sake, yet with a good will would I swear it for my true-love's sake who loveth thee.  Yet verily of mine own will would I swear it joyfully, were it for nought else save to pleasure thee, who hast done so kindly by me, and hath given me back my manhood and my love, which else I had miserably lost.

Spake the wood-wife:  It is well again.  Join hands then, and swear as I have bidden you by the love ye bear each other.

Even so they did, and then the wood-wife kissed them both and said: Now do I deem you earth's very children and mine, and this desire of yours is good, and it shall be done if I may bring it about; yet therein the valiance and wisdom of you both may well be tried.  For this have I found out by my messengers and others, that your friends are alive, all of them; and they have thought of you in their inmost hearts, and have long determined that they must needs go seek you if they are to live lives happy and worthy.  Furthermore, their quest hath drawn them hither to Evilshaw (nor say I that I have been nothing therein), and they are even now in the wood.  But ye shall know that peril encompasses them; for they fare but a few, and of those few be there two traitors who are minded to deliver them to the men of the Red Company, unto whom three women as fair as your she- friends were a prize indeed.  Wherefore the Red Folk are dogging them, and will fall upon them when they find the occasion.  But I shall see to it that the occasion shall be in time and place where they shall not be unholpen.  Now what ye have to do for your parts, is to waylay the waylayers, and keep watch and ward anigh the road they must needs take, and to fall on when need is.  But this again I shall see to, that your onset fail not.

But now ye may say:  Since thou art mighty, why shouldst not thou thyself take our friends out of the hands of these accursed, as thou couldst well do, and we to take no part therein?  My friends, this might indeed well be; but thou, Birdalone, hast told me the whole tale, and how that there be wrongs to be forgiven which cannot be made right, and past kindness to be quickened again, and coldness to be kindled into love, and estrangement into familiar friendship; and meseems that the sight of your bodies and your hands made manifest to the eyes of them may do somewhat herein.  Yet if otherwise ye think, then so let it be, and go ye back to the House under the Wood, and in three days' time I will bring you your friends all safe and sound.

Now they both said that they would not for aught that they should have no hand in the deliverance of them; so the wood-wife said:  Come with me, and I shall lead you to the place of your ambush.

Then all they went on together, and fared a long way west, and toward the place where erst they two had found Arthur; and at last, two hours before sunset, they came to where was a glade or way between the thickets, which was as it were a little beaten by the goings of man-folk.  And the wood-wife did them to wit, that the evil folk aforesaid had so used it and beaten it, that it might just look as if folk were wont to pass that way, whereas it was not very far from their chiefest haunt and stronghold.  A little on the north side of this half-blind way, and some ten yards through the thicket, the ground fell away into a little dale, the bottom whereof was plain and well grassed, and watered by a brook.

Thither the wood-wife brought the twain; and when they all stood together on the brook-side, she said to them:  Dear friends, this is your woodland house for this time, and I rede you go not forth of it, lest ye happen upon any of those evil men; for nought have ye to fear from any save them.  Here amidst these big stones, which make, see ye, as it were a cavern, have I stowed victual for you; and armour therewithal, because, though both of you are in a manner armed, yet who knoweth where a shaft drawn at a venture may reach.

And from the said stones she drew forth two very fair armours, helm and hauberk, and leg and arm wards; and they were all of green, and shone but little, but were fashioned as no smith of man-folk could have done the like.

This is thine, Sir Arthur, said the wood-wife, and thou wilt wear it like as it were silk; and this thine, my child, and thou art strong enough to bear such light gear.  And I charge you both to do on this gear presently, nor do it off till ye have achieved the adventure. And now this is the last word:  here is a horn of oliphant which thou shalt wear about thy neck, Birdalone; and if thou be sore bestead, or thy heart faileth thee, blow in it, yet not before the onfall; and then, whether thou blow much or little, thou shalt be well holpen.  Now be not downcast if nought befall to-night or to-morrow, or even the day after; but if the third day be tidingless, then at sunset burn a hair of my head, Birdalone, and I will come to you.  And now farewell! for I have yet to do in this matter.

With that she kissed Birdalone fondly and embraced Arthur, and went her way; and those twain abode in the dale, and slept and watched by turns, and all was tidingless till the morrow's dawn; neither was there aught to tell of on that day and the night that ended it.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_32]

CHAPTER XXXII. OF THE FIGHT IN THE FOREST AND THE RESCUE OF THOSE FRIENDS FROM THE MEN OF THE RED COMPANY

Light was growing on the dawn of the next day, and the colours of things could be seen, when Birdalone, who was holding this last watch of the night, stood still and hearkened, deeming that she could hear some noise that was neither the morning wind in the tree-boughs nor the going of the wild things anear them in the wood.

So she did off her helm to hear the better, and stood thus a little; then she turned about and stooped down to Arthur, who was yet sleeping, and put forth a hand to rouse him.  But or ever she touched him, broke forth a sound of big and rough voices and laughter, and amidst it two shrieks as of women.

Arthur heard it, and was on his feet in a moment, and helmed, and he caught up his bended bow and cast on the quiver (for Birdalone was already weaponed), and without more words they went forth swiftly up the bank and through the thicket till they were looking on the half- blind way, but under cover, and there was nothing before them as yet.

There they stayed and hearkened keenly.  There were no more shrieks of women, nor heard they any weapon clash, but the talking and laughter of men went on; and at last they heard a huge and grim whoop of many men together; and then thereafter was less sound of talking, but came the jingle as of arms and harness; and Arthur whispered in Birdalone's ear:  Stand close! they have gotten to horse, and will be coming our way.  Nock an arrow.  And even so did he.

Therewith they heard clearly the riding of men, and in less than five minutes' space they saw three big weaponed men riding together, clad in red surcoats, and they were so nigh that they heard the words of their speech.  One said to the other:  How long shall the knight hold out, think ye?  Oh, a week maybe, said the other.  Meseems it was scathe that we stayed not a while to pine him, said the first man. Nay, said the second, we be over-heavy laden with bed-gear to tarry. And they all laughed thereat, and so went on out of hearing.

But then came four on together, whereof one, a gaunt, oldish man, was saying:  It is not so much how long we shall be getting there, but what shall betide when we get there.  For this is not like lifting a herd of neat, whereof sharing is easy, but with this naked-skinned, two-legged cattle, which forsooth ye can eat and yet have, there may well be strife over the sharing.  And look to it if it hath not begun already:  we must needs dismount three of our best men that these white-skinned bitches forsooth may each have a horse to herself, or else would they be fighting as to which should have a damsel of them before him on the saddle:  curse the fools!

Laughed out they who were about him, and one young man cast a jeer at him the meaning whereof they might not catch, and again they laughed; and that deal passed on.  And next came a bigger rout, a half score or so, and they also laughing and jeering; but amidst them, plain to see riding a-straddle, their ankles twisted together under the horses' bellies, their hands bound behind them, first Atra, black- clad as erst; then Aurea, in a gown of wheat-colour; then Viridis, green-clad.  Atra rode upright, and looking straight before her; Aurea hung her head all she might, and her long red hair fell about her face; but Viridis had swooned, and was held up in the saddle by one of the caitiffs on each side of her.  They were but little disarrayed, save that some felon had torn the bosom of Viridis' gown, and dragged down the cloth so that her left shoulder was bare.

Arthur looked, and drew at the caitiff who went afoot beside Atra, and Birdalone at him who went by Viridis, for she wotted whitherward Arthur's shaft would be turned.  The loose of the two bows made but one sound; both men fell stark dead, and the others huddled together a moment, and then ran toward the thicket on either hand, and they who ran north, two of them saw not Arthur, because of his green armour, ere they felt the death which lay in his sword.  And then he brake out amidst them, and there were three of them on him, yet for no long while, whereas their weapons bit not on the armour of the Faery, and his woodland blade sheared leather and ring-mail to the flesh and the bone:  mighty were his strokes, and presently all three were wallowing on the earth.

Even therewith the seven who had passed on had turned back and were come on him a-horse-back; and hard had it gone with him, despite of his might and his valour and the trustiness of Habundia's mail.  But meanwhile Birdalone had run to Viridis, who had fallen a dead weight aside of her horse, and lay half hanging by the bonds of her ankles. Birdalone swiftly cut the cords both of her feet and her hands, and drew her off her horse as best she might, and laid her down on the grass; and then ran to Arthur sword aloft, just as his new battle was at point to begin.

But as she ran it came into her mind in a twinkling that her sword would be but weak, and the horn hung about her neck.  Then she stayed her feet, and set the horn to her lips and blew; and the oliphant gave forth a long singing note which was strange to hear.  But while it was yet at her lips one of the caitiffs was upon her, and he cried out:  Hah the witch, the accursed green witch! and fetched her a great stroke from his saddle, and smote her on the helm; and though his sword bit not on that good head-burg, she fell to the ground unwitting.

Yet was not the wood-wife's promise unavailing, for even while the voice of the horn was in the air, the way and thickets were alive with men-at-arms, green-clad as those twain, who straightway fell on the caitiffs, and with Arthur to help, left not one of them alive. Then went some to Viridis, and raised her up, and so dealt with her that she came to herself again; and the like they did by Birdalone, and she stood, and looked about confusedly, but yet saw this, that they had gotten the victory.  Some went withal to Aurea, and cut her bonds and took her off her horse and set her on the ground; and she was all bewildered, and knew not where she was.

But Arthur, when he saw Birdalone on her feet, and unhurt by seeming, went to Atra, and cut her bonds and loosed her, and set her on the earth, all without a word, and then stood before her shyly.  Came the colour back into her face therewith, and she flushed red, for she knew him despite his outlandish green war-harness, and she reached out her hand to him, and he knelt before her and took her hand and kissed it.  But she bent over him till her face was anigh his, and he lifted up his face and kissed her mouth.  And she drew aback a little, but yet looked on him earnestly, and said:  Thou hast saved my life, not from death indeed, but from a loathsome hell; I may well thank thee for that.  And O, if my thanks might be fruitful to thee! And her bosom heaved, and the sobs came, and the tears began to run down her cheeks.  And he hung his head before her.  But in a while she left weeping, and turned about her face and looked round the field of deed; and she said:  Who is yonder slim green warrior who hath even now knelt down by Viridis?  Is it not a woman?  Arthur reddened:  Yea, said he; it is Birdalone.  Thy love? she said.  He said swiftly:  Yea, and thy friend, and this time thy deliverer.  So it is, she said.  It is five years since I beheld her.  My heart yearns for her; I shall rejoice at the meeting of us.

She was silent, and he also a while; then she said:  But why tarry we here in idle talk when he is yet bound, and in torment of body and soul; he the valiant, and the kind and the dear brother?  Come, tarry for no question.  And she stepped out swiftly along the green road going westward, and Arthur beside her; and as they went by Viridis, lo! Aurea had wandered unto them, and now was Birdalone unhelmed and kissing and comforting her.  Then cried out Atra:  Keep up thine heart, Viridis! for now we go to fetch thee thy man safe and sound.

So they went but a little way on the green road ere they came to Sir Hugh bound hard and fast to a tree-bole, and he naked in his shirt, and hard by lay the bodies of two stout carles with their throats cut; for these honest men and the two felons who had betrayed them were all the following wherewith the Green Knight had entered Evilshaw.  And as it fell, the traitors had been set to watch while the others slept; and sleeping the caitiffs found them, and slew the said men-at-arms at once, but bound Hugh to a tree that he might be the longer a-dying; since none looked for any but their own folk to pass by that way.  All this they heard afterwards of Hugh.

But now the said Hugh heard men going, and he opened his eyes, and saw Atra and a man-at-arms with her; and he cried out:  Hah, what is this now, sister? a rescue?  Yea, she said, and look thou on the face of the rescuer; and there is another hard by, and she is a woman.

Therewith was Arthur on him and cutting his bonds, and when he was loose they fell into each other's arms, and Hugh spake:  Now then at last doth life begin for me as I willed it!  And hast thou my sweet she-fellow, Birdalone, with thee?  Yea, said Arthur.  How good is that! said Hugh.  And yet, if it might but be that Baudoin were yet alive for us to seek!  Then he laughed and said:  These be but sorry garments wherewith to wend along with dear and fair ladies, brother! Nay, said Arthur, that may soon be amended, for yonder, where sword met sword, lieth raiment abundantly on the grass.  Fie on it! said Hugh, laughing; shall I do on me the raiment of those lousy traitors? Not I, by the rood!  Thou must seek further for my array, dear lad! So they all laughed, and were glad to laugh together.  But Atra said: It is easier even than that, for thine own fair garments and weapons shall we find if we seek them.  Sooth to say there was none left to bear them off, save it were this man, or Birdalone his mate.

With that word she looked kindly on Arthur, and again they laughed all three; though forsooth they were well-nigh weeping-ripe; one for joy, and that was Hugh; one for memory of the days gone by; and one for the bitterness of love that should never be rewarded; albeit dear even unto her was the meeting of friends and the glory of forgiveness and the end of enmity.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f6_33]

CHAPTER XXXIII. VIRIDIS TELLETH THE TALE OF THEIR SEEKING

Now came they back to where were the three others, and Viridis was quite come to herself and ran to meet her man, and he took her in his arms and caressed her sweetly; and then he turned to Birdalone, and spared no sign of friendly love to her; and Arthur, for his part, did so much for Aurea and Viridis.  No long tale there was between them for that while, for they would busk them to be gone.  But first they dug a grave for those two poor men who had been slain by the felons, and prayed for them.  As for the caitiffs who lay slain there, one score and two of them, they left them for the wolves to devour, and the tearing of the kites and crows; nor meddled they with any of their gear or weapons.  But they speedily found Hugh's raiment, and his pouch, wherein was money good store; and they found also rings and ouches and girdles, which had been torn from the damsels in the first rage of their taking.

First though, when they had gathered together such horses as they needed, and let the rest run wild, Birdalone brought her she-friends down into the dale, and did them to bathe in a pool of the stream, and tended them as if she were their tire-woman, so that they were mightily refreshed; and she made garlands for them of the woodland flowers, as eglantine and honeysuckle; and herself, she bathed her, and did not on her battle-gear again, but clad her body in her woman's array.

Then she brought forth victual and wine from Habundia's store, and set it out on the stream-side; and thereafter she went up the bent to the green way and fetched down Hugh and Arthur, and brought them to the ladies, and bade them note how trim and lovely they were gotten again, and again it could scarce be but that kisses and caresses were toward; and in all content and love they took their breakfast, though bitter-sweet unto Atra had been the holding of her hand by Arthur and the kissing of her cheek, albeit not for worlds had she foregone it.

So there they abode merrily for some three hours, whereas the day was yet young; and they asked and told each other much, so that the whole tale, both of the seekers from the world and of the seekers from the water-side, came out little by little.  Now of the last ye have heard what there is to tell, but for the others Viridis took up the tale, as erst she did with the dealings of the Knights of the Quest in the Isle of Increase Unsought; and it seemed by her tale that Hugh and the ladies, though they were living happily and prosperously in the land of the Green Mountains, wherein Hugh had wealth enow, yet the thought both of Arthur and of Birdalone would not out of their minds, and often it was that they thought of them, not as friends think of friends of whom they are content to know that they are yet alive and most-like thriving, but as friends think of friends whose absence cuts a shard out of their lives, so that they long to see them day by day.  Wherefore it came to this at last, after much talk hereof, that Hugh left his possessions and his children (for he had two women- bairns born of Viridis) in the keeping of trusty folk, and took with him Viridis his wife, and Aurea and Atra, and they set out to seek those twain the world over till they should find them.  And first by the rede of Atra they fared to Greenford, and there tarried a month, and sought tidings of many, and heard a word here and there whereby they deemed that Birdalone had passed therethrough some little time before.  So they went thence to the Castle of the Quest, and found it in such plight as ye have heard, and it went sore to their hearts to behold it and to be there.  But therewithal they happed upon Leonard the priest, and he was rejoiced beyond measure to see them, and told them all that ye have heard concerning Birdalone's coming thither and departing thence; and he told them therewith about those hauntings and sendings in the hall of the castle, and that they came to an end the very day that Birdalone departed thence in the Sending Boat.  Yet for the last three days there had been visions therein; but being questioned he was loth to tell thereof, so they forbore him a while.

At these tidings they were sore moved, and they talked the matter over betwixt themselves (and Leonard also was in their redes), and they must needs deem that either Birdalone was cast away, or that she had come to her old dwelling, the House under the Wood, and belike had fallen into the hands of the witch once more, and thereat were they sore downcast; and yet somewhat it was, that they had heard sure tidings of her; though meanwhile of Arthur had they heard nought.

While they talked this over, Atra, who had been somewhat silent, spake and said:  Here are we brought to a stop with the first tidings which we have heard, whereas we know no manner of wending the Great Water.  This seemeth evil, but let us not be cast down, or die redeless.  Ye have heard of what sayeth Sir Leonard of these hauntings in the hall, and how that they have come back again, wherefore why should we not sleep in the hall this night, those of us at least who have not so much fear as not to note them well, to see if we may draw any avail from them?  How say ye?  For my part I will try the adventure, whatever may come of it.

Now they all yeasaid it, though Aurea was somewhat timorous, albeit she would not be parted from the others; so when night came there they made their beds and lay down; and the end of it was, that a little before midnight Atra waked the others, and did them to wit that by her deeming something was toward; and presently they were all four as wide awake as ever they were in their lives; and next, without any sound that was strange, there came the image of a woman on to the dais, clad in green like to an huntress of ancient days, her feet sandalled, her skirts gathered up into her girdle, so that her legs were naked; she had a quiver at her back, and a great bow in her hand.

Now to all of them save Atra this appearance seemed to be the image of Birdalone; but she told her fellows afterwards, that to her it seemed not to be altogether Birdalone, but rather some other one most like unto her, as it were her twin-sister.

Gazed the image kindly and sweetly on them, so that they beheld it without fear; and it seemed to them that it gave forth speech; yet not so much that the sound of words was in the air about and smote their ears, as that the sense of words reached the minds of them. And this was the tale of it:  Ye, who are seeking the lost, have done well to come hither, and now shall ye do well to wend the straightest way to the dwelling of the wildwood, and that is by way of the western verge of Evilshaw the forest.  Greenford is on the way.  Way- leaders ye shall get; be wise, yet not prudent, and take them, though they be evil, and your luck may well avail.

Therewith the image vanished away as it had come, and Leonard, who with the others took the appearance for an image of Birdalone, said that it was such as he had seen it the three last days.  So they lay not down again, but departed for Greenford without tarrying, and rode the other end of the short night through till they came to Greenford. But Leonard would not with them; and Hugh behight him, if he lived and did well, to come back somehow to the Castle of the Quest, and so redo it that it should be no longer desolate.  So to Greenford they came, and spared not to do folk to wit that they would ride a pilgrimage in Evilshaw, and were fain of way-leaders; and there they dwelt a day or two, and many would let them of that journey, which, said they, was rather deadly than perilous only.  But on the third day came to Sir Hugh two stout carles well weaponed, who said that they knew well all the ways that led to Evilshaw, and the ways that went therethrough, and they offered themselves for a wage to Sir Hugh.  Now these said carles were not over fair of favour, but seemed somewhat of ribalds, nor would Sir Hugh have taken them to service in his house at home; but he called to mind that it were more prudence than wisdom to spoil his journey and lose the occasion of finding his dear friends for the hasty judgment of a man's face and demeanour, wherefore he waged these two men, and they set out for the western edges of Evilshaw.

Many towns and thorps they passed through, and everywhere, when men knew whither they were bound, they letted them all they might in words; but little heed they paid thereto, whereas they were all fixed in their rede that nought was to be done save the finding of their friends, and that their life-days were spoiled if they found them not.  And moreover, each one of them, but especially Atra and Viridis, had dreams of the night from time to time, wherein they seemed to see the green-clad woman, were she Birdalone or another, beckoning and bidding them to enter the Wood of Evilshaw.

As to those two way-leaders withal, whether it were that they got used to their faces, or that their ways and manners were nought uncourteous or fierce, they doubted them less and less as time wore; all save Viridis, whose flesh crept when they drew anigh her, as will betide one who comes across an evil-looking creeping thing.  As for Atra, she now began to heed little the things about her, as if her heart were wholly set on the end of the journey.

But now at last were they come so far that they had no choice but to use the said way-leaders, for they were gotten to the edge of Evilshaw.  So they entered it, and those two led them by half-blind ways and paths amongst the thickets, and fumbled never with the road.

Five days they went thus, and on the fifth evening they lay down to sleep in the wood, and it was the turn of those two hirelings to keep watch and ward, and they woke not the next morn save with the hands of the Red Felons at their throats, so that Hugh was bound, and his two trusty men who came with him from the Green Mountains were slain before a stroke might be struck.

This was the end of Viridis' tale, save that she told how that it was she that had uttered those two shrieks which Arthur and Birdalone had heard from the thicket; and that she had so done when the two false way-leaders laid hold of her to drag her away from her man, who stood there before her bound to a tree that he might perish there, whereon the two caitiffs had smitten her into unwit that they might have no more of her cries.

Now when all this had been told, and they had abided awhile in the fair little dale, and had said many kind endearing words of friendship, they went up on the green way again, and took what of the horses they needed and trussed their goods thereon (and Birdalone would not leave that brave armour which Habundia had given her), and they dight others for their home-riding, and the rest they turned loose into the woods, and so rode their ways, Birdalone going ever with Atra, and Arthur by Aurea; but Viridis must needs have Hugh within reach of her hand all the way.

Good speed they made, so that ere the night had fallen on them, though the sun was set, they 'had come to the House under the Wood; and there again was joy and wondering of the new-comers, and merry feasting on such simple victuals as were there, and good-night and rest in all contentment in the house where erst had Birdalone tholed so many griefs and fears.

 Here ends the Sixth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is called The Days of Absence, and begins the Seventh Part, which is called The Days of Returning.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f7_01]

THE SEVENTH PART: THE DAYS OF RETURNING

CHAPTER I. SIR HUGH ASKETH BIRDALONE WHERE SHE WOULD HAVE THE ABODE OF THEIR FELLOWSHIP TO BE

On the next day, they arose and were glad, and it was to them as if the sun of the early summer had arisen for nought save to shine on their happy day.  And they went about from place to place whereas tidings had befallen Birdalone; and she served them one and all as if she were their handmaid, and they loved her and caressed her, and had been fain to do all her will did they but know it.

In this wise wore day after day till June began to wane, and then on a time came Hugh unto Birdalone, and spake unto her and said:  All we have been talking together, and I am sent to ask thee what is in thy mind as to abiding here or going elsewhither.  For now that we be come together again, not for all the kingdoms of the world would we sunder again; and above all, none of us would leave thee, O my sister.  But if thou wilt come with me to our land under the Green Mountains, there is for thee a pleasant place and a fair dwelling, and honour from all folk, and our love that shall never leave thee; and I, and Arthur my brother, we shall win fame together amongst the knighthood, and thou shalt be proud and glad both of him and of me.

She said:  And if I may not go with thee thither, what other way is there to escape the sundering?  Said Hugh:  This, that thou choose in the world what land liketh thee for a dwelling-place, and we will go with thee and leave thee never, and thou shalt be our lady and queen. Then he laughed and said:  Yet, our lady, I have left behind me under the Green Mountains certain things which I love, as two fair women- children, and a squire or two whose fathers served my fathers, and whose children I would should serve my children.  And moreover I have left there certain matters of avail, my wealth and livelihood to wit. Wilt thou begrudge it if I must needs go fetch these, and bring them to the land where thou dwellest, through whatever peril we may have to face?

Dear art thou, she said, and my very friend, but tell me:  how sorry wouldst thou be to leave thine own land and follow after me for the sake of one who is neither thine own true love nor of thy kindred? Said he:  Not so sorry that I should grudge against thee thereafter. Moreover if that much of sorrow came to me, I should deem it not ill, lest I grow so over-happy that the luck rise up against me and undo me.

She said, smiling on him kindly:  Meseems that I am over-happy, whereas I have such dear cherishing of noble friends.  But now I will tell thee all, and maybe thou wilt love me the less for the telling. In these woods here, and lady and mistress of them, dwelleth one who is not of the race of Adam.  And she helped and cherished me and gave me wisdom when I was tormented and accursed, and she it was who saved me from the evil witch, and gave me the good hap to meet your loves and to fetch you to their helping; and twice hath she saved me from mortal peril otherwise.  And she hath found me my love, thy brother Arthur, and delivered him from unwit and wanhope; and she it is who drew all you hither unto us, and who delivered you from the felons who had mastered you.  And I have sworn unto her that I would never wholly sunder me from her; and how shall I break mine oath and grieve her, even had I the will thereto, as God wot I have not?  And she wept therewith.

But Hugh kissed her and said:  Birdalone, my dear, why weepest thou? Didst thou not hear my word, that thy people should be my people, and thy land my land, and that whither thou goest I will go?  Dost thou not trow me then?  Or how deemest thou I may tear thy friend Viridis from thee, when she hath just found thee?  But tell me, hast thou in thy mind any dwelling-place other than this?

Yea, she said:  I may not depart very far from this forest of Evilshaw lest I grieve my wisdom-mother overmuch.  But if one go westward through the wood, he shall happen at last, when he cometh forth of it, on a good town hight Utterhay, which lieth on the very edge thereof.  There was I born, and there also I look to find three dear and trusty friends to whom I owe return of their much kindness. It is a noble town in a pleasant land, and thou and my lord Arthur may well win both honour and worship and lordship there.  And wholly I trust in thy word that thou wilt not grudge against me for dragging thee thither.

Therewith she gave him her hand, smiling on him, though there was yet trouble in her face.  But he took the hand and held it, and laughed merrily and said:  Lo now! how good it is for friends to take counsel together!  What better may we do than go with thee thither?  And how greatly will Viridis rejoice when she heareth of this.  Now will I go and tell her and the others.

Go then, dear lad, she said; but as to the matter of thy fetching thy children and livelihood hither, that may be not so hard nor so perilous as thou deemest; and thou shalt go about it whenso thou wilt, and the sooner the better, and we shall abide thee here as long as need may be.  And therewith he went his ways to tell Viridis and the others of this rede which they had come to between them.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f7_02]

CHAPTER II. BIRDALONE TAKETH COUNSEL WITH HER WOOD-MOTHER CONCERNING THE MATTER OF SIR HUGH

On that same day went Birdalone to the Oak of Tryst and called her wood-mother to her, and she came glad and smiling, and kissed and embraced Birdalone, and said unto her:  Now I see that thou art well content with this last matter I have done for thee, whereas thou art come to crave a new gift of me.  How knowest thou that? said Birdalone, laughing.  Said Habundia:

Wouldst thou have come to me so soon otherwise from out of all that happiness?  I have come to tell thee of my rede, said Birdalone, and to ask thee if thou art like-minded with me thereon.  Said the wood- wife:  And what is thy rede, my child?  Wood-mother, said Birdalone, we deem that it were good for us all to go down into Utterhay where I was born, and to take up our abode therein.

Said the wood-wife:  This rede I praise, and even so would I have counselled you to do; but I abided to see if it should come from out of thy breast, and now even so it hath done; wherefore I understand thy wisdom and rejoice in thee.  And now crave thy boon, my child, and thou shalt have it without fail.

Yea, said Birdalone, that will I, and the more that it is a simple one and easy for thee to do.  Thou knowest that Hugh the Green Knight hath come with my she-friends seeking us all the way from under the Green Mountains, and he hath left there goods that he needs must have and folk whom he loves; and now he would go back thither, and fetch all that away hither, and see to his matters as soon as may be.  And I would have thee counsel us what to do, whether to build a barque, as perchance we may get it done, and sail the lake therein to the Castle of the Quest or thereabout, and thence to ride to his land; or else to take thy guidance and safe-conduct through the wood, and to bring his folk back the same way.

Said the wood-wife:  As to the way by water, I may help you little therein, and meseemeth that way be many traps and wiles and many perils.  Wherefore I bid you try it not, but let the Green Knight come up hither to this tree to-morrow before noon, all horsed and armed and arrayed, and there shall he find three men armed in green gear, horsed well, and leading two sumpter-beasts with them; and they shall be his until he giveth them back unto me.  But if he doubteth any thing betwixt the wood's end and under the Green Mountains, let him wage what folk he will besides, for these my men will have money enough of his with them.  But by no means let him send them away till he hath done with the wood altogether, both betwixt here and the western dwelt-land, and here and Utterhay, save thou be with him. But while these be with him, both he and whatsoever money he bringeth shall be sure from all peril whiles they be in the wood.  Now, my child, was not this the boon thou camest up hither to ask of me?

Yea verily, said Birdalone; yet also I came up hither to praise thee and thank thee and love thee.  And she threw herself into Habundia's arms and kissed and caressed her, and Habundia her in like wise.

Spake the wood-wife:  Thou art the beloved child of my wisdom; and now I see of thee that thou wilt be faithful and true and loving unto me unto the end.  And I think I can see that thou and thy man shall do well and happily in Utterhay; and the Green Knight also and thy she-friends.  And whatsoever thou wilt of me that I may do for thee or thy friends, ask it freely, and freely shalt thou have it.  But this I will bid thee, that the while the Green Knight shall be gone about his matter, thou shalt come hither to me often; and thy friends also thou shalt bring to me, that I may see them and talk to them and love them.  And specially shalt thou bid Atra unto me; for meseems she is so wise already that I may learn her more wisdom, and put that into her heart which may solace her and make her to cease from fretting her own heart, and from grief and longing overmuch.  And I were fain to reward her in that she hath forborne to grudge against thee and to bear thee enmity.  For I know, my child, not from mine own heart, but from the wisdom I have learned, how hardly the children of Adam may bear to have that which they love taken away from them by another, even if they themselves might in the long last have wearied of it and cast it away their own selves.  Go now, my child, and do thy friend to wit what I will do for him.

Therewith they parted, and Birdalone fared home to the house, and found the fellowship of them all sitting by the brookside, and talking sweetly together in all joy and hope of what their life should be in the new land whereto Birdalone would lead them. Straightway then she told them of Hugh and his journey, and how well he should be guarded in the wood both coming and going.  And they thought that right good, and they thanked her and praised her, and took her into their talk, and she sat down by them happily.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f7_03]

CHAPTER III. OF THE JOURNEYING THROUGH THE FOREST OF EVILSHAW UNTO THE TOWN OF UTTERHAY

On the morrow in due time Birdalone, going afoot, led Sir Hugh, all- armed and horsed, to the Oak of Tryst, and there they found the three men-at-arms, well-weaponed and in green weed, abiding them.  They did obeisance to Sir Hugh, and he greeted them, and then without more ado he kissed Birdalone and went his ways with his way-leaders, but Birdalone turned back to the house and her friends.

Next day Birdalone brought her three she-friends unto the Trysting Oak, and showed them to the wood-mother, and she was kind and soft with them; and both Aurea and Viridis were shy with her, and as if they feared her, but Atra was frank and free, and spake boldly.  And thereafter when Birdalone went to meet her wood-mother, Atra would go with her if she were asked, and at last would go alone, when she found that Habundia was fain of her coming, so that there were not many days when they met not; and the wood-wife fell to learning her the lore of the earth, as she had done aforetime with Birdalone; and Atra waxed ruddier and merrier of countenance, whereof was Birdalone right glad, and Arthur yet more glad, and the others well content.

So wore the time till Hugh had been gone for twenty and three days, and as they walked the meadows anigh the house about undern, they saw a knight riding down the bent toward them, and presently they knew him for Hugh, and turned and hastened to meet him, so that he was straightway amidst them, and on foot.  Dear then were the greetings and caresses betwixt them, and when it was over, and Birdalone had led away his horse and dight it for him, and had gotten him victuals and drink, and they were all sitting on the grass together, he told them how he had fared.  He had done all his matters in the Land under the Green Mountains, and had given over his lands and houses to a man of his lineage, his cousin, a good knight, and had taken from him of gold and goods what he would.  Then he had taken his two bairns and their nurse, and an old squire and five sergeants, whereof one was his foster-brother, and the others men somewhat stricken in years, and had departed with them.  Sithence he had come his ways to Greenford, and had held talk therein with the prior of a great and fair house of Black Canons, and had given him no little wealth wherewith to re-do the Castle of the Quest what was needed, and for livelihood of four canons to dwell there, and Leonard to be their prior, that there they might remember Sir Baudoin their dear friend daily in the office, and do good unto his soul.  Sithence he had ridden to the Castle of the Quest with the said Prior of St. Austin of Greenford, and had found Leonard, and had settled all the business how it was to be done.  Thereafter he had returned to Greenford, and gathered his folk, and got him gone, under the guidance of Habundia's folk, by castles and thorps and towns the nearest way to the edge of Evilshaw.  And they had come to the forest, and ridden it six days without mishap; and when they had come to the Oak of Tryst once more, the way-leaders said that it were well if all they together tarried not much longer in the forest; wherefore they had brought them to a fair wood-lawn, and there they encamped, and were there as now.  And, said Hugh, there are they abiding me, and it is in my mind that this very eve we go, all of us, and meet them there, if ye may truss your goods in that while; but as to victuals, we have plenty, and it needeth not.  And then to-morrow shall we wend our way as straight as may be toward the good town of Utterhay.

All they yeasaid it, though in her heart maybe Birdalone had been fain of abiding a little longer in her own land; but she spake no word thereof.  And they all set to work to the trussing up of their goods, and then turned their backs on the Great Water, and came up into the woodland, and so to the camp in the wood-lawn.  And there had Viridis a joyful meeting with her babes, and she gladdened the hearts of Sir Hugh's men-at-arms by her kind greeting; and they rejoiced in meeting Aurea and Atra again, and they wondered at Birdalone and her beauty, and their hearts went out to her, both the old men's and the young ones.  But Habundia's men looked on it all like images of warriors.

There then they feasted merrily that evening.  But when the morrow was come they were speedily on the way toward Utterhay; and the way- leaders guided them so well and wisely, that by noon of the fifth day they were come forth of the wood and on to the bent that looked down upon the town of Utterhay.  There turned to Hugh the three way- leaders, and spake:  Lord, we have done thee the service which we were bidden; if thou hast no further need of us, give us leave.

Said Hugh:  Leave ye have, and I shall give you a great reward ere ye go.  Said the chief of them:  Nay, lord, no reward may we take, save a token from thee that thou art content with us.  What token shall it be? said Hugh.  Quoth the way-leader:  That each of us kiss the Lady Birdalone on the mouth, for she it is that is verily our mistress under our great mistress.

Laughed Hugh thereat, but the men laughed not; then spake Hugh:  This must be at the lady's own will.  Even so, said they.

Then Hugh brought Birdalone thither and told her what was toward, and she consented to the kiss with a good will, and said to each of the men after they had kissed her:  Herewith goeth my love to the mistress and queen of the woods; do ye bear the same unto her.  And thereafter those way-leaders fared back into the woods.

Now they gather themselves together and go down toward Utterhay, and make a brave show, what with the sumpter-horses, and the goodly array of the four ladies, and the glittering war-gear of the men-at-arms; and Sir Hugh and Sir Arthur displayed their pennons as they went.

All this saw the warders on the wall of Utterhay; and they told the captain of the porte, and he came up on to the wall, and a man with him; and when he saw this bright company coming forth from the wood, he bade men to him, two score of them, all weaponed, and he did on his armour, and rode out-a-gates with them to meet those new-comers; and this he did, not because he did not see them to be but few, but because they came forth out of Evilshaw, and then doubted if they were trustworthy.

So he met them two bowshots from the gate, and rode forward till he was close to the wayfarers; and when he beheld the loveliness of the women, and especially of Birdalone, who wore that day the gleaming- glittering gown which Habundia had given her, he was abashed, and deemed yet more that he had to do with folk of the Faery.  But he spake courteously, and said, turning to Hugh, who rode the foremost: Fair sir, would ye tell unto the man whose business it is to safeguard the good town of Utterhay what folk ye be, and on what errand ye ride, and how it is that ye come forth from Evilshaw safe, in good case, with pennons displayed, as if the said wood were your very own livelihood?  For, sooth to say, hitherto we have found this, that all men dread Evilshaw, and none will enter it uncompelled.

Thereto answered Hugh:  I hight Sir Hugh the Green Knight, and am come from under the Green Mountain; and this is Sir Arthur, called the Black Squire, but a knight he is verily, and of great kindred and a warrior most doughty.  And he hath been captain of the good town of Greenford west away through the wood yonder a long way, and hath done the town and the frank thereof mickle good service in scattering and destroying the evil companies of the Red Hold, which hold we took by force of arms from the felons who held it for the torment and plague of the country-side.

Now as to our errand, we be minded to dwell in your good town of Utterhay, and take our part with your folk, and we have wealth enow thereto, so as to be beholden to none; and as time goes on we may serve you in divers wise, and not least in this maybe, that with a good will we shall draw sword for your peace and the freedom of them of Utterhay.

When the captain heard these words, he made obeisance to Sir Hugh, and said:  Fair sir, though we be here a long way from Greenford, yet have we heard some tale of the deeds of you, and surely the porte and all the folk shall be fain of your corning.  Yet I pray thee be not wrath; for there is a custom of the good town, that none may enter its gates coming from out of this Forest of Evilshaw, save he leave some pledge or caution with me, be it his wealth, or the body of some friend or fellow, or, if nought else, his very own body.  Wherefore if thou, Sir Green Knight, wilt but give us some sure pledge, then will I turn about and ride with you back and through the gate into Utterhay; and doubtless, when the mayor hath seen you and spoken with you, the said pledge shall be rendered to you again.

Ere Hugh might answer, came Birdalone forth and said:  Sir captain, if I, who am the lady of the Black Squire here, be hostage good enough, then take me, and if need be, chain me to make surer of me. And she drew near unto him smiling, and held out her hands as if for the manacles.

But when the captain saw her thus, all the blood stirred in his body for joy of her beauty, and he might but just sit his horse for his wonder and longing; but he said:  The saints forbid it, lady, that I should do thee any hurt or displeasure, or aught save the most worship I may.  But thy hostage I will take, Sir Knight if thou be content to yield her, whereas in an hour belike she shall be free again.  And now fare we all gateward again.

So then they all rode on together, Birdalone by the captain's left hand; and as they passed by the poor houses without the wall, she looked and saw the one which had been her mother's dwelling, so oft and so closely had she told her all about it.

Thus then they entered Utterhay, and the captain led them straight to the mote-house whereas the mayor and the porte were sitting; and much people followed them through the streets, wondering at them, and praising the loveliness of the women, and the frank and gallant bearing of the men-at-arms.

So they lighted down at the mote-house and were brought to the mayor, and when he had spoken them but a little, and had come to himself again from the fear and abashment that he had of them, he showed himself full fain of their coming, and bade them welcome to the good town, and took them into his own house to guesting, until folk might dight a very goodly house which the porte did give unto them.

But some two hours afterwards, when they were housed in all content, as they sat in the hall of the mayor, which was great and goodly, talking and devising with worthies of Utterhay, there entered two fair and frank-looking young men, who went straight up to Birdalone, and the first knelt down before her and kissed her hand, and said:  O our lady, and art thou verily come to us!  O our happiness and the joy of this day!

But when she saw him and heard him and felt the touch of his hand, she bent down to him and kissed him on the forehead, for she knew him that it was Robert Gerardson.

Then the other man came up to her as if he also would have knelt to her, but his purpose changed, and he cast his arms about her body and fell to kissing her face all over, weeping the while, and then he drew off and stood trembling before her and she, all blushing like a red rose and laughing a little, and yet with the tears in her eyes, said:  O Giles Gerardson, and thou, Robert, how fain I am to see you twain; but tell me, is your father well?  Yea, verily, our dear lady, said Robert, and it will be unto him as a fresh draught of youth when he wotteth that thou art come to dwell amongst us; for so it is, O lady beloved, is it not? said he.  Yea, forsooth, or even so I hope, said Birdalone.  But here be other friends that ye must needs know, if we come to dwell together here in peace; and then go and fetch me hither your father.

Therewith she presented them unto Arthur and Hugh and the three ladies of the Quest, and all they greeted them kindly and in all honour; and the Gerardsons loved and worshipped them, and especially the lovely ladies, the she-friends of their lady.

And whiles they were about this, in cometh old Gerard himself, and when Birdalone saw him at the door, she arose and ran to meet him, and cast her arms about him as if she were his own daughter; and most joyful was the meeting betwixt them.

 

The Water of the Wondrous Isles, by William Morris, [1897], at sacred-texts.com

[f7_04]

CHAPTER IV. OF THE ABIDING IN UTTERHAY IN LOVE AND CONTENTMENT

Now when seven days were worn, the mayor made a great feast at his house, and thither were bidden all the men of the porte and other worthies, and great merchants who had come into their town; and the said feast was given in honour of these new-comers, and that day they sat on the dais, and all the guests worshipped them and wondered at their beauty; and nought was spoken of for many days save the glory and hope that there was in this lovely folk.

But the next day after the feast were they brought to their house in all triumph; and it was as fair as might be thought of, and there they dwelt a while in rest and peace, and great recourse there was there of Gerard and his sons.

But ere the winter was over, were Hugh and Arthur and Gerard and his sons taken to the freedom of Utterhay; and thereafter spake the chief men of the porte and the masters of the crafts unto the two knights by the mouth of the mayor; and he told them, what already they partly knew, that the good town had of late gotten many enemies, whereas it was wealthy and not very strong, and that now two such warriors having come amongst them, they were minded to strengthen themselves, if only they two would of their gentleness and meekness become their war-dukes to lead them against the foemen.  But the two friends answered that it was well their will to dwell there neighbourly, and do them all the help they might, and that they would not gainsay the worship they offered them nor the work that should go with it.

With that answer were all men well content and more:  and then the mayor said that the mind of the porte it was to strengthen the walls and the gates, and to build a good and fair castle, meet for any earl, joining on to the wall by the face that looked west, that is to say, on to Evilshaw; and that liked the war-dukes well.

So when spring came it was set about, but it was five years adoing, and before it was all finished the war-dukes entered into it, and dwelt there with their wives and their friends in all honour.  And a little thereafter, whether they would or no, the men of Utterhay had to handle weapons and fare afield to meet the foe with the valiant men of the crafts, and what of waged men they might get.  And well and valiantly were they led by their dukes, and they came to their above, and gained both wealth and honour thereby; and from that time forward began the increase of Utterhay under those two captains, who were unto them as in old time the consuls had been unto the Roman folk, save that they changed them not year by year as the Romans were wont.

So wore the days, and all those friends dwelt together in harmony and joy; though the wearing of time wrought changes amongst them.  For Robert Gerardson began in no long while to look on Aurea with eyes of love; and at last he came to Birdalone and craved her leave to woo the said lady, and she granted it with a good will, and was fain thereof, whereas she saw that Aurea sorely lacked a mate; and scarce might she have a better than was Robert; so in process of time they two were wedded and dwelt together happily.

Forsooth Birdalone had been fainer yet might she have seen Giles Gerardson and Atra drawn together.  But though they were dear friends and there was much converse betwixt them, this betid not, so far as we have heard.

The old Gerard dwelt happily amongst them all for fifteen years after they had come to Utterhay, and then fell asleep, a very old man.

As to the wood of Evilshaw, it was not once a year only that Birdalone and Arthur sought thither and met the wood-mother, but a half-score of times or more, might be, in the year's circle; and ever was she kind and loving with them, and they with her.

But of all those fellows it was Atra that had longest dealings with the wood-wife; for whiles would she leave Utterhay and her friends and fare lonesome up into Evilshaw, and find Habundia and abide with her in all kindness holden for a month or more.  And ever a little before these departures betid would she fall moody and few-spoken, but she came back ever from the wood calm and kind and well-liking. Amidst all these comings and goings somewhat wore off the terror of Evilshaw; yet never was it accounted other than a daring deed to enter it alone without fellowship; and most had liefer that some man of religion were of their company therein, or they would bear about them something holy or blessed to hold the evil things.

Now when all this hath been said, we have no more to tell about this company of friends, the most of whom had once haunted the lands about the Water of the Wondrous Isles, save that their love never sundered, and that they lived without shame and died without fear.  So here is an end.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: yaq.txt =====



The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE HOLY QUR-AN

  

Text, Translation and Commentary

  

BY

  

ABDULLAH YUSUF ALI

  

Lahore, Pakistan

  

[1934]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

Sura I.

  

Fatiha, or the Opening Chapter.

1. In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

2. Praise be to God,
 The Cherisher and Sustainer of the Worlds;

3. Most Gracious, Most Merciful;

4. Master of the Day of Judgment.

5. Thee do we worship,
 And Thine aid we seek.

[p. 15]

6. Show us the straight way,

7. The way of those on whom
 Thou hast bestowed Thy Grace,
 Those whose (portion)
 Is not wrath,
 And who go not astray.

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16] [p. 17]

  

Sura II.

  

Baqara, or the Heifer.

In the name of God, most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. M.

2. This is the Book;
 In it is guidance sure, without doubt,
 To those who fear God;

3. Who believe in the Unseen,
 Are steadfast in prayer,
 And spend out of what We
 Have provided for them;

4. And who believe in the Revelation
 Sent to thee,

[p. 18]

And sent before thy time,
 And (in their hearts)
 Have the assurance of the Hereafter.

5. They are on (true) guidance,
 From their Lord, and it is
 These who will prosper.

6. As to those who reject Faith,
 It is the same to them
 Whether thou warn them
 Or do not warn them;
 They will not believe.

7. God hath set a seal
 On their hearts and on their hearing,
 And on their eyes is a veil;
 Great is the penalty they (incur).

  

SECTION 2.

8. Of the people there are some who say:
 "We believe in God and the Last Day;"
 But they do not (really) believe.

9. Fain would they deceive
 God and those who believe,
 But they only deceive themselves,
 And realize (it) not!

10. In their hearts is a disease;

[p. 19]

And God has increased their disease:
 And grievous is the penalty they (incur),
 Because they are false (to themselves).

11. When it is said to them:
 "Make not mischief on the earth,"
 They say: "Why, we only
 Want to make peace!"

12. Of a surety, they are the ones
 Who make mischief,
 But they realize (it) not.

13. When it is said to them:
 "Believe as the others believe:"
 They say: "Shall we believe
 As the fools believe?"
 Nay, of a surety they are the fools,
 But they do not know."

14. When they meet those who believe,
 They say: "We believe;"
 But when they are alone
 With their evil ones,
 They say: "We are really with you:
 We (were) only jesting."

15. God will throw back
 Their mockery on them,
 And give them rope in their trespasses;
 So they will wander like blind ones
 (To and fro).

16. These are they who have bartered
 Guidance for error:

[p. 20]

But their traffic is profitless,
 And they have lost true direction,

17. Their similitude is that of a man
 Who kindled a fire;
 When it lighted all around him,
 God took away their light
 And left them in utter darkness.
 So they could not see.

18. Deaf, dumb, and blind,
 They will not return (to the path).

19. Or (another similitude)
 Is that of a rain-laden cloud
 From the sky: in it are zones
 Of darkness, and thunder and lightning:
 They press their fingers in their ears
 To keep out the stunning thunder-clap,
 The while they are in terror of death.
 But God is ever round
 The rejecters of Faith!

20. The lightning all but snatches away
 Their sight; every time the light
 (Helps) them, they walk therein,
 And when the darkness grows on them,
 They stand still.
 And if God willed, He could take away
 Their faculty of hearing and seeing;
 For God hath power over all things

[p. 21]

  

SECTION 3.

21. O ye people!
 Adore your Guardian-Lord,
 Who created you
 And those who came before you,
 That ye may have the chance
 To learn righteousness;

22. Who has made the earth your couch,
 And the heavens your canopy;
 And sent down rain from the heavens;
 And brought forth therewith
 Fruits for your sustenance;
 Then set not up rivals unto God
 When ye know (the truth).

23. And if ye are in doubt
 As to what We have revealed
 From time to time to Our servant,
 Then produce a Sura
 Like thereunto;
 And call your witnesses or helpers
 (If there are any) besides God,
 If your (doubts) are true.

24. But if ye cannot
 And of a surety ye cannot--
 Then fear the Fire
 Whose fuel is Men and Stones,--
 Which is prepared for those

[p. 22]

Who reject Faith.

25. But give glad tidings
 To those who believe
 And work righteousness,
 That their portion is Gardens,
 Beneath which rivers flow.
 Every time they are fed
 With fruits therefrom,
 They say: "Why, this is
 What we were fed with before,"
 For they are given things in similitude;
 And they have therein
 Companions pure (and holy);
 And they abide therein (for ever).

26. God disdains not to use
 The similitude of things,
 Lowest as well as highest.

[p. 23]

Those who believe know
 That it is truth from their Lord;
 But those who reject Faith say:
 "What means God by this similitude?"
 By it He causes many to stray,
 And many He leads into the right path;
 But He causes not to stray,
 Except those who forsake (the path),--

27. Those who break God's Covenant
 After it is ratified,
 And who sunder what God
 Has ordered to be joined,
 And do mischief on earth:
 These cause loss (only) to themselves.

28. How can ye reject
 The faith in God?--
 Seeing that ye were without life,
 And He gave you life
 Then will He cause you to die,
 And will again bring you to life;
 And again to Him will ye return.

29. It is He Who hath created for you
 All things that are on earth;
 Moreover His design comprehended the heavens,
 For He gave order and perfection
 To the seven firmaments;
 And of all things
 He hath perfect knowledge.

[p. 24]

  

SECTION 4.

30. Behold, thy Lord said to the angels: "I will create
 A vicegerent on earth." They said:
 "Wilt Thou place therein one who will make
 Mischief therein and shed blood?--
 Whilst we do celebrate Thy praises
 And glorify Thy holy (name)?"
 He said: "I know what ye know not."

31. And He taught Adam the nature
 Of all things; then He placed them
 Before the angels, and said: "Tell Me
 The nature of these if ye are right."

32. They said: "Glory to Thee: of knowledge

[p. 25]

We have none, save what Thou
 Hast taught us: in truth it is Thou
 Who art perfect in knowledge and wisdom."

33. He said: "O Adam! tell them
 Their natures." When he had told them,
 God said: "Did I not tell you
 That I know the secrets of heaven
 And earth, and I know what ye reveal
 And what ye conceal?"

34. And behold, We said to the angels:
 "Bow down to Adam: "and they bowed down:
 Not so Iblis: he refused and was haughty:
 He was of those who reject Faith.

35. We said: "O Adam! dwell thou
 And thy wife in the Garden;
 And eat of the bountiful things therein
 As (where and when) ye will; but approach not this tree,
 Or ye run into harm and transgression."

36. Then did Satan make them slip
 From the (Garden), and get them out

[p. 26]

Of the state (of felicity) in which
 They had been. We said:
 "Get ye down, all (ye people),
 With enmity between yourselves.
 On earth will be your dwelling-place
 And your means of livelihood--
 For a time."

37. Then learnt Adam from his Lord
 Words of inspiration, and his Lord
 Turned towards him; for He
 Is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

38. We said: "Get ye down all from here;
 And if, as is sure, there comes to you
 Guidance from Me, whosoever
 Follows My guidance, on them
 Shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

39. "But those who reject Faith
 And belie Our Signs,
 They shall be Companions of the Fire;
 They shall abide therein."

[p. 27]

  

SECTION 5.

40. O Children of Israel! call to mind
 The (special) favour which I bestowed
 Upon you, and fulfil your Covenants
 With Me as I fulfil My Covenant
 With you, and fear none but Me.

41. And believe in what I reveal,
 Confirming the revelation
 Which is with you,
 And be not the first to reject
 Faith therein, nor sell My Signs
 For a small price; and fear Me,
 And Me alone.

42. And cover not Truth
 With falsehood, nor conceal
 The Truth when ye know (what it is).

43. And be steadfast in prayer;
 Practise regular charity;
 And bow down your heads
 With those who bow down (in worship).

44. Do ye enjoin right conduct
 On the people, and forget
 (To practise it) yourselves,
 And yet ye study the Scripture?
 Will ye not understand?

[p. 28]

45. Nay, seek (God's) help
 With patient perseverance
 And prayer:
 It is indeed hard, except
 To those who bring a lowly spirit,--

46. Who bear in mind the certainty
 That they are to meet their Lord,
 And that they are to return to Him.

  

SECTION 6.

47. O Children of Israel! call to mind
 The (special) favour which I bestowed
 Upon you, and that I preferred you
 To all others (for My Message).

48. Then guard yourselves against a day
 When one soul shall not avail another
 Nor shall intercession be accepted for her,
 Nor shall compensation be taken from her,
 Nor shall anyone be helped (from outside).

49. And remember, We delivered you
 From the people of Pharaoh: they set you
 Hard tasks and punishments, slaughtered

[p. 29]

Your sons and let your women-folk live;
 Therein was a tremendous trial from your Lord.

50. And remember We divided
 The Sea for you and saved you
 And drowned Pharaoh's people
 Within your very sight.

51. And remember We appointed
 Forty nights for Moses,
 And in his absence ye took
 The calf (for worship),
 And ye did grievous wrong.

52. Even then We did forgive you;
 There was a chance for you
 To be grateful.

53. And remember We gave
 Moses the Scripture and the Criterion

[p. 30]

(Between right and wrong): there was
 A chance for you to be guided aright.

54. And remember Moses said
 To his people: "O my people!
 Ye have indeed wronged
 Yourselves by your worship of the calf:
 So turn (in repentance) to your Maker,
 And slay yourselves (the wrong-doers);
 That will be better for you
 In the sight of your Maker."
 Then He turned towards you (in forgiveness):
 For He is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

55. And remember ye said: "O Moses!
 We shall never believe in thee
 Until we see God manifestly,"
 But ye were dazed
 With thunder and lightning
 Even as ye looked on.

56. Then We raised you up
 After your death:
 Ye had the chance
 To be grateful.

57. And We gave you the shade of clouds

[p. 31]

And sent down to you
 Manna and quails, saying:
 "Eat of the good things
 We have provided fcr you:"
 (But they rebelled);
 To Us they did no harm,
 But they harmed their own souls.

58. And remember We said:
 "Enter this town, and eat
 Of the plenty therein
 As ye wish; but enter
 The gate with humility,
 In posture and in words,
 And We shall forgive you your faults
 And increase (the portion of)
 Those who do good."

59. But the transgressors
 Changed the word from that
 Which had been given them;
 So We sent on the transgt essors
 A plague from heaven,
 For that they infringed
 (Our command) repeatedly.

  

SECTION 7.

60. And remember Moses prayed
 For water for his people;
 We said: "Strike the rock
 With thy staff." Then gushed forth

[p. 32]

Therefrom twelve springs.
 Each group knew its own place
 For water. So eat and drink
 Of the sustenance provided by God,
 And do no evil nor mischief
 On the (face of the) earth.

61. And remember ye said:
 "O Moses! we cannot endure
 One kind of food (always);
 So beseech thy Lord for us
 To produce for us of what the earth
 Groweth,--its pot-herbs, and cucumbers,
 Its garlic, lentils, and onions."
 He said: "Will ye exchange
 The better for the worse?
 Go ye down to any town,"
 And ye shall find what ye want!"

[p. 33]

They were covered with humiliation
 And misery; they drew
 On themselves the wrath of God.
 This because they went on
 Rejecting the Signs of God
 And slaying His Messengers
 Without just cause.
 This because they rebelled
 And went on transgressing.

  

SECTION 8.

62. Those who believe (in the Qur-an),
 And those who follow the Jewish (scriptures),
 And the Christians and the Sabians,--
 Any who believe in God
 And the Last Day,
 And work righteousness,
 Shall have their reward

[p. 34]

With their Lord: on them
 Shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

63. And remember We took
 Your Covenant
 And We raised above you
 (The towering height)
 Of Mount (Sinai):
 (Saying): "Hold firmly
 To what We have given you
 And bring (ever) to remembrance
 What is therein:
 Perchance ye may fear God."

64. But ye turned back thereafter:
 Had it not been for the Grace
 And Mercy of God to you,
 Ye had surely been
 Among the lost.

65. And well ye knew
 Those amongst you
 Who transgressed
 In the matter of the Sabbath:
 We said to them:
 "Be ye apes,
 Despised and rejected."

66. So We made it an example
 To their own time

[p. 35]

And to their posterity,
 And a lesson
 To those who fear God.

67. And remember Moses said
 To his people: "God commands
 That ye sacrifice a heifer."
 They said: "Makest thou
 A laughing-stock of us?"
 He said: "God save me
 From being an ignorant (fool)!"

68. They said: "Beseech on our behalf
 Thy Lord to make plain to us
 What (heifer) it is!"
 He said: "He says: the heifer
 Should be neither too old
 Nor too young, but of middling
 Age: now do what ye are commanded!"

69. They said: "Beseech on our behalf
 Thy Lord to make plain to us
 Her colour." He said: "He says:
 A fawn-coloured heifer,
 Pure and rich in tone,
 The admiration of beholders!"

70. They said: "Beseech on our behalf
 Thy Lord to make plain to us
 What she is: to us are all heifers
 Alike: we wish indeed for guidance,
 If God wills."

[p. 36]

71. He said: "He says: a heifer
 Not trained to till the soil
 Or water the fields: sound
 And without blemish." They said:
 "Now hast thou brought
 The truth." Then they offered
 Her in sacrifice,
 But not with good-will.

  

SECTION 9.

72. Remember ye slew a man
 And fell into a dispute
 Among yourselves as to the crime:
 But God was to bring forth
 What ye did hide.

73. So We said: "Strike the (body)
 With a piece of the (heifer)."
 Thus God bringeth the dead
 To life and showeth you His Signs:
 Perchance ye may understand.

74. Thenceforth were your hearts
 Hardened: they became
 Like a rock and even worse
 In hardness. For among rocks
 There are some from which
 Rivers gush forth; others
 There are which when split
 Asunder send forth water;
 And others which sink

[p. 37]

For fear of God. And God is
 Not unmindful of what ye do.

75. Can ye (O ye men of Faith)
 Entertain the hope that they
 Will believe in you?--
 Seeing that a party of them
 Heard the Word of God,
 And perverted it knowingly
 After they understood it.

76. Behold! when they meet
 The men of Faith, they say:
 "We believe": but when
 They meet each other in private,
 They say: "Shall you tell them
 What God hath revealed to you,
 That they may engage you
 In argument about it
 Before your Lord?"--
 Do ye not understand (their aim)?

77. Know they not that God
 Knoweth what they conceal
 And what they reveal?

[p. 38]

78. And there are among them
 Illiterates, who know not the Book,
 But (see therein their own) desires,
 And they do nothing but conjecture.

79. Then woe to those who write
 The Book with their own hands,
 And then say: "This is from God,"
 To traffic with it
 For a miserable price!--
 Woe to them for what their hands
 Do write, and for the gain
 They make thereby.

80. And they say: "The Fire
 Shall not touch us
 But for a few numbered days:"
 Say: "Have ye taken a promise
 From God, for He never
 Breaks His promise?
 Or is it that ye say of God
 What ye do not know?"

81. Nay, those who seek gain
 In Evil, and are girt round
 By their sins,
 They are Companions of the Fire:
 Therein shall they abide
 (For ever).

82. But those who have faith
 And work righteousness,

[p. 39]

They are Companions of the Garden:
 Therein shall they abide
 (For ever).

  

SECTION 10.

83. And remember We took
 A Covenant from the Children
 Of Israel (to this effect):
 Worship none but God;
 Treat with kindness
 Your parents and kindred,
 And orphans and those in need;
 Speak fair to the people;
 Be steadfast in prayer;
 And practise regular charity.
 Then did ye turn back,
 Except a few among you,
 And ye backslide (even now).

84. And remember We took
 Your Covenant (to this effect):
 Shed no blood amongst you,
 Nor turn out your own people
 From your homes: and this
 Ye solemnly ratified,
 And to this ye can bear witness.

85. After this it is ye, the same people,
 Who slay among yourselves,
 And banish a party of you
 From their homes; assist
 (Their enemies) against them,
 In guilt and rancour;
 And if they come to you
 As captives, ye ransom them,

[p. 40]

Though it was not lawful
 For you to banish them.
 Then is it only a part of the Book
 That ye believe in,
 And do ye reject the rest?
 But what is the reward for those
 Among you who behave like this
 But disgrace in this life?--
 And on the Day of Judgment
 They shall be consigned
 To the most grievous penalty.
 For God is not unmindful
 Of what ye do.

86. These are the people who buy
 The life of this world at the price
 Of the Hereafter: their penalty
 Shall not be lightened
 Nor shall they be helped.

  

SECTION 11.

87. We gave Moses the Book
 And followed him up
 With a succession of Apostles;
 We gave Jesus the son of Mary
 Clear (Signs) and strengthened him
 With the holy spirit. Is it
 That whenever there comes to you
 An Apostle with what ye
 Yourselves desire not, ye are
 Puffed up with pride?--
 Some ye called impostors,
 And others ye slay!

[p. 41]

88. They say, "Our hearts
 Are the wrappings (which preserve
 God's Word: we need no more)."
 Nay, God's curse is on them
 For their blasphemy:
 Little is it they believe.

89. And when there comes to them
 A Book from God, confirming
 What is with them,--although
 From of old they had prayed
 For victory against those
 Without Faith,--when there comes.
 To them that which they
 (Should) have recognized,
 They refuse to believe in it
 But the curse of God
 Is on those without Faith.

90. Miserable is the price
 For which they have sold
 Their souls, in that they
 Deny (the revelation)
 Which God has sent down,
 In insolent envy that God
 Of His Grace should send it
 To any of His servants He pleases:

[p. 42]

Thus have they drawn
 On themselves Wrath upon Wrath.
 And humiliating is the punishment
 Of those who reject Faith.

91. When it is said to them,
 "Believe in what God
 Hath sent down," they say,
 "We believe in what was sent down
 To us": yet they reject
 All besides, even if it be Truth
 Confirming what is with them.
 Say: "Why then have ye slain
 The prophets of God in times
 Gone by, if ye did indeed
 Believe?"

92. There came to you Moses
 With clear (Signs); yet
 Ye worshipped the Calf
 (Even) after that, and ye
 Did behave wrongfully.

93. And remember We took
 Your Covenant and We raised
 Above you (the towering height)
 Of Mount (Sinai):
 (Saying): "Hold firmly
 To what We have given you,
 And hearken (to the Law)"
 They said: "We hear,
 And we disobey"
 And they had to drink

[p. 43]

Into their hearts
 (Of the taint) of the Calf
 Because of their Faithlessness.
 Say: "Vile indeed
 Are the behests of your Faith
 If ye have any faith!"

94. Say: "If the last Home,
 With God, be for you specially,
 And not for anyone else,
 Then seek ye for death,
 If ye are sincere."

95. But they will never seek
 For death, on account of the (sins)
 Which their hands have sent
 On before them.
 And God is well-acquainted
 With the wrong-doers.

96. Thou wilt indeed find them,
 Of all people, most greedy
 Of life,--even more
 Than the idolaters:
 Each one of them wishes
 He could be given a life
 Of a thousand years:
 But the grant of such life
 Will not save him
 From (due) punishment.
 For God sees well
 All that they do.

  

SECTION 12.

97. Say: Whoever is an enemy
 To Gabriel--for he brings down

[p. 44]

The (revelation) to thy heart
 By God's will, a confirmation
 Of what went before,
 And guidance and glad tidings
 For those who believe,--

98. Whoever is an enemy to God
 And His angels and apostles,
 To Gabriel and Michael,--
 Lo! God is an enemy to those
 Who reject Faith.

99. We have sent down to thee
 Manifest Signs (ayat);
 And none reject them
 But those who are perverse.

100. Is it not (the case) that
 Every time they make a Covenant,
 Some party among them
 Throw it aside?--Nay,
 Most of them are faithless.

101. And when there came to them
 An Apostle from God,
 Confirming what was with them,
 A party of the People of the Book
 Threw away the Book of God
 Behind their backs,
 As if (it had been something)
 They did not know!

102. They followed what the evil ones
 Gave out (falsely)
 Against the power
 Of Solomon: the blasphemers
 Were, not Solomon, but
 The evil ones, teaching men

[p. 45]

Magic, and such things
 As came down at Babylon
 To the angels Harut and Marut.
 But neither of these taught anyone
 (Such things) without saying:
 "We are only for trial;
 So do not blaspheme."
 They learned from them
 The means to sow discord
 Between man and wife.
 But they could not thus
 Harm anyone except
 By God's permission.
 And they learned what harmed them,
 Not what profited them.
 And they knew that the buyers
 Of (magic) would have
 No share in the happiness
 Of the Hereafter. And vile
 Was the price for which
 They did sell their souls,
 If they but knew!

103. If they had kept their Faith
 And guarded themselves from evil,

[p. 46]

Far better had been
 The reward from their Lord,
 If they but knew!

  

SECTION 13

104. ye of Faith!
 Say not (to the Apostle)
 Words of ambiguous import,
 But words of respect;
 And hearken (to him):
 To those without Faith
 Is a grievous punishment.

105. It is never the wish
 Of those without Faith
 Among the People of the Book,
 Nor of the Pagans,
 That anything good
 Should come down to you
 From your Lord.
 But God will choose
 For His special Mercy
 Whom He will--for God is
 Lord of grace abounding.

106. None of Our revelations
 Do We abrogate
 Or cause to be forgotten,
 But We substitute

[p. 47]

Something better or similar:
 Knowest thou not that God
 Hath power over all things?

107. Knowest thou not
 That to God belongeth
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth?
 And besides Him ye have
 Neither patron nor helper.

108. Would ye question
 Your Apostle as Moses's
 Was questioned of old?
 But whoever changeth
 From Faith to Unbelief,
 Hath strayed without doubt
 From the even way.

109. Quite a number of the People
 Of the Book wish they could
 Turn you (people) back
 To infidelity after ye have believed,
 From selfish envy,
 After the Truth hath become
 Manifest unto them:
 But forgive and overlook,

Till God accomplish
 His purpose; for God
 Hath power over all things.'

[p. 48]

110. And be steadfast in prayer
 And regular in charity:
 And whatever good
 Ye send forth for your souls
 Before you, ye shall find it
 With God: for God sees
 Well all that ye do.

111. And they say: "None
 Shall enter Paradise unless
 He be a Jew or a Christian."
 Those are their (vain) desires.
 Say: "Produce your proof
 If ye are truthful."

112. Nay,--whoever submits
 His whole self to God
 And is a doer of good,
 He will get his reward
 With his Lord;
 On such shall be no fear,
 Nor shall they grieve.

  

SECTION 14.

113. The Jews say: "The Christians
 Have naught (to stand) upon;
 And the Christians say:
 "The Jews have naught
 (To stand) upon." Yet they
 (Profess to) study the (same) Book.
 Like unto their word
 Is what those say who know not;

[p. 49]

But God will judge
 Between them in their quarrel
 On the Day of Judgment.

114. And who is more unjust
 Than he who forbids
 That in places for the worship
 Of God, God's name should be
 Celebrated?--whose zeal
 Is (in fact) to ruin them?
 It was not fitting that such
 Should themselves enter them
 Except in fear. For them
 There is nothing but disgrace
 In this world, and in the world
 To come, an exceeding torment.

115. To God belong the East
 And the West: whithersoever
 Ye turn, there is the Presence
 Of God. For God is All-Pervading,
 All-Knowing.

116. They say: "God hath begotten
 A son": Glory be to Him.--Nay,
 To Him belongs all
 That is in the heavens
 And on earth: everything
 Renders worship to Him.'"

117. To Him is due
 The primal origin

[p. 50]

Of the heavens and the earth:
 When He decreeth a matter,
 He saith to it: "Be,"
 And it is.

118. Say those without knowledge:
 "Why speaketh not God
 Unto us? Or why cometh not
 Unto us a Sign?"
 So said the people before them
 Words of similar import.
 Their hearts are alike.
 We have indeed made clear
 The Signs unto any people
 Who hold firmly
 To Faith (in their hearts).

119. Verily We have sent thee
 In truth as a bearer
 Of glad tidings and a warner:
 But of thee no question
 Shall be asked of the Companions
 Of the Blazing Fire.

120. Never will the Jews
 Or the Christians be satisfied
 With thee unless thou follow
 Their form of religion. Say:

[p. 51]

"The Guidance of God,--that
 Is the (only) Guidance."
 Wert thou to follow their desires
 After the knowledge
 Which hath reached thee,
 Then wouldst thou find
 Neither Protector nor Helper
 Against God.

121. Those to whom We have sent
 The Book study it as it
 Should be studied: they are
 The ones that believe therein:
 Those who reject faith therein,--
 The loss is their own.

  

SECTION 15.

122. O Children of Israel! call to mind
 The special favour which I bestowed
 Upon you, and that I preferred you
 To all others (for My Message).

123. Then guard yourselves against a Day

[p. 52]

When one soul shall not avail another,
 Nor shall compensation be
 accepted from her
 Nor shall intercession profit her
 Nor shall anyone be helped (from outside).

124. And remember that Abraham
 Was tried by his Lord
 With certain Commands,
 Which he fulfilled:
 He said: "I will make thee
 An Imam to the Nations."
 He pleaded: "And also
 (Imams) from my offspring!"
 He answered: "But My Promise
 Is not within the reach
 Of evil-doers."

125. Remember We made the House
 A place of assembly for men
 And a place of safety;
 And take ye the Station
 Of Abraham as a place
 Of prayer; and We covenanted
 With Abraham and lsma'il,
 That they should sanctify
 My House for those who
 Compass it round, or use it

[p. 53]

As a retreat, or bow, or
 Prostrate themselves (therein
 In prayer).

126. And remember Abraham said:
 "My Lord, make this a City
 Of Peace, and feed its People
 With fruits,--such of them
 As believe in God and the Last Day."
 He said: "(Yea), and such as
 Reject Faith,--for a while
 Will I grant them their pleasure,
 But will soon drive them
 To the torment of Fire,--
 An evil destination (indeed)!"

127. And remember Abraham
 And Isma'il raised
 The foundations of the House
 (With this prayer): "Our Lord!
 Accept (this service) from us:
 For Thou art the All-Hearing,
 The All-Knowing.

128. "Our Lord! make of us
 Muslims, bowing to Thy (Will),
 And of our progeny a people
 Muslim, bowing to Thy (Will);
 And show us our places for
 The celebration of (due) rites;
 And turn unto us (in Mercy);
 For Thou art the Oft-Returning,
 Most Merciful.

129. "Our Lord! send amongst them
 An Apostle of their own,
 Who shall rehearse Thy Signs
 To them and instruct them

[p. 54]

In Scripture and Wisdom,
 And sanctify them:
 For Thou art the Exalted in Might,
 The Wise."

  

SECTION 16.

130. And who turns away
 From the religion of Abraham
 But such as debase their souls
 With folly? Him We chose
 And rendered pure in this world:
 And he will be in the Hereafter
 In the ranks of the Righteous.

131. Behold! his Lord said
 To him: "Bow (thy will to Me):"
 He said: "I bow (my will)
 To the Lord and Cherisher
 Of the Universe."

132. And this was the legacy
 That Abraham left to his sons,
 And so did Jacob;
 "Oh my sons! God hath chosen
 The Faith for you; then die not
 Except in the Faith of Islam."

133. Were ye witnesses
 When Death appeared before Jacob?
 Behold, he said to his sons:
 "What will ye worship after me?"
 They said: "We shall worship

[p. 55]

Thy God and the God of thy fathers,--
 Of Abraham, Isma'il, and Isaac,--
 The One (True) God:
 To Him we bow (in Islam)."

134. That was a People that hath
 Passed away. They shall reap
 The fruit of what they did,
 And ye of what ye do!
 Of their merits
 There is no question in your case!

135. They say: "Become Jews
 Or Christians if ye would be guided
 (To salvation)." Say thou:
 "Nay! (I would rather) the Religion
 Of Abraham the True,
 And he joined not gods with God."

136. Say ye: "We believe
 In God, and the revelation
 Given to us, and to Abraham,
 Isma'il, Isaac, Jacob,
 And the Tribes, and that given
 To Moses and Jesus, and that given
 To (all) Prophets from their Lord:
 We make no difference
 Between one and another of them:
 And we bow to God (in Islam)."

137. So if they believe
 As ye believe, they are indeed
 On the right path; but if
 They turn back, it is they

[p. 56]

Who are in schism; but God will
 Suffice thee as against them,
 And He is the All-Hearing,
 The All-Knowing.

138. (Our religion is)
 The Baptism of God:
 And who can baptize better
 Than God? And it is He
 Whom we worship.

139. Say: Will ye dispute
 With us about God, seeing
 That He is our Lord
 And your Lord; that we
 Are responsible for our doings
 And ye for yours; and that
 We are sincere (in our faith) In him?

140. Or do ye say that
 Abraham, Isma'il, Isaac,
 Jacob and the Tribes were
 Jews or Christians?
 Say: Do ye know better
 Than God? Ah! who
 Is more unjust than those
 Who conceal the testimony
 They have from God?
 But God is not unmindful
 Of what ye do!

141. That was a people that hath
 Passed away. They shall reap
 The fruit of what they did,
 And ye of what ye do!
 Of their merits
 There is no question in your case:

[p. 57]

  

SECTION 17.

142. The Fools among the people
 Will say: "What hath turned
 Them from the Qibla to which
 They were used?" Say:
 To God belong both East and West:
 He guideth whom He will
 To a Way that is straight.

143. Thus have We made of you
 An Ummat justly balanced,
 That ye might be witnesses
 Over the nations,

[p. 58]

And the Apostle a witness
 Over yourselves;
 And We appointed the Qibla
 To which thou wast used,
 Only to test those who followed
 The Apostle from those
 Who would turn on their heels
 (From the Faith). Indeed it was
 (A change) momentous, except
 To those guided by God.
 And never would God
 Make your faith of no effect.
 For God is to all people
 Most surely full of kindness,
 Most Merciful.

144. We see the turning
 Of thy face (for guidance)
 To the heavens: now
 Shall We turn thee
 To a Qibla that shall
 Please thee. Turn then
 Thy face in the direction
 Of the sacred Mosque:
 Wherever ye are, turn
 Your faces in that direction.

[p. 59]

The people of the Book
 Know well that that is
 The truth from their Lord.
 Nor is God unmindful
 Of what they do.

145. Even if thou wert to bring
 To the people of the Book
 All the Signs (together),
 They would not follow
 Thy Qibla; nor art thou
 Going to follow their Qibla;
 Nor indeed will they follow
 Each other's Qibla. If thou
 After the knowledge hath reached thee,
 Wert to follow their (vain)
 Desires,--then wert thou
 Indeed (clearly) in the wrong.

146. The people of the Book
 Know this as they know
 Their own sons; but some
 Of them conceal the truth
 Which they themselves know.

147. The Truth is from thy Lord;
 So be not at all in doubt.

[p. 60]

  

SECTION 18.

148. To each is a goal
 To which God turns him;
 Then strive together (as in a race)
 Towards all that is good.
 Wheresoever ye are,
 God will bring you
 Together, For God
 Hath power over all things.

149. From whencesoever
 Thou startest forth, turn
 Thy face in the direction
 Of the Sacred Mosque;
 That is indeed the truth
 From thy Lord. And God
 Is not unmindful
 Of what ye do.

150. So from whencesoever
 Thou startest forth, turn
 Thy face in the direction
 Of the Sacred Mosque;
 And wheresoever ye are,
 Turn your face thither:
 That there be no ground
 Of dispute against you
 Among the people,
 Except those of them that are
 Bent on wickedness; so fear
 Them not, but fear Me;
 And that I may complete
 My favours on you, and ye
 May (consent to) be guided;

[p. 61]

151. A similar (favour
 Have ye already received)
 In that We have sent
 Among you an Apostle
 Of your own, rehearsing to you
 Our Signs, and sanctifying
 You, and instructing you
 In Scripture and Wisdom,
 And in new Knowledge.

152. Then do ye remember
 Me; I will remember
 You. Be grateful to Me,
 And reject not Faith.

  

SECTION 19.

153. O ye who believe! seek help
 With patient Perseverance
 And Prayer: for God is with those
 Who patiently persevere.

154. And say not of those
 Who are slain in the way

[p. 62]

Of God: "They are dead."
 Nay, they are living,
 Though ye perceive (it) not.

155. Be sure we shall test you
 With something of fear
 And hunger, some loss
 In goods or lives or the fruits
 (Of your toil), but give
 Glad tidings to those
 Who patiently persevere,--

156. Who say, when afflicted
 With calamity: "To God
 We belong, and to Him
 Is our return":--

157. They are those on whom
 (Descend) blessings from God,
 And Mercy,
 And they are the ones
 That receive guidance.

158. Behold! Safa and Marwa
 Are among the Symbols
 Of God. So if those who visit
 The House in the Season
 Or at other times,
 Should compass them round,
 It is no sin in them.
 And if any one obeyeth his own

[p. 63]

Impulse to Good,--
 Be sure that God
 Is He Who recogniseth
 And knoweth.

159. Those who conceal
 The clear (Signs) We have
 Sent down, and the Guidance,
 After We have made it
 Clear for the People
 In the Book,--on them
 Shall be God's curse,
 And the curse of those
 Entitled to curse,--

160. Except those who repent
 And make amends
 And openly declare (the Truth):
 To them I turn;
 For I am Oft-returning,
 Most Merciful.

161. Those who reject Faith,
 And die rejecting,--
 On them is God's curse,
 And the curse of angels,
 And of all mankind;

162. They will abide therein:
 Their penalty will not
 Be lightened, nor will
 Respite be their (lot).

163. And your God
 Is One God:
 There is no god
 But He,

[p. 64]

Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 20.

164. Behold! In the creation
 Of the heavens and the earth;
 In the alternation
 Of the Night and the Day;
 In the sailing of the ships
 Through the Ocean
 For the profit of mankind;
 In the rain which God
 Sends down from the skies,
 And the life which He gives therewith
 To an earth that is dead;
 In the beasts of all kinds
 That He scatters
 Through the earth;
 In the change of the winds,
 And the clouds which they
 Trail like their slaves
 Between the sky and the earth;--
 (Here) indeed are Signs
 For a people that are wise.

165. Yet there are men
 Who take (for worship)
 Others besides God,
 As equal (with God):

[p. 65]

They love them
 As they should love God.
 But those of Faith are
 Overflowing in their love
 For God. If only
 The unrighteous could see,
 Behold, they would see
 The Penalty: that to God
 Belongs all power, and God
 Will strongly enforce
 The Penalty.

166 Then would those
 Who are followed
 Clear themselves of those
 Who follow (them):
 They would see the Penalty,
 And all relations
 Between them would be cut off.

167. And those who followed
 Would say: "If only
 We had one more chance,
 We would clear ourselves
 Of them, as they have
 Cleared themselves of us."
 Thus will God show them
 (The fruits of) their deeds
 As (nothing but) regrets.
 Nor will there be a way
 For them out of the Fire.

[p. 66]

  

SECTION 21.

168. O ye people!
 Eat of what is on earth,
 Lawful and good;
 And do not follow
 The footsteps of the Evil One,
 For he is to you
 An avowed enemy.

[p. 67]

169. For he commands you
 What is evil
 And shameful,
 And that ye should say
 Of God that of which
 Ye have no knowledge.

170. When it is said to them:
 "Follow what God hath revealed:"
 They say: "Nay! we shall follow
 The ways of our fathers."
 What! even though their fathers
 Were void of wisdom and guidance?

171. The parable of those
 Who reject Faith is
 As if one were to shout
 Like a goat-herd, to things
 That listen to nothing
 But calls and cries:
 Deaf, dumb, and blind,
 They are void of wisdom.

172 O ye who believe!
 Eat of the good things
 That We have provided for you,
 And be grateful to God,
 If it is Him ye worship.

173. He hath only forbidden you
 Dead meat, and blood,
 And the flesh of swine,
 And that on which

[p. 68]

Any other name hath been invoked
 Besides that of God.
 But if one is forced by necessity,
 Without wilful disobedience,
 Nor transgressing due limits,--
 Then is he guiltless.
 For God is Oft-forgiving
 Most Merciful.

174. Those who conceal
 God's revelations in the Book,
 And purchase for them
 A miserable profit,--
 They swallow into themselves
 Naught but Fire;
 God will not address them
 On the Day of Resurrection,
 Nor purify them:
 Grievous will be
 Their Penalty.

175. They are the ones
 Who buy Error
 In place of Guidance
 And Torment in place
 Of Forgiveness.
 Ah! what boldness
 (They show) for the Fire!

176. (Their doom is) because
 God sent down the Book
 In truth but those who seek
 Causes of dispute in the Book

[p. 69]

Are in a schism
 Far (from the purpose).

  

SECTION 22.

177. It is not righteousness
 That ye turn your faces
 Towards East or West;
 But it is righteousness--
 To believe in God
 And the Last Day,
 And the Angels,
 And the Book,
 And the Messengers;
 To spend of your substance,
 Out of love for Him,
 For your kin,
 For orphans,
 For the needy,
 For the wayfarer,
 For those who ask,
 And for the ransom of slaves;
 To be steadfast in prayer,
 And practice regular charity;
 To fulfil the contracts
 Which ye have made;

[p. 70]

And to be firm and patient,
 In pain (or suffering)
 And adversity,
 And throughout
 All periods of panic.
 Such are the people
 Of truth, the God-fearing.

178. O ye who believe!
 The law of equality
 Is prescribed to you
 In cases of murder:
 The free for the free,
 The slave for the slave,
 The woman for the woman.
 But if any remission
 Is made by the brother
 Of the slain, then grant
 Any reasonable demand,
 And compensate him

[p. 71]

With handsome gratitude.
 This is a concession
 And a Mercy
 From your Lord.
 After this whoever
 Exceeds the limits
 Shall be in grave penalty.

179. In the Law of Equality
 There is (saving of) Life
 To you, O ye men of understanding;
 That ye may
 Restrain yourselves.

180. It is prescribed,
 When death approaches
 Any of you, if he leave
 Any goods, that he make a bequest
 To parents and next of kin,
 According to reasonable usage;
 This is due
 From the God-fearing.

181. If anyone changes the bequest
 After hearing it,
 The guilt shall be on those
 Who make the change.
 For God hears and knows
 (All things).

182. But if anyone fears
 Partiality or wrong-doing
 On the part of the testator,
 And makes peace between

[p. 72]

(The parties concerned),
 There is no wrong in him:
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 23.

183. O ye who believe!
 Fasting is prescribed to you
 As it was prescribed
 To those before you,
 That ye may (learn)
 Self-restraint,--

184. (Fasting) for a fixed
 Number of days;
 But if any of you is ill,
 Or on a journey,
 The prescribed number
 (Should be made up)
 From days later.
 For those who can do it
 (With hardship), is a ransom,
 The feeding of one
 That is indigent.
 But he that will give
 More, of his own free will,--
 It is better for him.
 And it is better for you
 That ye fast,
 If ye only knew.

[p. 73]

185. Ramadhan is the (month)
 In which was sent down
 The Qur-an, as a guide
 To mankind, also clear (Signs)
 For guidance and judgment
 (Between right and wrong).
 So every one of you
 Who is present (at his home)
 During that month
 Should spend it in fasting,
 But if any one is ill,
 Or on a journey,
 The prescribed period
 (Should be made up)
 By days later.
 God intends every facility
 For you; He does not want
 To put you to difficulties.
 (He wants you) to complete
 The prescribed period,
 And to glorify Him
 In that He has guided you;
 And perchance ye shall be grateful.

186. When My servants
 Ask thee concerning Me,
 I am indeed
 Close (to them): I listen
 To the prayer of every
 Suppliant when he calleth on Me:
 Let them also, with a will,
 Listen to My call,
 And believe in Me:
 That they may walk
 In the right way.

187. Permitted to you,
 On the night of the fasts,
 Is the approach to your wives.
 They are your garments

[p. 74]

And ye are their garments.
 God knoweth what ye
 Used to do secretly among yourselves;
 But He turned to you
 And forgave you;
 So now associate with them,
 And seek what God
 Hath ordained for you,
 And eat and drink,
 Until the white thread
 Of dawn appear to you
 Distinct from its black thread;
 Then complete your fast
 Till the night appears;
 But do not associate
 With your wives
 While ye are in retreat
 In the mosques. Those are
 Limits (set by) God:
 Approach not nigh thereto.
 Thus doth God make clear
 His Signs to men: that
 They may learn self-restraint.

188. And do not eat up
 Your property among yourselves
 For vanities, nor use it
 As bait for the judges,
 With intent that ye may
 Eat up wrongfully and knowingly

[p. 75]

A little of (other) people's property.

  

SECTION 24.

189. They ask thee
 Concerning the New Moons.
 Say: They are but signs
 To mark fixed periods of time
 In (the affairs of) men,
 And for Pilgrimage.
 It is no virtue if ye enter
 Your houses from the back:
 It is virtue if ye fear God.
 Enter houses
 Through the proper doors:
 And fear God:
 That ye may prosper.

190. Fight in the cause of God
 Those who fight you,
 But do not transgress limits;
 For God loveth not transgressors.

191. And slay them
 Wherever ye catch them,
 And turn them out
 From where they have

[p. 76]

Turned you out;
 For tumult and oppression
 Are worse than slaughter;
 But fight them not
 At the Sacred Mosque,
 Unless they (first)
 Fight you there;
 But if they fight you,
 Slay them.
 Such is the reward
 Of those who suppress faith.

192. But if they cease,
 God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

193. And fight them on
 Until there is no more
 Tumult or oppression,
 And there prevail
 Justice and faith in God;
 But if they cease,
 Let there be no hostility
 Except to those
 Who practise oppression.

[p. 77]

194. The prohibited month
 For the prohibited month,--
 And so for all things prohibited,--
 There is the law of equality.
 If then any one transgresses
 The prohibition against you,
 Transgress ye likewise
 Against him.
 But fear God, and know
 That God is with those
 Who restrain themselves.

195. And spend of your substance
 In the cause of God,
 And make not your own hands
 Contribute to (your) destruction;
 But do good;
 For God loveth those
 Who do good.

196. And complete
 The .Hajj or 'umra 

[p. 78]

In the service of God.
 But if ye are prevented
 (From completing it),
 Send an offering
 For sacrifice,
 Such as ye may find,
 And do not shave your heads
 Until the offering reaches
 The place of sacrifice.
 And if any of you is ill,
 Or has an ailment in his scalp,
 (Necessitating shaving),
 (He should) in compensation
 Either fast, or feed the poor,
 Or offer sacrifice;
 And when ye are
 In peaceful conditions (again),
 If any one wishes
 To continue the 'umra 
 On to the hajj,
 He must make an offering,
 Such as he can afford,
 But if he cannot afford it,
 He should fast
 Three days during the hajj
 And seven days on his return,
 Making ten days in all.
 This is for those
 Whose household
 Is not in (the precincts
 Of) the Sacred Mosque.
 And fear God,
 And know that God.
 Is strict in punishment?

[p. 79]

  

SECTION 25.

197. For Hajj 
 Are the months well known.
 If any one undertakes
 That duty therein,
 Let there be no obscenity,
 Nor wickedness,
 Nor wrangling
 In the Hajj.
 And whatever good
 Ye do, (be sure)
 God knoweth it.
 And take a provision
 (With you) for the journey,
 But the best of provisions
 Is right conduct.
 So fear Me,
 O ye that are wise.

198. It is no crime in you
 If ye seek of the bounty
 Of your Lord (during pilgrimage).
 Then when ye pour down
 From (Mount) 'Arafat,
 Celebrate the praises of God
 At the Sacred Monument,

[p. 80]

And celebrate His praises
 As He has directed you,
 Even though, before this,
 Ye went astray.

199. Then pass on
 At a quick pace from the place
 Whence it is usual
 For the multitude
 So to do, and ask
 For God's forgiveness.
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

200. So when ye have
 Accomplished your holy rites,
 Celebrate the praises of God,
 As ye used to celebrate
 The praises of your fathers,--
 Yea, with far more
 Heart and soul.
 There are men who say:
 "Our ! Give us
 (Thy bounties) in this world!"
 But they will have
 No portion in the Hereafter.

201. And there are men who say:
 "Our Lord! Give us
 Good in this world
 And good in the Hereafter,
 And defend us
 From the torment
 Of the Fire!"

[p. 81]

202. To these will be allotted
 What they have earned;
 And God is quick in account.

203. Celebrate the praises of God
 During the Appointed Days.
 But if any one hastens
 To leave in two days,
 There is no blame on him,
 And if any one stays on,
 There is no blame on him,
 If his aim is to do right.
 Then fear God, and know
 That ye will surely
 Be gathered unto Him.

204. There is the type of man
 Whose speech
 About this world's life
 May dazzle thee,
 And he calls God to witness
 About what is in his heart;
 Yet is he the most contentious
 Of enemies.

205. When he turns his back,
 His aim everywhere
 Is to spread mischief
 Through the earth and destroy
 Crops and cattle.
 But God loveth not mischief.

206. When it is said to him,
 "Fear God,"
 He is led by arrogance
 To (more) crime.

[p. 82]

Enough for him is Hell;--
 An evil bed indeed
 (To lie on)!

207. And there is the type of man
 Who gives his life
 To earn the pleasure of God;
 And God is full of kindness
 To (His) devotees.

208. O ye who believe!
 Enter into Islam
 Whole-heartedly;
 And follow not
 The footsteps
 Of the Evil One;
 For he is to you
 An avowed enemy.

209. If ye backslide
 After the clear (Signs)
 Have come to you,
 Then know that God
 Is Exalted in Power, Wise.

210. Will they wait
 Until God comes to them
 In canopies of clouds,
 With angels (in His train)
 And the question
 Is (thus) settled?
 But to God
 Do all questions
 Go back (for decision).

  

SECTION 26.

211. Ask the Children of Israel
 How many Clear (Signs)

[p. 83]

We have sent them.
 But if any one,
 After God's favour
 Has come to him,
 Substitutes (something else),
 God is strict in punishment.

212. The life of this world
 Is alluring to those
 Who reject faith,
 And they scoff at those
 Who believe.
 But the righteous
 Will be above them
 On the Day of Resurrection;
 For God bestows His abundance
 Without measure
 On whom He will.

213. Mankind was one single nation,
 And God sent Messengers
 With glad tidings and warnings;
 And with them He sent
 The Book in truth,
 To judge between people
 In matters wherein
 They differed;
 But the People of the Book,
 After the clear Signs
 Came to them, did not differ
 Among themselves,
 Except through selfish contumacy.
 God by His Grace
 Guided the Believers
 To the Truth,
 Concerning that
 Wherein they differed.
 For God guides
 Whom He will
 To a path
 That is straight.

214. Or do ye think
 That ye shall enter

[p. 84]

The Garden (of Bliss)
 Without such (trials)
 As came to those
 Who passed away
 Before you?
 They encountered
 Suffering and adversity,
 And were so shaken in spirit
 That even the Apostle
 And those of faith
 Who were with him
 Cried: "When (will come)
 The help of God?"
 Ah! Verily, the help of God
 Is (always) near!

215. They ask thee
 What they should spend
 (In charity). Say: Whatever
 Ye spend that is good,
 Is for parents and kindred
 And orphans
 And those in want
 And for wayfarers.
 And whatever ye do
 That is good,--God
 Knoweth it well.

216. Fighting is prescribed
 For you, and ye dislike it.
 But it is possible
 That ye dislike a thing
 Which is good for you,
 And that ye love a thing
 Which is bad for you.
 But God knoweth,
 And ye know not.

[p. 85]

  

SECTION 27.

217. They ask thee
 Concerning fighting
 In the Prohibited Month.
 Say: "Fighting therein
 Is a grave (offence);
 But graver is it
 In the sight of God
 To prevent access
 To the path of God,
 To deny Him,
 To prevent access
 To the Sacred Mosque,
 And drive out its members.
 Tumult and oppression
 Are worse than slaughter.
 Nor will they cease
 Fighting you until
 They turn you back
 From your faith
 If they can.
 And if any of you
 Turn back from their faith
 And die in unbelief,
 Their works will bear no fruit
 In this life
 And in the Hereafter;
 They will be
 Companions of the Fire
 And will abide therein.

218. Those who believed
 And those who suffered exile
 And fought (and strove and struggled)
 In the path of God,--
 They have the hope
 Of the Mercy of God;
 And God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

[p. 86]

219. They ask thee
 Concerning wine and gambling.
 Say: "In them is great sin,
 And some profit, for men;
 But the sin is greater
 Than the profit."
 Whey ask thee how much
 They are to spend;
 Say: "What is beyond
 Your needs."
 Thus doth God
 Make clear to you
 His Signs: in order that
 Ye may consider--

220. (Their bearings) on
 This life and the Hereafter.

They ask thee
 Concerning orphans.
 Say: "The best thing to do
 Is what is for their good;
 If ye mix
 Their affairs with yours,
 They are your brethren;
 But God knows

[p. 87]

The man who means mischief
 From the man who means good.
 And if God had wished,
 He could have put you
 Into difficulties: He is indeed
 Exalted in Power, Wise.

221. Do not marry
 Unbelieving women (idolaters),
 Until they believe:
 A slave woman who believes
 Is better than an unbelieving woman,
 Even though she allure you.
 Nor marry (your girls)
 To unbelievers until
 They believe:
 A man slave who believes
 Is better than an unbeliever,
 Even though he allure you.
 Unbelievers do (but)
 Beckon you to the Fire.
 But God beckons by His Grace
 To the Garden (of Bliss)
 And forgiveness,
 And makes His Signs
 Clear to mankind:
 That they may
 Celebrate His praise.

  

SECTION 28.

222. They ask thee
 Concerning women's courses.
 Say: They are
 A hurt and a pollution:

[p. 88]

So keep away from women
 In their courses, and do not
 Approach them until
 They are clean.
 But when they have
 Purified themselves,
 Ye may approach them
 In any manner, time, or place
 Ordained for you by God.
 For God loves those
 Who turn to Him constantly
 And He loves those
 Who keep themselves pure and clean,

223. Your wives are
 As a tilth unto you;
 So approach your tilth
 When or how ye will;
 But do some good act
 For your souls beforehand;
 And fear God,
 And know that ye are
 To meet Him (in the Hereafter),
 And give (these) good tidings
 To those who believe.

224. And make not
 God's (name) an excuse
 In your oaths against
 Doing good, or acting rightly,
 Or making peace
 Between persons;

[p. 89]

For God is One
 Who heareth and knoweth
 All things.

225. God will not
 Call you to account
 For thoughtlessness
 In your oaths,
 But for the intention
 In your hearts;
 And He is
 Oft-forgiving
 Most Forbearing.

226. For those who take
 An oath for abstention
 From their wives,
 A waiting for four months
 Is ordained;
 If then they return,
 God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

227. But if their intention
 Is firm for divorce,
 God heareth
 And knoweth all things.

228. Divorced women
 Shall wait concerning themselves

[p. 90]

For three monthly periods.
 Nor is it lawful for them
 To hide what God
 Hath created in their wombs,
 If they have faith
 In God and the Last Day.
 And their husbands
 Have the better right
 To take them back
 In that period, if
 They wish for reconciliation.
 And women shall have rights
 Similar to the rights
 Against them, according
 To what is equitable;
 But men have a degree
 (Of advantage) over them.
 And God is Exalted in Power, Wise.

  

SECTION 29.

229. A divorce is only
 Permissible twice: after that,
 The parties should either hold
 Together on equitable terms,
 Or separate with kindness.
 It is not lawful for you,
 (Men), to take back
 Any of your gifts (from your wives)
 Except when both parties
 Fear that they would be
 Unable to keep the limits

[p. 91]

Ordained by God.
 If ye (judges) do indeed
 Fear that they would be
 Unable to keep the limits
 Ordained by God,
 There is no blame on either
 Of them if she give
 Something for her freedom.
 These are the limits
 Ordained by God;
 So do not transgress them
 If any do transgress
 The limits ordained by God,
 Such persons wrong
 (Themselves as well as others).

230. So if a husband
 Divorces his wife (irrevocably),
 He cannot, after that,
 Re-marry her until
 After she has married
 Another husband and
 He has divorced her.
 In that case there is
 No blame on either of them
 If they re-unite, provided
 They feel that they
 Can keep the limits
 Ordained by God.
 Such are the limits
 Ordained by God,
 Which He makes plain
 To those who understand.

231. When ye divorce
 Women, and they fulfil

[p. 92]

The term of their ('Iddat),
 Either take them back
 On equitable terms
 Or set them free
 On equitable terms;
 But do not take them back
 To injure them, (or) to take
 Undue advantage;
 If any one does that,
 He wrongs his own soul.
 Do not treat God's Signs
 As a jest,
 But solemnly rehearse
 God's favours on you,
 And the fact that He
 Sent down to you
 The Book
 And Wisdom,
 For your instruction.
 And fear God,
 And know that God
 Is well acquainted
 With all things.

  

SECTION 30.

232. When ye divorce
 Women, and they fulfil
 The term of their ('Iddat),
 Do not prevent them
 From marrying
 Their (former) husbands,
 If they mutually agree
 On equitable terms.
 This instruction
 Is for all amongst you,
 Who believe in God
 And the Last Day.
 That is (the course

[p. 93]

Making for) most virtue
 And purity amongst you,
 And God knows,
 And ye know not.

233. The mothers shall give suck
 To their offspring
 For two whole years,
 If the father desires
 To complete the term.
 But he shall bear the cost
 Of their food and clothing
 On equitable terms.
 No soul shall have
 A burden laid on it
 Greater than it can bear.
 No mother shall be
 Treated unfairly
 On account of her child.
 Nor father
 On account of his child,
 An heir shall be chargeable
 In the same way.
 If they both decide
 On weaning,
 By mutual consent,
 And after due consultation,
 There is no blame on them.
 If ye decide
 On a foster-mother
 For your offspring,
 There is no blame on you,
 Provided ye pay (the mother)
 What ye offered,
 On equitable terms.
 But fear God and know
 That God sees well
 What ye do.

234. If any of you die
 And leave widows behind,

[p. 94]

They shall wait concerning themselves
 Four months and ten days:
 When they have fulfilled
 Their term, there is no blame
 On you if they dispose
 Of themselves in a just
 And reasonable manner.
 And God is well acquainted
 With what ye do.

235. There is no blame
 On you if ye make
 An offer of betrothal
 Or hold it in your hearts.
 God knows that ye
 Cherish them in your hearts:
 But do not make a secret contract
 With them except in terms
 Honourable, nor resolve on the tie
 Of marriage till the term
 Prescribed is fulfilled.
 And know that God
 Knoweth what is in your hearts,
 And take heed of Him;
 And know that God is
 Oft-forgiving, Most Forbearing.

  

SECTION 31.

236. There is no blame on you
 If ye divorce women
 Before consummation
 Or the fixation of their dower;
 But bestow on them
 (A suitable gift),
 The wealthy
 According to his means,
 And the poor
 According to his means;--

[p. 95]

A gift of a reasonable amount
 Is due from those
 Who wish to do the right thing.

237. And if ye divorce them
 Before consummation,
 But after the fixation
 Of a dower for them,
 Then the half of the dower
 (Is due to them), unless
 They remit it
 Or (the man's half) is remitted
 By him in whose hands
 Is the marriage tie;
 And the remission
 (Of the man's half)
 Is the nearest to righteousness.
 And do not forget
 Liberality between yourselves.
 For God sees well
 All that ye do.

238. Guard strictly
 Your (habit of) prayers,
 Especially the Middle Prayer;
 And stand before God
 In a devout (frame of mind).

239. If ye fear (an enemy),
 Pray on foot, or riding,
 (As may be most convenient),
 But when ye are
 In security, celebrate
 God's praises in the manner
 He has taught you,
 Which ye knew not (before).

[p. 96]

240. Those of you
 Who die and leave widows
 Should bequeath
 For their widows
 A year's maintenance
 And residence;
 But if they leave
 (The residence),
 There is no blame on you
 For what they do
 With themselves,
 Provided it is reasonable.
 And God is Exalted in Power, Wise.

241. For divorced women
 Maintenance (should be provided)
 On a reasonable (scale).
 This is a duty
 On the righteous.

242. Thus doth God
 Make clear His Signs
 To you: in order that
 Ye may understand.

[p. 97]

  

SECTION 32.

243. Didst thou not
 Turn by vision to those
 Who abandoned their homes,
 Though they were thousands
 (In number), for fear of death?
 God said to them: "Die":
 Then He restored them to life.
 For God is full of bounty
 To mankind, but
 Most of them are ungrateful.

244. Then fight in the cause
 Of God, and know that God
 Heareth and knoweth all things.

245. Who is he
 That will loan to God
 A beautiful loan, which God
 Will double unto his credit
 And multiply many times?
 It is God that giveth (you)
 Want or Plenty,
 And to Him shall be
 Your return.

246. Hast thou not
 Turned thy vision to the Chiefs
 Of the Children of Israel
 After (the time of) Moses?

[p. 98]

They said to a Prophet
 (That was) among them:
 "Appoint for us a King, that we
 May fight in the cause of God."
 He said: "Is it not possible,
 If ye were commanded
 To fight, that that ye
 Will not fight?" They said:
 "How could we refuse
 To fight in the cause of God,
 Seeing that we were turned out
 Of our homes and our families?"
 But when they were commanded
 To fight, they turned back,
 Except a small band
 Among them. But God
 Has full knowledge of those
 Who do wrong.

247. Their Prophet said to them:
 "God hath appointed
 Talut as king over you."
 They said: "How can he
 Exercise authority over us
 When we are better fitted
 Than he to exercise authority,
 And he is not even gifted,
 With wealth in abundance?"
 He said: "God hath
 Chosen him above you,
 And hath gifted him
 Abundantly with knowledge
 And bodily prowess: God

[p. 99]

Granteth His authority to whom
 He pleaseth. God careth
 For all, and He knoweth
 All things."

248. And (further) their Prophet
 Said to them: "A Sign
 Of his authority
 Is that there shall come
 To you the Ark of the Covenant,
 With (an assurance) therein
 Of security from your Lord,
 And the relics left
 By the family of Moses
 And the family of Aaron,
 Carried by angels.
 In this is a Symbol
 For you if ye indeed
 Have faith."

  

SECTION 33.

249. When Talut set forth
 With the armies, he said:
 "God will test you
 At the stream: if any
 Drinks of its water,
 He goes not with my army:
 Only those who taste not
 Of it go with me:
 A mere sip out of the hand
 Is excused." But they all
 Drank of it, except a few.
 When they crossed the river,--
 He and the faithful ones with him,
 They said: "This day
 We cannot cope
 With Goliath and his forces."

[p. 100]

But those who were convinced
 That they must meet God,
 Said: "How oft, by God's will,
 Hath a small force
 Vanquished a big one?
 God is with those
 Who steadfastly persevere."

250. When they advanced
 To meet Goliath and his forces,
 They prayed: "Our Lord
 Pour out constancy on us
 And make our steps firm:
 Help us against those
 That reject faith."

251. By God's will,
 They routed them;
 And David slew Goliath;
 And God gave him
 Power and wisdom
 And taught him
 Whatever (else) He willed,
 And did not God
 Check one set of people
 By means of another,
 The earth would indeed
 Be full of mischief:
 But God is full of bounty
 To all the worlds.

252. These are the Signs
 Of God: we rehearse them
 To thee in truth: verily
 Thou art one of the Apostles.

[p. 101]

253. Those apostles
 Were endowed with gifts,
 Some above others
 To one of them God spoke;
 Others He raised
 To degrees (of honour);
 To Jesus the son of Mary
 We gave Clear (Signs),
 And strengthened him
 With the holy spirit.
 If God had so willed,
 Succeeding generations
 Would not have fought
 Among each other, after
 Clear (Signs) had come to them,
 But they (chose) to wrangle,
 Some believing and Others
 Rejecting. If God had so willed,
 They would not have fought
 Each other; but God
 Fulfilleth His plan.

[p. 102]

  

SECTION 34.

254. O ye who believe!
 Spend out of (the bounties)
 We have provided for you,
 Before the Day comes
 When no bargaining
 (Will avail), nor friendship
 Nor intercession.
 Those who reject Faith--they
 Are the wrong-doers.

255. God! There is no god
 But He,--the Living,
 The Self-subsisting, Eternal.
 No slumber can seize Him
 Nor sleep. His are all things
 In the heavens and on earth.
 Who is there can intercede
 In His presence except
 As He permitteth? He knoweth
 What (appeareth to His creatures

[p. 103]

As) Before or After
 Or Behind them.
 Nor shall they compass
 Aught of His knowledge
 Except as He willeth.
 His Throne doth extend
 Over the heavens
 And the earth, and He feeleth
 No fatigue in guarding,
 And preserving them
 For He is the Most High,
 The Supreme (in glory).

256. Let there be no compulsion
 In religion: Truth stands out
 Clear from Error: whoever
 Rejects Evil and believes
 In God hath grasped
 The most trustworthy
 Hand-hold, that never breaks.
 And God heareth
 And knoweth all things.

257. God is the Protector
 Of those who have faith:

[p. 104]

From the depths of darkness
 He will lead them forth
 Into light. Of those
 Who reject faith the patrons
 Are the Evil Ones: from light
 They will lead them forth
 Into the depths of darkness.
 They will be Companions
 Of the fire, to dwell therein
 (For ever).

  

SECTION 35.

258. Hast thou not
 Turned thy vision to one
 Who disputed with Abraham
 About his Lord, because
 God had granted him
 Power? Abraham said:
 "My Lord is He Who
 Giveth life and death."
 He said: "I give life and death."
 Said Abraham: "But it is God
 That causeth the sun
 To rise from the East:
 Do thou then cause him
 To rise from the West."
 Thus was he confounded
 Who (in arrogance) rejected
 Faith. Nor doth God
 Give guidance
 To a people unjust.

259. Or (take) the similitude
 Of one who passed

[p. 105]

By a hamlet, all in ruins
 To its roofs. He said:
 "Oh! how shall God
 Bring it (ever) to life,
 After (this) its death?"
 But God caused him
 To die for a hundred years,
 Then raised him up (again).
 He said: "How long
 Didst thou tarry (thus)?"
 He said: "(Perhaps) a day
 Or part of a day." He said:
 "Nay, thou hast tarried
 Thus a hundred years;
 But look at thy food
 And thy drink; they show
 No signs of age; and look
 At thy donkey: and that
 We may make of thee
 A Sign unto the people,
 Look further at the bones,
 How We bring them together
 And clothe them with flesh."
 When this was shown clearly
 To him, he said: "I know
 That God hath power
 Over all things."

260. Behold! Abraham said:
 "My Lord! Show me how
 Thou givest life to the dead."
 He said: "Dost thou not
 Then believe?" He said:
 "Yea! but to satisfy

[p. 106]

My own understanding."
 He said: "Take four birds;
 Tame them to turn to thee;
 Put a portion of them
 On every hill, and call to them:
 They will come to thee
 (Flying) with speed.
 Then know that God
 Is Exalted in Power, Wise."

  

SECTION 36.

261. The parable of those
 Who spend their substance
 In the way of God is that
 Of a grain of corn: it groweth
 Seven ears, and each ear
 Hath a hundred grains.
 God giveth manifold increase
 To whom He pleaseth:
 And God careth for all
 And He knoweth all things

262. Those who spend
 Their substance in the cause
 Of God, and follow not up
 Their gifts with reminders
 Of their generosity
 Or with injury,--for them
 Their reward is with their Lord:
 On them shall be no fear,
 Nor shall they grieve.

263. Kind words
 And the covering of faults

[p. 107]

Are better than charity
 Followed by injury.
 God is Free of all wants,
 And He is most Forbearing.

264. O ye who believe!
 Cancel not your charity
 By reminders of your generosity
 Or by injury,--like those
 Who spend their substance
 To be seen of men,
 But believe neither
 In God nor in the Last Day.
 They are in Parable like a hard,
 Barren rock, on which
 Is a little soil: on it
 Falls heavy rain,
 Which leaves it
 (Just) a bare stone.
 They will be able to do nothing
 With aught they have earned.
 And God guideth not
 Those who reject faith.

265. And the likeness of those
 Who spend their substance,
 Seeking to please God
 And to strengthen their souls,
 Is as a garden, high
 And fertile: heavy rain
 Falls on it but makes it yield
 A double increase
 Of harvest, and if it receives not
 Heavy rain, light moisture
 Sufficeth it. God seeth well
 Whatever ye do.

[p. 108]

266. Does any of you wish
 That he should have a garden
 With date-palms and vines
 And streams flowing
 Underneath, and all kinds
 Of fruit, while he is stricken
 With old age, and his children
 Are not strong (enough
 To look after themselves)--
 That it should be caught
 In a whirlwind,
 With fire therein,
 And be burnt up?
 Thus doth God make clear
 To you (His) Signs;
 That ye may consider.

  

SECTION 37.

267. O ye who believe!
 Give of the good things
 Which ye have (honourably) earned,
 And of the fruits of the earth
 Which We have produced

[p. 109]

For you, and do not even aim
 At getting anything
 Which is bad, in order that
 Out of it ye may give away
 Something, when ye yourselves
 Would not receive it
 Except with closed eyes.
 And know that God
 Is Free of all wants,
 And Worthy of all praise.

268. The Evil One threatens
 You with poverty
 And bids you to conduct
 Unseemly. God promiseth
 You His forgiveness
 And bounties.
 And God careth for all
 And He knoweth all things.

269. He granteth wisdom
 To whom He pleaseth;
 And he to whom wisdom
 Is granted receiveth
 Indeed a benefit overflowing;
 But none will grasp the Message
 But men of understanding.

270. And whatever ye spend
 In charity or devotion,
 Be sure God knows it all.
 But the wrong-doers
 Have no helpers.

[p. 110]

271. If ye disclose (acts
 Of) charity, even so
 It is well,
 But if ye conceal them,
 And make them reach
 Those (really) in need,
 That is best for you:
 It will remove from you
 Some of your (stains
 Of) evil. And God
 Is well acquainted
 With what ye do.

272. It is not required
 Of thee (O Apostle),
 To set them on the right path,
 But God sets on the right path
 Whom He pleaseth.
 Whatever of good ye give
 Benefits your own souls,
 And ye shall only do so
 Seeking the "Face"
 Of God. Whatever good
 Ye give, shall be
 Rendered back to you,
 And ye shall not
 Be dealt with unjustly.

273. (Charity is) for those
 In need, who, in God's cause
 Are restricted (from travel),
 And cannot move about

[p. 111]

In the land, seeking
 (For trade or work):
 The ignorant man thinks,
 Because of their modesty,
 That they are free from want.
 Thou shaltknow them
 By their (unfailing) mark:
 They beg not importunately
 From all and sundry.
 And whatever of good
 Ye give, be assured
 God knoweth it well.

  

SECTION 38.

274. Whose who (in charity)
 Spend of their goods
 By night and by day,
 In secret and in public,
 Have their reward
 With their Lord:
 On them shall be no fear,
 Nor shall they grieve.

275. Those who devour usury
 Will not stand except
 As stands one whom
 The Evil One by his touch
 Hath driven to madness.
 That is because they say:
 "Trade is like usury,"
 But God hath permitted trade

[p. 112]

And forbidden usury.
 Those who after receiving
 Direction from their Lord,
 Desist, shall be pardoned
 For the past; their case
 Is for God (to judge);
 But those who repeat
 (The offence) are Companions
 Of the Fire: they will
 Abide therein (for ever).

276. God will deprive
 Usury of all blessing,
 But will give increase
 For deeds of charity:
 For He loveth not
 Creatures ungrateful
 And wicked.

277. Those who believe,
 And do deeds of righteousness,
 And establish regular prayers
 And regular charity,
 Will have their reward
 With their Lord:
 On them shall be no fear,
 Nor shall they grieve.

278. O ye who believe!
 Fear God, and give up
 What remains of your demand
 For usury, if ye are
 Indeed believers.

279. If ye do it not,
 Take notice of war
 From God and His Apostle:
 But if ye turn back,
 Ye shall have
 Your capital sums:
 Deal not unjustly,
 And ye shall not
 Be dealt with unjustly.

[p. 113]

280. If the debtor is
 In a difficulty,
 Grant him time
 Till it is easy
 For him to repay.
 But if ye remit it
 By way of charity,
 That is best for you
 If ye only knew.

281. And fear the Day
 When ye shall be
 Brought back to God.
 Then shall every soul
 Be paid what it earned,
 And none shall be
 Dealt with unjustly.

  

SECTION 39.

282. O ye who believe!
 When ye deal with each other,
 In transactions involving
 Future obligations
 In a fixed period of time,
 Reduce them to writing
 Let a scribe write down
 Faithfully as between
 The parties: let not the scribe
 Refuse to write: as God
 Has taught him,
 So let him write.
 Let him who incurs
 The liability dictate,
 But let him fear
 His Lord God,
 And not diminish
 Aught of what he owes.
 If the party liable
 Is mentally deficient,

[p. 114]

Or weak, or unable
 Himself to dictate,
 Let his guardian
 Dictate faithfully.
 And get two witnesses,
 Out of your own men,
 And if there are not two men,
 Then a man and two women,
 Such as ye choose,
 For witnesses,
 So that if one of them errs,
 The other can remind her.
 The witnesses
 Should not refuse
 When they are called on
 (For evidence).
 Disdain not to reduce
 To writing (your contract)
 For a future period,
 Whether it be small
 Or big: it is juster
 In the sight of God,
 More suitable as evidence,
 And more convenient
 To prevent doubts
 Among yourselves
 But if it be a transaction
 Which ye carry out
 On the spot among yourselves,
 There is no blame on you
 If ye reduce it not
 To writing.
 But take witnesses
 Whenever ye make
 A commercial contract;
 And let neither scribe
 Nor witness suffer harm.
 If ye do (such harm),
 It would be wickedness
 In you. So fear God;
 For it is God
 That teaches you.
 And God is well acquainted
 With all things.

[p. 115]

283. If ye are on a journey,
 And cannot find
 A scribe, a pledge
 With possession (may serve
 The purpose).
 And if one of you
 Deposits a thing
 On trust with another,
 Let the trustee
 (Faithfully) discharge
 His trust, and let him
 Fear his Lord.
 Conceal not evidence;
 For whoever conceals it,--
 His heart is tainted
 With sin. And God
 Knoweth all that ye do.

  

SECTION 40.

284. To God belongeth all
 That is in the heavens
 And on earth. Whether
 Ye show what is in your minds
 Or conceal it, God
 Calleth you to account for it.

[p. 116]

He forgiveth whom He pleaseth,
 And punishefh whom He pleaseth.
 For God hath power
 Over all things.

285. The Apostle believeth
 In what hath been revealed
 To him from his Lord,
 As do the men of faith.
 Each one (of them) believeth
 In God, His angels,
 His books, and His apostles.
 "We make no distinction (they say)
 Between one and another
 Of His apostles." And they say:
 "We hear, and we obey:
 (We seek) Thy forgiveness,
 Our Lord, and to Thee
 Is the end of all journeys."

286. On no soul doth God
 Place a burden greater
 Than it can bear.
 It gets every good that it earns,
 And it suffers every ill that if earns.
 (Pray:) "Our Lord!
 Condemn us not
 If we forget or fall
 Into error; our Lord!
 Lay not on us a burden
 Like that which Thou
 Didst lay on those before us;

[p. 117]

Our Lord! lay not on us
 A burden greater than we
 Have strength to bear.
 Blot out our sins,
 And grant us forgiveness,
 Have mercy on us.
 Thou art our Protector;
 Help us against those
 Who stand against Faith"

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 118] [p. 119] [p. 120] [p. 121] [p. 122]

  

Sura III.

  

Al-i-'Imran, or The Family of 'Imran.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. M.

2. God! There is no god
 But He,--the Living,
 The Self-Subsisting, Eternal.

3. It is He Who sent down
 To thee (step by step),
 In truth, the Book,
 Confirming what went before it;
 And He sent down the Law
 (Of Moses) and the Gospel
 (Of Jesus) before this,
 As a guide to mankind,
 And He sent down the Criterion
 (Of judgment between right and wrong).

4. Then those who reject
 Faith in the Signs of God
 Will suffer the severest
 Penalty, and God
 Is Exalted in Might,
 Lord of Retribution.

5. From God, verily
 Nothing is hidden
 On earth or in the heavens.

6. He it is Who shapes you
 In the wombs as He pleases.

[p. 123]

There is no god but He,
 The Exalted in Might,
 The Wise.

7. He it is Who has sent down
 To thee the Book:
 In it are verses
 Basic or fundamental
 (Of established meaning);
 They are the foundation
 Of the Book: others
 Are allegorical. But those
 In whose hearts is perversity follow
 The part thereof that is allegorical,
 Seeking discord, and searching
 For its hidden meanings,
 But to one knows
 Its hidden meanings except God.
 And those who are firmly grounded
 In knowledge say: "We believe
 In the Book; the whole of it
 Is from our Lord:" and none
 Will grasp the Message
 Except men of understanding.

8. "Our Lord!" (they say),
 "Let not our hearts deviate
 Now after Thou hast guided us,
 But grant us mercy
 From Thine own Presence;
 For Thou art the Grantor
 Of bounties without measure.

[p. 124]

9. "Our Lord! Thou art He
 That will gather mankind
 Together against a Day about which
 There is no doubt; for God
 Never fails in His promise."

  

SECTION 2.

10. Whose who reject Faith,--
 Neither their possessions
 Nor their (numerous) progeny
 Will avail them aught
 Against God: they are themselves
 But fuel for the Fire.

11. (Their plight will be)
 No better than that
 Of the people of Pharaoh,
 And their predecessors:
 They denied our Signs,
 And God called them to account
 For their sins.
 For God is strict
 In punishment.

12. Say to those who reject Faith:
 "Soon will ye be vanquished
 And gathered together
 To Hell,--an evil bed
 Indeed (to lie on)!

13. "There has already been
 For you a Sign

[p. 125]

In the two armies
 That met (in combat):
 One was fighting in the Cause
 Of God, the other
 Resisting God; these saw
 With their own eyes
 Twice their number.
 But God doth support
 With His aid whom He pleaseth.
 In this is a warning
 For such as have eyes to see."

14. Fair in the eyes of men
 Is the love of things they covet:
 Women and sons;
 Heaped-up hoards
 Of gold and silver; horses
 Branded (for blood and excellence);
 And (wealth of) cattle
 And well-tilled land.
 Such are the possessions
 Of this world's life;
 But in nearness to God
 Is the best of the goals
 (To return to).

15. Say: Shall I give you
 Glad tidings of things
 Far better than those?
 For the righteous are Gardens

[p. 126]

In nearness to their Lord,
 With rivers flowing beneath;
 Therein is their eternal home;
 With Companions pure (and holy);
 And the good pleasure of God.
 For in God's sight
 Are (all) His servants,--

16. (Namely), those who say:
 "Our Lord! we have indeed
 Believed: forgive us, then,
 Our sins, and save us
 From the agony of the Fire;"--

17. Those who show patience,
 Firmness and self control;
 Who are true (in word and deed);
 Who worship devoutly;
 Who spend (in the way of God);
 And who pray for forgiveness
 In the early hours of the morning.

18. There is no god but He
 That is the witness of God,
 His angels, and those endued
 With knowledge, standing firm
 On justice. There is no god but He,
 The Exalted in Power,
 The Wise.

19. The Religion before God
 Is Islam (submission to His Will):
 Nor did the People of the Book
 Dissent therefrom except

[p. 127]

Through envy of each other,
 After knowledge had come to them.
 But if any deny the Signs of God,
 God is swift in calling to account.

20. So if they dispute with thee,
 Say: "I have submitted
 My whole self to God
 And so have those
 Who follow me."
 And say to the People of the Book
 And to those who are unlearned:
 "Do ye (also) submit yourselves?"
 If they do, they are in right guidance,
 But if they turn back,
 Thy duty is to convey the Message;
 And in God's sight
 Are (all) His servants.

  

SECTION 3.

21. As to those who deny
 The Signs of God, and in defiance

[p. 128]

Of right, slay the prophets,
 And slay those who teach
 Just dealing whith mankind,
 Announce to them a grievous penalty.

22. They are those whose works
 Will bear no fruit
 In this world
 And in the Hereafter,
 Nor will they have
 Anyone to help.

23. Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to those
 Who have been given a portion
 Of the Book? They are
 Invited to the Book of God,
 To settle their dispute,
 But a party of them
 Turn back and decline
 (The arbitration).

24. This because they say:
 "The Fire shall not touch us
 But for a few numbered days":
 For their forgeries deceive them
 As to their own religion.

25. But how (will they fare)
 When We gather them together

[p. 129]

Against a Day about which
 There is no doubt,
 And each soul will be paid out
 Just what it has earned,
 Without (favour or) injustice?

26. Say: "O God!
 Lord of Power (and Rule),
 Thou givest Power
 To whom Thou pleasest,
 And Thou strippest off Power
 From whom Thou pleasest:
 Thou enduest with honour
 Whom Thou pleasest,
 And Thou bringest low
 Whom Thou pleasest:
 In Thy hand is all Good."
 Verily, over all things
 Thou hast power.

27. "Thou causest the Night
 To gain on the Day,
 And Thou causest the Day
 To gain on the Night;
 Thou bringest the Living
 Out of the Dead,
 And Thou bringest the Dead
 Out of the Living;
 And Thou givest sustenance
 To whom Thou pleasest,
 Without measure."

28. let not the Believers
 Take for friends or helpers

[p. 130]

Unbelievers rather than
 Believers: if any do that,
 In nothing will there be help
 From God: except by way
 Of precaution, that ye may
 Guard yourselves from them,
 But God cautions you
 (To remember) Himself;
 For the final goal
 Is to God.

29. Say: "Whether ye hide
 What is in your hearts
 Or reveal it,
 God knows it all:
 He knows what is
 In the heavens,
 And what is on earth.
 And God has power
 Over all things.

30. "On the Day when every soul
 Will be confronted
 With all the good it has done,
 And all the evil it has done,
 It will wish there were
 A great distance
 Between it and its evil.
 But God cautions you
 (To remember) Himself.
 And God is full of kindness
 To those that serve Him."

[p. 131]

  

SECTION 4.

31. Say: "If ye do love God,
 Follow me: God will love you
 And forgive you your sins:
 For God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful."

32. Say: "Obey God
 And His Apostle":
 But if they turn back,
 God loveth not those
 Who reject Faith.

33. God did choose
 Adam and Noah, the family
 Of Abraham, and the family
 Of 'Imran above all people,--

34. Offspring, one of the other:
 And God heareth
 And knoweth all things.

35. Behold! a woman of 'Imran
 Said: "O my Lord! I do

[p. 132]

Dedicate unto Thee
 What is in my womb
 For Thy special service:
 So accept this of me:
 For Thou hearest
 And knowest all things."

36. When she was delivered,
 She said: "O my Lord!
 Behold! I am delivered
 Of a female child!"--
 And God knew best
 What she brought forth--
 "And nowise is the male
 Like the female.
 I have named her Mary,
 And I commend her
 And her offspring
 To Thy protection
 From the Evil One,
 The Rejected."

37. Right graciously
 Did her Lord accept her:
 He made her grow
 In purity and beauty:
 To the care of Zakariya
 Was she assigned.
 Every time that he entered
 (Her) chamber to see her,
 He found her supplied
 With sustenance. He said:
 "O Mary! Whence (comes) this
 To you?" She said:
 "From God: for God
 Provides sustenance
 To whom He pleases,
 Without measure."

[p. 133]

38. There here did Zakariya
 Pray to his Lord, saying:
 "O my Lord! Grant unto me
 From Thee a progeny
 That is pure: for Thou
 Art He that heareth prayer!

39. While he was standing
 In prayer in the chamber,
 The angels called unto him:
 "God doth give thee
 Glad tidings of Yahya,
 Witnessing the truth
 Of a Word from God, and (be
 Besides) noble, chaste,
 And a Prophet,
 Of the (goodly) company
 Of the righteous."

40. He said: "O my Lord!
 How shall I have a son,
 Seeing I am very old,
 And my wife is barren?"
 "Thus, "was the answer,
 "Doth God accomplish
 What He willeth,"

41. He said: "O my Lord!
 Give me a Sign!"
 "Thy Sign, "was the answer,
 "Shall be that thou
 Shalt speak to no man
 For three days
 But with signals.
 Then celebrate
 The praises of thy Lord
 Again and again,
 And glorify Him
 In the evening
 And in the morning."

[p. 134]

  

SECTION 5.

42. Behold! the angels said:
 "O Mary! God hath chosen thee
 And purified thee--chosen thee
 Above the women of all nations.

43. "O Mary! worship
 Thy Lord devoutly:
 Prostrate thyself,
 And bow down (in prayer)
 With those who bow down."

44. This is part of the tidings
 Of the things unseen,
 Which We reveal unto thee
 (O Apostle!) by inspiration:
 Thou wast not with them
 When they cast lots
 With arrows, as to which
 Of them should be charged
 With the care of Mary:
 Nor wast thou with them
 When they disputed (the point).

45. Behold! the angels said:
 "O Mary! God giveth thee
 Glad tidings of a Word
 From Him: his name
 Will be Christ Jesus,
 The son of Mary, held in honour
 In this world and the Hereafter
 And of (the company of) those
 Nearest to God;

[p. 135]

46. "He shall speak to the people
 In childhood and in maturity.
 And he shall be (of the company)
 Of the righteous."

47. She said: "O my Lord!
 How shall I have a son
 When no man hath touched me?"
 He said: "Even so:
 God createth
 What He willeth:
 When He hath decreed
 A Plan, He but saith
 To it, 'Be,' and it is!

48. "And God will teach him
 The Book and Wisdom,
 The Law and the Gospel,

49. "And (appoint him)
 An apostle to the Children
 Of Israel, (with this message):
 "'I have come to you,
 With a Sign from your Lord,
 In that I make for you
 Out of clay, as it were,
 The figure of a bird,
 And breathe into it,
 And it becomes a bird
 By God's leave:
 And I heal those
 Born blind, and the lepers,
 And I quicken the dead,
 By God's leave;
 And I declare to you
 What ye eat, and what ye store
 In your houses. Surely
 Therein is a Sign for you
 If ye did believe;

[p. 136]

50. "'(I have come to you),
 To attest the Law
 Which was before me.
 And to make lawful
 To you part of what was
 (Before) forbidden to you;
 I have come to you
 With a Sign from your Lord.
 So fear God,
 And obey me.

51. "'It is God
 Who is my Lord
 And your Lord;
 Then worship Him.
 This is a Way
 That is straight.'"

52. When Jesus found
 Unbelief on their part
 He said: "Who will be
 My helpers to (the work
 Of) God?" Said the Disciples:
 "We are God's helpers:
 We believe in God,
 And do thou bear witness
 That we are Muslims.

53. "Our Lord! we believe
 In what Thou hast revealed,
 And we follow the Apostle;
 Then write us down
 Among those who bear witness."

54. And (the unbelievers)
 Plotted and planned,
 And God too planned,
 And the best of planners
 Is God.

[p. 137]

  

SECTION 6.

55. Behold! God said:
 "O Jesus! I will take thee
 And raise thee to Myself
 And clear thee (of the falsehoods)
 Of those who blaspheme;
 I will make those
 Who follow thee superior
 To those who reject faith,
 To the Day of Resurrection:
 Then shall ye all
 Return unto me,
 And I will judge
 Between you of the matters
 Wherein ye dispute.

56. "As to those who reject faith,
 I will punish them
 With terrible agony
 In this world and in the Hereafter,
 Nor will they have
 Anyone to help.

57. "As to those who believe
 And work righteousness,
 God will pay them (in full)
 Their reward;
 But God loveth not
 Those who do wrong.

58. "This is what we rehearse
 Unto thee of the Signs
 And the Message
 Of Wisdom."

[p. 138]

59. The similitude of Jesus
 Before God is as that of Adam;
 He created him from dust,
 Then said to him, "Be":
 And he was.

60. The Truth (comes)
 From God alone;
 So be not of those
 Who doubt.

61. If any one disputes
 In this matter with thee,
 Now after (full) knowledge
 Hath come to thee,
 Say: "Come! let us
 Gather together,
 Our sons and your sons,
 Our women and your women,
 Ourselves and yourselves:
 Then let us earnestly pray,
 And invoke the curse
 Of God on those who lie!"

62. This is the true account:
 There is no god
 Except God;
 And God--He is indeed

[p. 139]

The Exalted in Power,
 The Wise.

63. But if they turn back,
 God hath full knowledge
 Of those who do mischief.

  

SECTION 7.

64. Say: "O People
 Of the Book! come
 To common terms
 As between us and you:
 That we worship
 None but God;
 That we associate
 No partners with Him;
 That we erect not,
 From among ourselves,
 Lords and patrons
 Other than God."
 If then they turn back,
 Say ye: "Bear witness
 That we (at least)
 Are Muslims (bowing
 To God's Will)."

[p. 140]

65. Ye People of the Book!
 Why dispute ye
 About Abraham,
 When the Law and the Gospel
 Were not revealed
 Till after him?
 Have ye no understanding?

66. Ah! Ye are those
 Who fell to disputing
 (Even) in matters of which
 Ye had some knowledge!
 But why dispute ye
 In matters of which
 Ye have no knowledge?
 It is God Who knows,
 And ye who know not!

67. Abraham was not a Jew
 Nor yet a Christian;
 But he was true in Faith,
 And bowed his will to God's,
 (Which is Islam),
 And he joined not gods with God.

68. Without doubt, among men,
 The nearest of kin to Abraham,
 Are those who follow him,
 As are also this Apostle
 And those who believe:
 And God is the Protector
 Of those who have faith.

69. It is the wish of a section
 Of the People of the Book
 To lead you astray.
 But they shall lead astray
 (Not you), but themselves,
 And they do not perceive!

70. Ye People of the Book!
 Why reject ye

[p. 141]

The Signs of God,
 Of which ye are
 (Yourselves) witnesses?

71. Ye People of the Book!
 Why do ye clothe
 Truth with falsehood,
 And conceal the Truth,
 While ye have knowledge?

  

SECTION 8.

72. A section of the People
 Of the Book say:
 "Believe in the morning
 What is revealed
 To the Believers,
 But reject it at the end
 Of the day; perchance
 They may (themselves)
 Turn back;

73. "And believe no one
 Unless he follows
 Your religion."
 Say: "True guidance
 Is the guidance of God:
 (Fear ye) lest a revelation
 Be sent to someone (else)
 Like unto that which was sent
 Unto you? Or that those
 (Receiving such revelation)
 Should engage you in argument
 Before your Lord?"
 Say: "All bounties
 Are in the hand of God:
 He granteth them
 To whom He pleaseth:

[p. 142]

And God careth for all,
 And He knoweth all things."

74. For His Mercy He specially chooseth
 Whom He pleaseth;
 For God is the Lord
 Of bounties unbounded.

75. Among the People of the Book
 Are some who, if entrusted
 With a hoard of gold,
 Will (readily) pay it back;
 Others, who, if entrusted
 With a single silver coin,
 Will not repay it unless
 Thou constantly stoodest
 Demanding, because,
 They say, "there is no call
 On us (to keep faith)
 With these ignorant (Pagans)."
 But they tell a lie against God,
 And (well) they know it.

76. Nay.--Those that keep
 Their plighted faith
 And act aright,--verily
 God loves those
 Who act aright.

77. As for those who sell
 The faith they owe to God
 And their own plighted word
 For a small price,
 They shall have no portion
 In the Hereafter:

[p. 143]

Nor will God
 (Deign to) speak to them
 Or look at them
 On the Day of Judgment,
 Nor will He cleanse them
 (Of sin): they shall have
 A grievous Penalty.

78. There is among them
 A section who distort
 The Book with their tongues
 (As they read) you would think
 It is a part of the Book,
 But it is no part
 Of the Book; and they say,
 That is from God,"
 But it is not from God:
 It is they who tell
 A lie against God,
 And (well) they know it!

79. It is not (possible)
 That a man, to whom
 Is given the Book,
 And Wisdom,
 And the Prophetic Office,
 Should say to people:
 "Be ye my worshippers
 Rather than God's":
 On the contrary
 (He would say):
 "Be ye worshippers
 Of Him Who is truly
 The Cherisher of all:
 For ye have taught
 The Book and ye
 Have studied it earnestly."

80. Nor would he instruct you
 To take angels and prophets
 For Lords and Patrons.
 What! would he bid you

[p. 144]

To unbelief after ye have
 Bowed your will
 (To God in Islam)?

  

SECTION 9.

81. Behold! God took
 The Covenant of the Prophets,
 Saying: "I give you
 A Book and Wisdom;
 Then comes to you
 An Apostle, confirming
 What is with you;
 Do ye believe in him
 And render him help."
 God said: "Do ye agree,
 And take this my Covenant
 As binding on you?"
 They said: "We agree."
 He said: "Then bear witness,
 And I am with you
 Among the witnesses."

82. If any turn back
 After this, they are
 Perverted transgressors.

83. Do they seek
 For other than the Religion
 Of God?--while all creatures
 In the heavens and on earth
 Have, willing or unwilling,
 Bowed to His Will
 (Accepted Islam),
 And to Him shall they
 All be brought back.

[p. 145]

84. Say: "We believe
 In God, and in what
 Has been revealed to us
 And what was revealed
 To Abraham, Isma'il;
 Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes,
 And in (the Books)
 Given to Moses, Jesus,
 And the Prophets,
 From their Lord:
 We make no distinction
 Between one and another
 Among them, and to God do we
 Bow our will (in Islam)."

85. If anyone desires
 A religion other than
 Islam (submission to God),
 Never will it be accepted
 Of him; and in the Hereafter
 He will be in the ranks
 Of those who have lost
 (All spiritual good).

86. How shall God
 Guide those who reject
 Faith after they accepted it
 And bore witness
 That the Apostle was true
 And that Clear Signs
 Had come unto them?
 But God guides not
 A people unjust.

87. Of such the reward
 Is that on them (rests)

[p. 146]

The curse of God,
 Of His angels,
 And of all mankind;--

88. In that will they dwell;
 Nor will their penalty
 Be lightened, nor respite
 Be their (lot);--

89. Except for those that repent
 (Even) after that,
 And make amends;
 For verily God
 Is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

90. But those who reject
 Faith after they accepted it,
 And then go on adding
 To their defiance of Faith,--
 Never will their repentance
 Be accepted; for they
 Are those who have
 (Of set purpose) gone astray.

91. As to those who reject
 Faith, and die rejecting,--
 Never would be accepted
 From any such as much
 Gold as the earth contains,
 Though they should offer it
 For ransom. For such
 Is (in store) a penalty grievous,
 And they will find no helpers.

[p. 147]

  

SECTION 10.

92. By no means shall ye
 Attain righteousness unless
 Ye give (freely) of that
 Which ye love; and whatever
 Ye give, of a truth
 God knoweth it well.

93. All food was lawful
 To the Children of Israel,
 Except what Israel
 Made unlawful for itself,
 Before the Law (of Moses)
 Was revealed. Say:
 "Bring ye the Law
 And study it,
 If ye be men of truth."

94. If any, after this, invent
 A lie and attribute it
 To God, they are indeed
 Unjust wrong-doers.

95. Say: "God speaketh
 The Truth: follow
 The religion of Abraham,
 The sane in faith; he
 Was not of the Pagans."

96. The first House (of worship)
 Appointed for men
 Was that at Bakka:
 Full of blessing

[p. 148]

And of guidance
 For all kinds of beings:

97. In it are Signs
 Manifest; (for example),
 The Station of Abraham;
 Whoever enters it
 Attains security;
 Pilgrimage thereto is a duty
 Men owe to God,
 Those who can afford
 The journey; but if any
 Deny faith, God stands not
 In need of any of His creatures.

98. Say: "O People of the Book!
 Why reject ye the Signs
 Of God, when God
 Is Himself witness
 To all ye do?"

99. Say: "O ye People of the Book!
 Why obstruct ye
 Those who believe,
 From the Path of God,
 Seeking to make it crooked,
 While ye were yourselves
 Witnesses (to God's Covenant)?'
 But God is not unmindful
 Of all that ye do."

100. O ye who believe!
 If ye listen
 To a faction
 Among the People of the Book,
 They would (indeed)
 Render you apostates
 After ye have believed!

101. And how would ye
 Deny Faith while unto you
 Are rehearsed the Signs
 Of God, and among you

[p. 149]

Lives the Apostle?
 Whoever holds
 Firmly to God
 Will be shown
 A Way that is straight.

  

SECTION 11.

102. O ye who believe!
 Fear God as He should be
 Feared, and die not
 Except in a state
 Of Islam.

103. And hold fast,
 All together, by the Rope
 Which God (stretches out
 For you), and be not divided
 Among yourselves;
 And remember with gratitude
 God's favour on you;
 For ye were enemies
 And He joined your hearts
 In love, so that by His Grace,
 Ye became brethren;
 And ye were on the brink
 Of the Pit of Fire,
 And He saved you from it.
 Thus doth God make
 His Signs clear to you:
 That ye may be guided.

104. Let there arise out of you
 A band of people
 Inviting to all that is good,
 Enjoining what is right,

[p. 150]

And forbidding what is wrong:
 They are the ones
 To attain felicity.

105. Be not like those
 Who are divided
 Amongst themselves
 And fall into disputations
 After receiving
 Clear Signs:
 For them
 Is a dreadful Penalty,--

106. On the Day when
 Some faces will be (lit up
 With) white, and some faces
 Will be (in the gloom of) black:
 To those whose faces
 Will be black, (will be said):
 "Did ye reject Faith
 After accepting it?
 Taste then the Penalty
 For rejecting Faith."

107. But those whose faces
 Will be (lit with) white,--
 They will be in (the light
 Of) God's mercy: therein
 To dwell (for ever).

108. These are the Signs
 Of God: We rehearse them
 To thee in Truth:
 And God means
 No injustice to any
 Of His creatures.

109. To God belongs all
 That is in the heavens

[p. 151]

And on earth: to Him
 Do all questions
 Go back (for decision).

  

SECTION 12.

110. Ye are the best
 Of Peoples, evolved
 For mankind,
 Enjoining what is right,
 Forbidding what is wrong,
 And believing in God.
 If only the People of the Book
 Had faith, it were best
 For them: among them
 Are some who have faith,
 But most of them
 Are perverted transgressors.

111: They will do you no harm,
 Barring a trifling annoyance;
 If they come out to fight you,
 They will show you their backs,
 And no help shall they get.

112. Shame is pitched over them
 (Like a tent) wherever
 They are found,
 Except when under a covenant
 (Of protection) from God
 And from men; they draw
 On themselves wrath from God,
 And pitched over them
 Is (the tent of) destitution.
 This because they rejected
 The Signs of God, and slew
 The Prophets in defiance of right;

[p. 152]

This because they rebelled
 And transgressed beyond bounds.

113. Not all of them are alike:
 Of the People of the Book
 Are a portion that stand
 (For the right); they rehearse
 The Signs of God all night long,
 And they prostrate themselves
 In adoration.

114. They believe in God
 And the Last Day;
 They enjoin what is right,
 And forbid what is wrong;
 And they hasten (in emulation)
 In (all) good works:
 They are in the ranks
 Of the righteous.

115. Of the good that they do,
 Nothing will be rejected
 Of them; for God knoweth well
 Those that do right.

116. Those who reject Faith,--
 Neither their possessions
 Nor their (numerous) progeny
 Will avail them aught against God:
 They will be Companions
 Of the Fire,--dwelling
 Therein (for ever).

117. What they spend
 In the life
 Of this (material) world
 May be likened to a Wind
 Which brings a nipping frost:
 It strikes and destroys the harvest
 Of men who have wronged

[p. 153]

Their own souls: it is not God
 That hath wronged them, but
 They wrong themselves.

118. O ye who believe!
 Take not into your intimacy
 Those outside your ranks:
 They will not fail
 To corrupt you. They
 Only desire your ruin:
 Rank hatred has already
 Appeared from their mouths:
 What their hearts conceal
 Is far worse.
 We have made plain
 To you the Signs,
 If ye have wisdom.

119. Ah! ye are those
 Who love them,
 But they love you not,
 Though ye believe
 In the whole of the Book,
 When they meet you,
 They say, "We believe":
 But when they are alone,
 They bite off the very tips
 Of their fingers at you
 In their rage. Say:
 "Perish in your rage;
 God knoweth well
 All the secrets of the heart."

120. If aught that is good
 Befalls you, it grieves them;
 But if some misfortune
 Overtakes you, they rejoice

[p. 154]

At it. But if ye are constant
 And do right,
 Not the least harm
 Will their cunning
 Do to you; for God
 Compasseth round about
 All that they do.

  

SECTION 13.

121. Remember that morning
 Thou didst leave
 Thy household (early)
 To post the Faithful
 At their stations for battle:
 And God heareth
 And knoweth all things:

[p. 155]

122. Rememer two of your parties
 Meditated cowardice;
 But God was their protector,
 And in God should the Faithful
 (Ever) put their trust.

123. God had helped you
 At Badr, when ye were
 A contemptible little force;
 Then fear God; thus
 May ye show your gratitude.

124. Remember thou saidst
 To the Faithful: "Is it not enough
 For you that God should help you
 With three thousand angels
 (Specially) sent down?

125. "Yea,--if ye remain firm,
 And act aright, even if
 The enemy should rush here
 On you in hot haste,
 Your Lord would help you
 With five thousand angels
 Making a terrific onslaught."

126. God made it but a message
 Of hope for you, and an assurance
 To your hearts: (in any case)
 There is no help
 Except from God,
 The Exalted, the Wise:

[p. 156]

127. That He might cut off
 A fringe of the Unbelievers
 Or expose them to infamy,
 And they should then
 Be turned back,
 Frustrated of their purpose.

128. Not for thee, (but for God),
 Is the decision:
 Whether He turn in mercy
 To them, or punish them;
 For they are indeed wrong-doers.

129. To God belongeth all
 That is in the heavens
 And on earth.
 He forgiveth whom He pleaseth
 And punisheth whom He pleaseth
 But God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 14.

130. ye who believe!
 Devour not Usury,
 Doubled and multiplied;
 But fear God; that
 Ye may (really) prosper.

131. Fear the Fire, which is prepared
 For those who reject Faith:

[p. 157]

132. And obey God
 And the Apostle;
 That ye may obtain mercy.

133. Be quick in the race
 For forgiveness from your Lord,
 And for a Garden whose width
 Is that (of the whole)
 Of the heavens
 And of the earth,
 Prepared for the righteous,--

134. Those who spend (freely),
 Whether in prosperity,
 Or in adversity;
 Who restrain anger,
 And pardon (all) men;--
 For God loves those
 Who do good;--

135. And those who,
 Having done something
 To be ashamed of,
 Or wronged their own souls,
 Earnestly bring God to mind,
 And ask for forgiveness
 For their sins,
 And who can forgive
 Sins except God?--
 And are never obstinate
 In persisting knowingly
 In (the wrong) they have done

[p. 158]

136. For such the reward
 Is forgiveness from their Lord,
 And Gardens with rivers
 Flowing underneath,--
 An eternal dwelling:
 How excellent a recompense
 For those who work (and strive)!

137. Many were the Ways of Life
 That have passed away
 Before you: travel through
 The earth, and see what was
 The end of those
 Who rejected Truth.

138. Here is a plain statement
 To men, a guidance
 And instruction to those
 Who fear God!

139. So lose not heart,
 Nor fall into despair:
 For ye must gain mastery
 If ye are true in Faith.

140. If a wound hath touched you,
 Be sure a similar wound
 Hath touched the others.
 Such days (of varying fortunes)
 We give to men and men
 By turns: that God may know
 Those that believe,
 And that He may take
 To Himself from your ranks
 Martyr-witnesses (to Truth).
 And God loveth not
 Those that do wrong.

[p. 159]

141. God's object also is to purge
 Those that are true in Faith
 And to deprive of blessing
 Those that resist Faith.

142. Did ye think that ye
 Would enter Heaven
 Without God testing
 Those of you who fought hard
 (In His Cause) and
 Remained steadfast?

143. Ye did indeed
 Wish for Death
 Before ye met him:
 Now ye have seen him
 With your own eyes,
 (And ye flinch!)

  

SECTION 15.

144. Muhammad is no more
 Than an Apostle: many
 Were the Apostles that passed away
 Before him. If he died
 Or were slain, will ye then
 Turn back on your heels?
 If any did turn back
 On his heels, not the least
 Harm will he do to God;
 But God (on the other hand)
 Will swiftly reward those
 Who (serve him) with gratitude.

145. Nor can a soul die
 Except by God's leave,

[p. 160]

The term being fixed
 As by writing. If any
 Do desire a reward
 In this life, We shall give it
 To him; and if any
 Do desire a reward
 In the Hereafter, We shall
 Give it to him.
 And swiftly shall We reward
 Those that (serve us with) gratitude.

146. How many of the Prophets
 Fought (in God's way),
 And with them (fought)
 Large bands of godly men?
 But they never lost heart
 If they met with disaster
 In God's way, nor did
 They weaken (in will)
 Nor give in. And God
 Loves those who are
 Firm and steadfast.

147. All that they said was:
 "Our Lord! forgive us
 Our sins and anything
 We may have done
 That transgressed our duty:
 Establish our feet firmly,
 And help us against
 Those that resist
 Faith."

148. And God gave them
 A reward in this world,
 And the excellent reward
 Of the Hereafter. For God
 Loveth those who do good.

[p. 161]

  

SECTION 16.

149. O ye who believe!
 If ye obey the Unbelievers,
 They will drive you back
 On your heels, and ye
 Will turn back (from Faith)
 To your own loss.

150. Nay, God is your Protector,
 And He is the best of helpers.

151. Soon shall We cast terror
 Into the hearts of the Unbelievers
 For that they joined companions
 With God, for which He had sew
 No authority: their abode
 Will be the Fire: and evil
 Is the home of the wrong-doers!

152. God did indeed fulfil
 His promise to you
 When ye with His permission
 Were about to annihilate
 Your enemy,--until ye flinched
 And fell to disputing
 About the order,
 And disobeyed it
 After He brought you in sight
 (Of the Booty) which ye covet.
 Among you are some
 That hanker after this world
 And some that desire
 The Hereafter. Then did He

[p. 162]

Divert you from your foes
 In order to test you.
 But He forgave you:
 For God is full of grace
 To those who believe.

153. Behold! ye were climbing up
 The high ground, without even
 Casting a side glance
 At any one, and the Apostle
 In your rear was calling you
 Back. There did God give you
 One distress after another
 By way of requital,
 To teach you not to grieve
 For (the booty) that had escaped you
 And for (the ill) that had befallen you.
 For God is well aware
 Of all that ye do.

154. After (the excitement)
 Of the distress, He sent down
 Calm on a band of you
 Overcome with slumber,
 While another band
 Was stirred to anxiety
 By their own feelings,
 Moved by wrong suspicions
 Of God--suspicions due
 To Ignorance. They said:
 "What affair is this of ours?"
 Say thou: "Indeed, this affair

[p. 163]

Is wholly God's." They hide
 In their minds what they
 Dare not reveal to thee.
 They say (to themselves):
 "If we had had anything
 To do with this affair,
 We should not have been
 In the slaughter here."
 Say: "Even if you had remained
 In your homes, those
 For whom death was decreed
 Would certainly have gone forth
 To the place of their death";
 But (all this was)
 That God might test
 What is in your breasts
 And purge what is
 In your hearts.
 For God knoweth well
 The secrets of your hearts.

155. Those of you
 Who turned back
 On the day the two hosts
 Met,--it was Satan
 Who caused them to fail,
 Because of some (evil)
 They had done. But God
 Has blotted out (their fault):
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Forbearing.

  

SECTION 17.

156. O ye who believe!
 Be not like the Unbelievers,
 Who say of their brethren,
 When they are travelling
 Through the earth or engaged
 In fighting: "If they had stayed
 With us, they would not
 Have died, or been slain."

[p. 164]

This that God may make it
 A cause of sighs and regrets
 In their hearts. It is God
 That gives Life and Death,
 And God sees well
 All that ye do.

157. And if ye are slain, or die,
 In the way of God,
 Forgiveness and mercy
 From God are far better
 Than all they could amass.

158. And if ye die, or are slain,
 Lo! it is-unto God
 That ye are brought together.

159. It is part of the Mercy
 Of God that thou dost deal
 Gently with them.
 Wert thou severe
 Or harsh-hearted,
 They would have broken away
 From about thee: so pass over
 (Their faults), and ask
 For (God's) forgiveness
 For them; and consult
 Them in affairs (of moment).
 Then, when thou hast
 Taken a decision,
 Put thy trust in God.

[p. 165]

For God loves those
 Who put their trust (in Him).

160. If God helps you,
 Non can overcome you:
 If He forsakes you,
 Who is there, after that,
 That can help you?
 In God, then,
 Let Believers put their trust.

161. No prophet could (ever)
 Be false to his trust.
 If any person is so false,
 He shall, on the Day
 Of Judgment, restore
 What he misappropriated;
 Then shall every soul
 Receive its due,--
 Whatever it earned,--
 And none shall be
 Dealt with unjustly.

162. Is the man who follows
 The good pleasure of God
 Like the man who draws
 On himself the wrath
 Of God, and whose abode
 Is in Hell?--
 A woeful refuge!

163. They are in varying grades
 In the sight of God,
 And God sees well
 All that they do.

164. God did confer
 A great favour

[p. 166]

On the Believers
 When He sent among them
 An Apostle from among
 Themselves, rehearsing
 Unto them the Signs
 Of God, sanctifying them,
 And instructing them
 In Scripture and Wisdom,
 While, before that,
 They had been
 In manifest error.

165. What! When a single
 Disaster smites you,
 Although ye smote (your enemies)
 With one twice as great,
 Do ye say?--
 "Whence is this?"
 Say (to them):
 "It is from yourselves:
 For God hath power
 Over all things."

166. What ye suffered
 On the day the two armies
 Met, was with the leave
 Of God, in order that
 He might test the Believers,--

167. And the Hypocrites also.
 These were told: "Come,
 Fight in the way of God,
 Or (at least) drive
 (The foe from Your city)."
 They said: "Had we known
 How to fight, we should
 Certainly have followed you."

[p. 167]

They were that day
 Nearer to Unbelief
 Than to Faith,
 Saying with their lips
 What was not in their hearts.
 But God hath full knowledge
 Of all they conceal.

168. (They are) the ones that say,
 (Of their brethren slain),
 While they themselves
 Sit (at ease): "If only
 They had listened to us,
 They would not have been slain."
 Say: "Avert death
 From your own selves,
 If ye speak the truth."

169. Think not of those
 Who are slain in God's way
 As dead. Nay, they live,
 Finding their sustenance
 In the Presence of their Lord;

170. They rejoice in the Bounty
 Provided by God:
 And with regard to those
 Left behind, who have not
 Yet joined them (in their bliss),
 The (Martyrs) glory in the fact
 That on them is no fear,
 Nor have they (cause to) grieve.

171. They glory in the Grace
 And the Bounty from God,
 And in the fact that
 God suffereth not

[p. 168]

The reward of the Faithful
 To be lost (in the least).

  

SECTION 18.

172. Of those who answered
 The call of God
 And the Apostle,
 Even after being wounded,
 Those who do right
 And refrain from wrong
 Have a great reward;--

173. Men said to them:
 "A great army is gathering
 Against you":
 And frightened them:
 But it (only) increased
 Their Faith: they said:
 "For us God sufficeth,
 And He is the best
 Disposer of affairs."

174. And they returned
 With Grace and Bounty
 From God: no harm
 Ever touched them:
 For they followed
 The good pleasure of God:
 And God is the Lord
 Of bounties unbounded.

175. It is only the Evil One
 That suggests to you
 The fear of his votaries:
 Be ye not afraid
 Of them, but fear Me,
 If ye have Faith.

176. Let not those grieve thee
 Who rush headlong
 Into Unbelief:
 Not the least harm
 Will they do to God:
 God's Plan is that He

[p. 169]

Will give them no portion
 In the Hereafter,
 But a severe punishment.

177. Those who purchase
 Unbelief at the price
 Of faith,
 Not the least harm
 Will they do to God,
 But they will have
 A grievous punishment.

178. Let not the Unbelievers
 Think that Our respite
 To them is good for themselves:
 We grant them respite
 That they may grow
 In their iniquity:
 But they will have
 A shameful punishment.

179. God will not leave
 The Believers in the state
 In which ye are now,
 Until He separates
 What is evil
 From what is good.
 Nor will He disclose
 To you the secrets
 Of the Unseen,
 But He chooses
 Of His Apostles
 (For the purpose)
 Whom He pleases.
 So believe in God
 And His Apostles:
 And if ye believe
 And do right,
 Ye have a reward
 Without measure.

[p. 170]

180. And let not those
 Who covetously withhold
 Of the gifts which God
 Hath given them of His Grace,
 Think that it is good for them:
 Nay, it will be the worse
 For them: soon shall the things
 Which they covetously withheld
 Be tied to their necks
 Like a twisted collar,
 On the Day of Judgment.
 To God belongs the heritage
 Of the heavens and the earth;
 And God is well-acquainted
 With all that ye do.

  

SECTION 19.

181. God hath heard
 The taunt of those
 Who say: "Truly, God
 Is indigent and we
 Are rich!"--We shall
 Certainly record their word

[p. 171]

And (their act) of slaying
 The Prophets in defiance
 Of right, and We shall say:
 "Taste ye the Penalty
 Of the Scorching Fire!

182. "This is because
 Of the (unrighteous deeds)
 Which your hands
 Sent on before ye:
 For God never harms
 Those who serve Him."

183. They (also) said: "God took
 Our promise not to believe
 In an apostle unless
 He showed us a sacrifice
 Consumed by fire
 (From heaven)." Say:
 "There came to you
 Apostles before me,
 With Clear Signs
 And even with what
 Ye ask for: why then
 Did ye slay them,
 If ye speak the truth?"

184. Then if they reject thee,
 So were rejected apostles
 Before thee, who came
 With Clear Signs,
 Books of dark prophecies,
 And the Book of Enlightenment.

[p. 172]

185. Every soul shall have
 A taste of death:
 And only on the Day
 Of Judgment shall you
 Be paid your full recompense.
 Only he who is saved
 Far from the Fire
 And admitted to the Garden
 Will have attained
 The object (of Life):
 For the life of this world
 Is but goods and chattels
 Of deception.

186. Ye shall certainly
 Be tried and tested
 In your possessions
 And in your personal selves;
 And ye shall certainly
 Hear much that will grieve you,
 From those who received
 The Book before yot:
 And from those who
 Worship many gods.
 But if ye persevere
 Patiently, and guard
 Against evil,--then
 That will be
 A determining factor
 In all affairs.

187. And remember
 God took a Covenant
 From the People of the Book,
 To make it known
 And clear to mankind,
 And not to hide it;

[p. 173]

But they threw it away
 Behind their backs,
 And purchased with it
 Some miserable gain!
 And vile was the bargain
 They made!

188. Think not that those
 Who exult in what they
 Have brought about, and love
 To be praised for what
 They have not done,--
 Think not that they
 Can escape the Penalty.
 For them is a Penalty
 Grievous indeed.

189. To God belongeth
 The dominion
 Of the heavens
 And the earth;
 And God hath power
 Over all things.

  

SECTION 20.

190. Behold! In the creation
 Of the heavens and the earth,
 And the alternation
 Of Night and Day,--
 There are indeed Signs
 For men of understanding,--

191. Men who celebrate
 The praises of God,
 Standing, sitting,
 And lying down on their sides,
 And contemplate
 The (wonders of) creation

[p. 174]

In the heavens and the earth,
 (With the thought):
 "Our Lord! not for naught
 Hast Thou created (all) this!
 Glory to Thee! Give us
 Salvation from the Penalty
 Of the Fire.

192. "Our Lord! any whom Thou
 Dost admit to the Fire,
 Truly Thou coverest with shame,
 And never will wrong-doers
 Find any helpers!

193. "Our Lord! we have heard
 The call of one calling
 (Us) to Faith, 'Believe ye
 In the Lord,' and we
 Have believed. Our Lord!
 Forgive us our sins,
 Blot out from us
 Our iniquities, and take
 To Thyself our souls
 In the company of the righteous.

194. "Our Lord! Grant us
 What Thou didst promise
 Unto us through Thine Apostles,
 And save us from shame
 On the Day of Judgment:
 For Thou never breakest
 Thy promise."

195. And their Lord hath accepted
 Of them, and answered them:
 "Never will I suffer to be lost
 The work of any of you,

[p. 175]

Be he male or female:
 Ye are members, one of another:
 Those who have left their homes,
 Or been driven out therefrom,
 Or suffered harm in My Cause,
 Or fought or been slain,--
 Verily, I will blot out
 From them their iniquities,
 And admit them into Gardens
 With rivers flowing beneath;--
 A reward from the Presence
 Of God, and from His Presence
 Is the best of rewards."

196. Let not the strutting about
 Of the Unbelievers
 Through the land
 Deceive thee:

197. Little is it for enjoyment:
 Their ultimate abode
 Is Hell: what an evil bed
 (To lie on)!

198. On the other hand, for those
 Who fear their Lord,
 Are Gardens, with rivers
 Flowing beneath; therein
 Are they to dwell (for ever),--
 A gift from the Presence
 Of God; and that which is
 In the Presence of God
 Is the best (bliss)
 For the righteous.

199. And there are, certainly,
 Among the People of the Book,

[p. 176]

Those who believe in God,
 In the revelation to you,
 And in the revelation to them,
 Bowing in humility to God:
 They will not sell
 The Signs of God
 For a miserable gain!
 For them is a reward
 With their Lord,
 And God is swift in account.

200. O ye who believe!
 Persevere in patience
 And constancy; vie
 In such perseverance;
 Strengthen each other;
 And fear God;
 That ye may prosper.

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 177] [p. 178]

  

Sura IV.

  

Nisaa, or The Women.

In the name of God, Most Gracious
 Most Merciful.

1. O mankind! reverence
 Your Guardian-Lord,
 Who created you
 From a single Person,
 Created, of like nature,
 His mate, and from them twain
 Scattered (like seeds)
 Countless men and women;--
 Reverence God, through Whom
 Ye demand your mutual (rights),
 And (reverence) the wombs
 (That bore you): for God
 Ever watches over you.

2. To orphans restore their property
 (When they reach their age),
 Nor substitute (your) worthless things
 For (their) good ones; and devour not
 Their substance (by mixing it up)

[p. 179]

With your own. For this is
 I ndeed a great sin.

3. If ye fear that ye shall not
 Be able to deal justly
 With the orphans,
 Marry women of your choice,
 Two, or three, or four;
 But if ye fear that ye shall not
 Be able to deal justly (with them),
 Then only one, or (a captive)
 That your right hands possess.
 That will be more suitable,
 To prevent you
 From doing injustice.

4. And give the women
 (On marriage) their dower
 As a free gift; but if they,
 Of their own good pleasure,
 Remit any part of it to you,
 Take it and enjoy it
 With right good cheer.

5. To those weak of understanding
 Make not over your property,
 Which God hath made
 A means of support for you,
 But feed and clothe them
 Therewith, and speak to them
 Words of kindness and justice.

[p. 180]

6. Make trial of orphans
 Until they reach the age
 Of marriage; if then ye find
 Sound judgment in them,
 Release their property to them;
 But consume it not wastefully,
 Nor in haste against their growing up.
 If the guardian is well-off,
 Let him claim no remuneration,
 But if he is poor, let him
 Have for himself what is
 Just and reasonable.
 When ye release their property
 To them, take witnesses
 In their presence:
 But all-sufficient
 Is God in taking account.

7. From what is left by parents
 And those nearest relateds,
 There is a share for men
 And a share for women,
 Whether the property be small
 Or large,--a determinate share.

8. But if at the time of division
 Other relatives, or orphans,
 Or poor, are present,
 Feed them out of the (property),
 And speak to them
 Words of kindness and justice.

9. Let those (disposing of an estate)
 Have the same fear in their minds
 As they would have for their own
 If they had left a helpless family behind:
 Let them fear God, and speak
 Words of appropriate (comfort),

[p. 181]

10. Those who unjustly
 Eat up the property
 Of orphans, eat up
 A Fire into their own
 Bodies: they will soon
 Be enduring a blazing Fire!

  

SECTION 2.

11. God (thus) directs you
 As regards your children's
 (Inheritance): to the male,
 A portion equal to that
 Of two females: if only
 Daughters, two or more,
 Their share is two-thirds
 Of the inheritance;
 If only one, her share
 Is a half.

For parents, a sixth share
 Of the inheritance to each,
 If the deceased left children;
 If no children, and the parents
 Are the (only) heirs, the mother
 Has a third; if the deceased
 Left brothers (or sisters)
 The mother has a sixth.
 (The distribution in all cases
 Is) after the payment
 Of legacies and debts.
 Ye know not whether
 Your parents or your children
 Are nearest to you
 In benefit. These are
 Settled portions ordained

[p. 182]

By God; and God is
 All-knowing, All-wise.

12. In what your wives leave,
 Your share is a half,
 1f they leave no child;
 But if they leave a child,
 Ye get a fourth; after payment
 Of legacies and debts.
 In what ye leave,
 Their share is a fourth,
 If ye leave no child;
 But if ye leave a child,
 They get an eighth; after payment
 Of legacies and debts.

If the man or woman
 Whose inheritance is in question,
 Has left neither ascendants nor descendants,
 But has left a brother
 Or a sister, each one of the two
 Gets a sixth; but if more
 Than two, they share in a third;
 After payment of legacies
 And debts; so that no loss
 Is caused (to any one).
 Thus is it ordained by God;
 And God is All-knowing,
 Most Forbearing.

[p. 183]

13. Those are limits
 Set by God: those who
 Obey God and His Apostle
 Will be admitted to Gardens
 With rivers flowing beneath,
 To abide therein (for ever)
 And that will be
 The Supreme achievement.

14. But those who disobey
 God and His Apostle
 And transgress His limits
 Will be admitted
 To a Fire, to abide therein:
 And they shall have
 A humiliating punishment.

  

SECTION 3.

15. If any of your women
 Are guilty of lewdness,
 Take the evidence of four
 (Reliable) witnesses from amongst you
 Against them; and if they testify,
 Confine them to houses until
 Death do claim them,

[p. 184]

Or God ordain for them
 Some (other) way.

16. If two men among you
 Are guilty of lewdness,
 Punish them both.
 If they repent and amend,
 Leave them alone; for God
 Is Oft-returning, Most Merciful.

17. God accepts the repentance
 Of those who do evil
 In ignorance and repent
 Soon afterwards; to them
 Will God turn in mercy:
 For God is full of knowledge
 And wisdom.

18. Of no effect is the repentance
 Of those who continue
 To do evil, until Death
 Faces one of them, and he says,
 "Now have I repented indeed;"
 Nor of those who die
 Rejecting Faith: for them
 Have we prepared
 A punishment most grievous.

19. O ye who believe!
 Ye are forbidden to inherit
 Women against their will.
 Nor should ye treat them

[p. 185]

With harshness, that ye may
 Take away part of the dower
 Ye have given them,--except
 Where they have been guilty
 Of open lewdness;
 On the contrary live with them
 On a footing of kindness and equity.
 If ye take a dislike to them
 It may be that ye dislike
 A thing, and God brings about
 Through it a great deal of good.

20. But if ye decide to take
 One wife in place of another,
 Even if ye had given the latter
 A whole treasure for dower,
 Take not the least bit of it back:
 Would ye take it by slander
 And a manifest wrong?

21. And how could ye take it
 When ye have gone in
 Unto each other, and they have
 Taken from you a solemn covenant?

22. And marry not women
 Whom your fathers married,--
 Except what is past:
 It was shameful and odious,--
 An abominable custom indeed.

[p. 186]

  

SECTION 4.

23. Prohibited to you
 (For marriage) are:--
 Your mothers, daughters,
 Sisters; father's sisters,
 Mother's sisters; brother's daughters,
 Sister's daugters; foster-mothers
 (Who gave you suck), foster-sisters;
 Your wives' mothers;
 Your step-daughters under your
 Guardianship, born of your wives
 To whom ye have gone in,
 No prohibition if ye have not gone in;--
 (Those who have been)
 Wives of your sons proceeding
 From your loins;
 And two sisters in wedlock
 At one and the same time,
 Except for what is past;
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful;--

[p. 187]

24. Also (prohibited are)
 Women already married,
 Except those
 Whom your right hands possess:
 Thus hath God ordained
 (Prohibitions) against you:
 Except for these, all others
 Are lawful, provided
 Ye seek (them in marriage)
 With gifts from your property,--
 Desiring chastity, not lust.
 Seeing that ye derive
 Benefit from them, give them
 Their dowers (at least)
 As prescribed; but if,
 After a dower is prescribed, ye agree
 Mutually (to vary it),
 There is no blame on you,
 And God is All-knowing
 All-wise.

25. If any of you have not
 The means wherewith
 To wed free believing women,
 They may wed believing
 Girls from among those
 Whom your right hands possess:
 God hath full knowledge
 About your Faith.
 Ye are one from another:
 Wed them with the leave
 Of their owners, and give them
 Their dowers, according to what

[p. 188]

Is reasonable: they should be
 Chaste, not lustful, nor taking
 Paramours: when they
 Are taken in wedlock,
 If they fall into shame,
 Their punishment is half
 That for free women.
 This (permission) is for those
 Among you who fear sin;
 But it is better for you
 That ye practise self-restraint.
 And God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 5.

26. God doth wish
 To make clear to you
 And to show you
 The ordinances of those
 Before you; and (He
 Doth wish to) turn to you
 (In Mercy): and God
 Is All-knowing, All-wise.

27. God doth wish
 To turn to you,
 But the wish of those
 Who follow their lusts
 Is that ye should turn
 Away (from Him),
 Far, far away.

28. God doth wish
 To lighten your (difficulties);
 For man was created
 Weak (in flesh).

29. O ye who believe! sot
 Eat not up your property

[p. 189]

Among yourselves in vanities:
 But let there be amongst you
 Traffic and trade
 By mutual good-will:
 Nor kill (or destroy)
 Yourselves: for verily
 God hath been to you
 Most Merciful!

30. If any do that
 In rancour and injustice,--
 Soon shall We cast them
 Into the Fire: and easy
 It is for God.

31. If ye (but) eschew
 The most heinous
 Of the things
 Which ye are forbidden to do,
 We shall expel
 Out of you
 All the evil in you,
 And admit you to a Gate
 Of great honour.

32. And in no wise covet
 Those things in which God
 Hath bestowed His gifts
 More freely on some of you
 Than on others: to men
 Is allotted what they earn,
 And to women what they earn:
 But ask God of His bounty.
 For God hath full knowledge
 Of all things.

33. To (benefit) every one,
 We have appointed
 Sharers and heirs
 To property left

[p. 190]

By parents and relatives.
 To those, also, to whom
 Your right hand was pledged,
 Give their due portion.
 For truly God is witness
 To all things.

  

SECTION 6.

34. Men are the protectors
 And maintainers of women,
 Because God has given
 The one more (strength)
 Than the other, and because
 They support them
 From their means.
 Therefore the righteous women
 Are devoutly obedient, and guard
 In (the husband's) absence
 What God would have them guard.
 As to those women
 On whose part ye fear
 Disloyalty and ill-conduct,
 Admonish them (first),
 (Next), refuse to share their beds,
 (And last) beat them (lightly);
 But if they return to obedience,
 Seek not against them
 Means (of annoyance):

[p. 191]

For God is Most High,
 Great (above you all).

35. If ye fear a breach
 Between them twain,
 Appoint (two) arbiters,
 One from his family,
 And the other from hers;
 If they wish for peace,
 God will cause
 Their reconciliation:
 For God hath full knowledge,
 And is acquainted
 With all things.

36. serve God, and join not
 Any partners with Him;
 And do good
 To parents, kinsfolk,
 Orphans, those in need,
 Neighbours who are near,
 Neighbours who are strangers,
 The Companion by your side,
 The way-farer (ye meet),
 And what your right hands possess:
 For God loveth not
 The arrogant, the vainglorious;--

[p. 192]

37. (Nor) those who are niggardly
 Or enjoin niggardliness on others,
 Or hide the bounties
 Which God hath bestowed
 On them; for We have prepared,
 For those who resist Faith,
 A Punishment that steeps
 Them in contempt;--

38. Not those who spend
 Of their substance, to be seen
 Of men, but have no faith
 In God and the Last Day:
 If any take the Evil One
 For their intimate,
 What a dreadful intimate he is!

39. And what burden
 Were it on them if they
 Had faith in God
 And in the Last Day,
 And they spent
 Out of what God hath
 Given them for sustenance?
 For God hath full
 Knowledge of them.

40. God is never unjust
 In the least degree:
 If there is any good (done),
 He doubleth it,
 And giveth from His own
 Presence a great reward.

41. How then if We brought
 From each People a witness,

[p. 193]

And We brought thee
 As a witness against
 These People!

42. On that day
 Those who reject Faith
 And disobey the Apostle
 Will wish that the earth
 Were made one with them:
 But never will they hide
 A single fact from God!

  

SECTION 7.

43. O ye who believe!
 Approach not prayers
 With a mind befogged,
 Until ye can understand
 All that ye say,
 Nor in a state
 Of ceremonial impurity
 (Except when travelling on the road),
 Until after washing
 Your whole body.
 If ye are ill,
 Or on a journey,
 Or one of you cometh
 From offices of nature,

[p. 194]

Or ye have been
 In contact with women,
 And ye find no water,
 Then take for yourselves
 Clean sand or earth,
 And rub therewith
 Your faces and hands.
 For God doth blot out sins
 And forgive again and again.

44. Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to those
 Who were given a portion
 Of the Book? They traffic
 In error, and wish that ye
 Should lose the right path.

45. But God hath full knowledge
 Of your enemies:
 God is enough for a Protector,
 And God is enough for a Helper.

46. Of the Jews there are those
 Who displace words
 From their (right) places,
 And say: "We hear
 And we disobey";
 And "Hear what is not
 Heard"; and "Ra'ina";--
 With a twist of their tongues
 And a slander to Faith.
 If only they had said:
 "We hear and we obey;
 And "Do hear";

[p. 195]

And "Do look at us":
 It would have been better
 For them, and more proper;
 But God hath cursed them
 For their Unbelief; and but few
 Of them will believe.

47. O ye People of the Book!
 Believe in what We
 Have (now) revealed, confirming
 What was (already) with you,
 Before We change the face and fame
 Of some (of you) beyond all recognition,
 And turn them hindwards,
 Or curse them as We cursed
 The Sabbath-breakers,
 For the decision of God
 Must be carried out.

48. God forgiveth not
 That partners should be set up
 With Him; but He forgiveth
 Anything else, to whom
 He pleaseth; to set up
 Partners with God
 Is to devise a sin
 Most heinous indeed.

49. Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to those
 Who claim sanctity
 For themselves?

[p. 196]

Nay--but God
 Doth sanctify
 Whom He pleaseth.
 But never will they
 Fail to receive justice
 In the least little thing.

50. Behold! how they invent
 A lie against God!
 But that by itself
 Is a manifest sin!

  

SECTION 8.

51. Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to those
 Who were given a portion
 Of the Book? They believe
 In Sorcery and Evil,
 And say to the Unbelievers
 That they are better guided
 In the (right) way
 Than the Believers!

52. They are (men) whom
 God hath cursed:
 And those whom God
 Hath cursed, thou wilt find,
 Have no one to help.

53. Have they a share
 In dominion or power?
 Behold, they give not a farthing
 To their fellow-men?

[p. 197]

54. Or do they envy mankind
 For what God hath given them
 Of his bounty? But We
 Had already given the people
 Of Abraham the Book
 And Wisdom, and conferred
 Upon them a great kingdom.

55. Some of them believed,
 And some of them averted
 Their faces from him: and enough
 Is Hell for a burning fire.

56. Those who reject
 Our Signs, We shall soon
 Cast into the Fire:
 As often as their skins
 Are roasted through,
 We shall change them
 For fresh skins,
 That they may taste
 The Penalty: for God
 Is Exalted in Power, Wise.

57. But those who believe
 And do deeds of righteousness,
 We shall soon admit to Gardens,
 With rivers flowing beneath,--
 Their eternal home:
 Therein shall they have
 Companions pure and holy: ye
 We shall admit them
 To shades, cool and ever deepening.

58. God doth command you
 To render back your Trusts
 To those to whom they are due;
 And when ye judge

[p. 198]

Between man and man,
 That ye judge with justice:
 Verily how excellent
 Is the teaching which He giveth you!
 For God is He Who heareth
 And seeth all things.

59. O ye who believe!
 Obey God, and obey the Apostle,
 And those charged
 With authority among you.
 If ye differ in anything
 Among yourselves, refer it
 To God and His Apostle,
 If ye do believe in God
 And the Last Day:
 That is best, and most suitable
 For final determination.

  

SECTION 9.

60. Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to those
 Who declare that they believe
 In the revelations
 That have come to thee
 And to those before thee?
 Their (real) wish is
 To resort together for judgment
 (In their disputes)
 To the Evil One,
 Though they were ordered
 To reject him.
 But Satan's wish
 Is to lead them astray
 Far away (from the Right).

61. When it is said to them:
 "Come to what God hath revealed,

[p. 199]

And to the Apostle":
 Thou seest the Hypocrites avert
 Their faces from thee in disgust.

62. How then, when they are
 Seized by misfortune,
 Because of the deeds
 Which their hands have sent forth?
 Then they come to thee,
 Swearing by God:
 "We meant no more
 Than good-will and conciliation!"

63. Those men,--God knows
 What is in their hearts;
 So keep clear of them,ss:
 But admonish them,
 And speak to them a word
 To reach their very souls.

64. We sent not an Apostle,
 But to be obeyed, in accordance
 With the Will of God.
 If they had only,
 When they were unjust
 To themselves,
 Come unto thee
 And asked God's forgiveness,
 And the Apostle had asked
 Forgiveness for them,
 They would have found
 God indeed Oft-returning,
 Most Merciful.

65. But no, by thy Lord,
 They can have
 No (real) Faith,
 Until they make thee judge
 In all disputes between them,
 And find in their souls
 No resistance against
 Thy decisions, but accept
 Them with the fullest conviction.

[p. 200]

66. If We had ordered them
 To sacrifice their lives
 Or to leave their homes,
 Very few of them
 Would have done it:
 But if they had done
 What they were (actually) told,
 It would have been best
 For them, and would have gone
 Farthest to strengthen their (faith);

67. And We should then have
 Given them from Our Presence
 A great reward;

68. And We should have
 Shown them the Straight Way.

69. All who obey God
 And the Apostle
 Are in the company
 Of those on whom
 Is the Grace of God,--
 Of the Prophets (who teach),
 The Sincere (lovers of Truth),
 The Witnesses (who testify),
 And the Righteous (who do good):
 Ah! what a beautiful Fellowship!

[p. 201]

70. Such is the Bounty
 From God: and sufficient
 Is it that God knoweth all.

  

SECTION 10.

71. O ye who believe!
 Take your precautions,
 And either go forth in parties
 Or go forth all together.

72. There are certainly among you
 Men who would tarry behind:
 If a misfortune befalls you,
 They say: "God did favour us
 In that we were not
 Present among them."

73. But if good fortune comes to you
 From God, they would be sure
 To say--as if there had never been
 Ties of affection between you and them--

"Oh! I wish I had been with them;
 A fine thing should I then
 Have made of it!"

[p. 202]

74. Let those fight
 In the cause of God
 Who sell the life of this world
 For the Hereafter.
 To him who fighteth
 In the cause of God,--
 Whether he is slain
 Or gets victory
 Soon shall We give him
 A reward of great (value).

75. And why should ye not
 Fight in the cause of God
 And of those who, being weak,
 Are ill-treated (and oppressed)?--
 Men, women, and children,
 Whose cry is: "Our Lord!
 Rescue us from this town,
 Whose people are oppressors;
 And raise for us from Thee
 One who will protect;
 And raise for us from Thee
 One who will help!"

76. Those who believe
 Fight in the cause of God,
 And those who reject Faith
 Fight in the cause of Evil:
 So fight ye against the
 Friends of Satan: feeble indeed
 Is the cunning of Satan.

  

SECTION 11.

77. Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to those

[p. 203]

Who were told to hold back
 Their hands (from fight)
 But establish regular prayers
 And spend in regular Charity?
 When (at length) the order
 For fighting was issued to them,
 Behold! a section of them
 Feared men as
 Or even more than
 They should have feared God:
 They said: "Our Lord!
 Why hast Thou ordered us
 To fight? Wouldst Thou not
 Grant us respite
 To our (natural) term,
 Near (enough)?" Say: "Short
 Is the enjoyment of this world:
 The Hereafter is the best
 For those who do right:
 Never will ye be
 Dealt with unjustly
 In the very least!

78. "Wherever ye are,
 Death will find you out,
 Even if ye are in towers
 Built up strong and high!"

If some good befalls them,
 They say, "This is from God";
 But if evil, they say,
 "This is from thee" (O Prophet).

[p. 204]

Say: "All things are from God."
 But what hath come
 To these people,
 That they fail
 To understand
 A single fact?

79. Whatever good, (O man!)
 Happens to thee, is from God;
 But whatever evil happens
 To thee, is from thy (own) soul.
 And We have sent thee
 As an Apostle
 To (instruct) mankind.
 And enough is God
 For a witness.

80 He who obeys
 The Apostle, obeys God:
 But if any turn away,
 We have not sent thee
 To watch over
 Their (evil deeds).

81. They have "Obedience"
 On their lips; but
 When they leave thee,
 A section of them
 Meditate all night
 On things very different
 From what thou tellest them.
 But God records
 Their nightly (plots):
 So keep clear of them,
 And put thy trust in God,
 And enough is God

[p. 205]

As a disposer of affairs.

82. Do they not consider
 The Qur-an (with care)?
 Had it been from other
 Than God, they would surely
 Have found therein
 Much discrepancy.

83. When there comes to them
 Some matter touching
 (Public) safety or fear,
 They divulge it.
 If they had only referred it
 To the Apostle, or to those
 Charged with authority
 Among them, the proper
 Investigators would have
 Tested it from them (direct).
 Were it not for the Grace
 And Mercy of God unto you,
 All but a few of you
 Would have fallen
 Into the clutches of Satan.

84. Then fight in God's cause--
 Thou art held responsible
 Only for thyself--
 And rouse the Believers.
 It may be that God
 Will restrain the fury

[p. 206]

Of the Unbelievers;
 For God is the strongest
 In might and in punishment.

85. Whoever recommends
 And helps a good cause
 Becomes a partner therein:
 And whoever recommends
 And helps an evil cause,
 Shares in its burden:
 And God hath power
 Over all things.

86. When a (courteous) greeting
 Is offered you, meet it
 With a greeting still more
 Courteous, or (at least)
 Of equal courtesy.
 God takes careful account
 Of all things.

87. God! There is no god
 But He: of a surety
 He will gather you together
 Against the Day of Judgment,
 About which there is no doubt.
 And whose word can be
 Truer than God's?

  

SECTION 12.

88. Why should ye be
 Divided into two parties

[p. 207]

About the Hypocrites?
 God hath upset them
 For their (evil) deeds.
 Would ye guide those
 Whom God hath thrown
 Out of the Way? For those
 Whom God hath thrown
 Out of the Way, never
 Shalt thou find the Way.

89. They but wish that ye
 Should reject Faith,
 As they do, and thus be
 On the same footing (as they):
 But take not friends
 From their ranks
 Until they flee
 In the way of God
 (From what is forbidden).
 But if they turn renegades,
 Seize them and slay them
 Wherever ye find them;
 And (in any case) take
 No friends or helpers
 From their ranks:--

90. Except those who join
 A group between whom
 And you there is a treaty

[p. 208]

(Of peace), or those who approach
 You with hearts restraining
 Them from fighting you
 As well as fighting their own
 People. If God had pleased,
 He could have given them
 Power over you, and they
 Would have fought you:
 Therefore if they withdraw
 From you but fight you not,
 And (instead) send you
 (Guarantees of) peace, then God
 Hath opened no way
 For you (to war against them).

91. Others you will find
 That wish to gain
 Your confidence as well
 As that of their people:
 Every time they are sent back
 To temptation, they succumb
 Thereto: if they withdraw not
 From you nor give you (guarantees)
 Of peace besides
 Restraining their hands,
 Seize them and slay them
 Wherever ye get them:
 In their case
 We have provided you
 With a clear argument
 Against them.

[p. 209]

  

SECTION 13.

92. Never should a Believer
 Kill a Believer; but
 (If it so happens) by mistake,
 (Compensation is due):
 If one (so) kills a Believer,
 It is ordained that he
 Should free a believing slave,
 And pay compensation
 To the deceased's family,
 Unless they remit it freely.
 If the deceased belonged
 To a people at war with you,
 And he was a Believer,
 The freeing of a believing slave
 (Is enough). If he belonged
 To a people with whom
 Ye have a treaty of mutual
 Alliance, compensation should
 Be paid to his family,
 And a believing slave be freed.
 For those who find this
 Beyond their means, (is prescribed)
 A fast for two months
 Running: by way of repentance
 To God: for God hath
 All knowledge and all wisdom.

[p. 210]

93.1f a man kills a Believer
 Intentionally, his recompense
 Is Hell, to abide therein
 (For ever): and the wrath
 And the curse of God
 Are upon him, and
 A dreadful penalty
 Is prepared for him.

94. O ye who believe!
 When ye go abroad
 In the cause of God,
 Investigate carefully,
 And say not to any one
 Who offers you a salutation:
 "Thou art none of a Believer!"
 Coveting the perishable goods
 Of this life: with God
 Are profits and spoils abundant.
 Even thus were ye yourselves
 Before, till God conferred
 On you His favours: therefore
 Carefully investigate.
 For God is well aware
 Of all that ye do.

95. Not equal are those
 Believers who sit (at home)
 And receive no hurt,
 And those who strive
 And fight in the cause
 Of God with their goods
 And their persons.
 God hath granted
 A grade higher to those
 Who strive and fight

[p. 211]

With their goods and persons
 Than to those who sit (at home).
 Unto all (in Faith)
 Hath God promised good:
 But those who strive and fight
 Hath He distinguished
 Above those who sit (at home)
 By a special reward,--

96. Ranks specially bestowed
 By Him. And Forgiveness
 And Mercy. For God is
 Oft forgiving, Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 14.

97. When angels take
 The souls of those
 Who die in sin
 Against their souls,
 They say: "In what (plight)
 Were ye?" They reply:
 "Weak and oppressed
 Were we in the earth."
 They say: "Was not
 The earth of God
 Spacious enough for you
 To move yourselves away
 (From evil)?" Such men
 Will find their abode
 In Hell,--What an evil
 Refuge!--

[p. 212]

98. Except those who are
 (Really) weak and oppressed--
 Men, women, and children--
 Who have no means
 In their power, nor (a guide-post)
 To direct their way.

99. For these, there is hope
 That God will forgive:
 For God doth blot out (sins)
 And forgive again and again.

100. He who forsakes his home
 In the cause of God,
 Finds in the earth
 Many a refuge,
 Wide and spacious:
 Should he die
 As a refugee from home
 For God and His Apostle,
 His reward becomes due
 And sure with God:
 And God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 15.

101. When ye travel
 Through the earth,
 There is no blame on you
 If ye shorten your prayers,
 For fear the Unbelievers
 May attack you:
 For the Unbelievers are
 Unto you open enemies.

[p. 213]

102. When thou (O Apostle)
 Art with them, and standest
 To lead them in prayer,
 Let one party of them
 Stand up (in prayer) with thee,
 Taking their arms with them:
 When they finish
 Their prostrations, let them
 Take their position in the rear.
 And let the other party come up
 Which hath not yet prayed--
 And let them pray with thee,
 Taking all precautions,
 And bearing arms:
 The Unbelievers wish,
 If ye were negligent
 Of your arms and your baggage,
 To assault you in a single rush.
 But there is no blame on you
 If ye put away your arms
 Because of the inconvenience
 Of rain or because ye are ill;
 But take (every) precaution
 For yourselves. For the
 Unbelievers
 God hath prepared
 A humiliating punishment.

103. When ye pass
 (Congregational) prayers,
 Celebrate God's praises,
 Standing, sitting down,
 Or lying down on your sides;
 But when ye are free
 From danger, set up
 Regular Prayers:
 For such prayers
 Are enjoined on Believers
 At stated times.

[p. 214]

104. And slacken not
 In following up the enemy:
 If ye are suffering hardships,
 They are suffering similar
 Hardships; but ye have
 Hope from God, while they
 Have none. And God
 Is full of knowledge and wisdom.

  

SECTION 16.

105. We have sent down
 To thee the Book in truth,
 That thou might test judge
 Between men, as guided
 By God: so be not (used)
 As an advocate by those
 Who betray their trust;

106. But seek the forgiveness
 Of God; for God is
 Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

[p. 215]

107. Contend not on behalf
 Of such as betray
 Their own souls;
 For God loveth not
 One given to perfidy
 And crime;

108. They may hide
 (Their crimes) from men,
 But they cannot hide
 (Them) from God, seeing that
 He is in their midst
 When they plot by night,
 In words that He cannot
 Approve: and God
 Doth compass round
 All that they do.

109. Ah! these are the sort
 Of men on whose behalf
 Ye may contend in this world;
 But who will contend with God
 On their behalf on the Day
 Of Judgment, or who
 Will carry their affairs through?

110. If any one does evil
 Or wrongs his own soul
 But afterwards seeks
 God's forgiveness, he will find
 God Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

111. And if any one earns
 Sin, he earns it against

[p. 216]

His own soul: for God
 Is full of knowledge and wisdom.

112. But if any one earns
 A fault or a sin
 And throws it on to one
 That is innocent,
 He carries (on himself)
 (Both) a falsehood
 And a flagrant sin.

  

SECTION 17.

113. But for the Grace of God
 To thee and His Mercy,
 A party of them would
 Certainly have plotted
 To lead thee astray.
 But (in fact) they will only
 Lead their own souls astray,
 And to thee they can do
 No harm in the least.
 For God hath sent down
 To thee the Book and Wisdom
 And taught thee what thou
 Knewest not (before):
 And great is the Grace
 Of God unto thee.

114. In most of their secret talks
 There is no good: but if
 One exhorts to a deed
 Of charity or justice
 Or conciliation between men,
 (Secrecy is permissible):
 To him who does this,
 Seeking the good pleasure
 Of God, We shall soon give
 A reward of the highest (value).

[p. 217]

115. If anyone contends with
 The Apostle even after
 Guidance has been plainly
 Conveyed to him, and follows
 A path other than that
 Becoming to men of Faith,
 We shall leave him
 In the path he has chosen,
 And land him in Hell,--
 What an evil refuge!

  

SECTION 18.

116. God forgiveth not
 (The sin of) joining other gods
 With Him; but He forgiveth
 Whom He pleaseth other sins
 Than this: one who joins
 Other gods with God,
 Hath strayed far, far away
 (From the Right).

117. (The Pagans), leaving Him,
 Call but upon female deities:
 They call but upon Satan
 The persistent rebel!

118. God did curse him,
 But he said: "I will take
 Of Thy servants a portion
 Marked off;

119. "I will mislead them,
 And I will create

[p. 218]

In them false desires; I will
 Order them to slit the ears
 Of cattle, and to deface
 The (fair) nature created
 By God." Whoever,
 Forsaking God, takes Satan
 For a friend, hath
 Of a surety suffered
 A loss that is manifest.

120. Satan makes them promises,
 And creates in them false desires;
 But Satan's promises
 Are nothing but deception.

121. They (his dupes)
 Will have their dwelling
 In Hell, and from it
 They will find no way
 Of escape.

122. But those who believe
 And do deeds of righteousness,--
 We shall soon admit them
 To Gardens, with rivers
 Flowing beneath,--to dwell
 Therein for ever.
 God's promise is the truth,
 And whose word can be
 Truer than God's?

123. Not your desires, nor those
 Of the People of the Book

[p. 219]

(Can prevail): whoever
 Works evil, will be
 Requited accordingly.
 Nor will he find, besides God,
 Any protector or helper.

124. If any do deeds
 Of righteousness,
 Be they male or female--
 And have faith,
 They will enter Heaven,
 And not the least injustice
 Will be done to them.

125. Who can be better
 In religion than one
 Who submits his whole self
 To God, does good,
 And follows the way
 Of Abraham the true in faith?
 For God did take
 Abraham for a friend.

126. But to God belong all things
 In the heavens and on earth:
 And He it is that
 Encompasseth all things.

[p. 220]

  

SECTION 19.

127. They ask thy instruction
 Concerning the Women
 Say: God doth
 Instruct you about them:
 And (remember) what hath
 Been rehearsed unto you
 In the Book, concerning
 The orphans of women to whom
 Ye give not the portions
 Prescribed, and yet whom ye
 Desire to marry, as also
 Concerning the children
 Who are weak and oppressed:
 That ye stand firm
 For justice to orphans.
 There is not a good deed
 Which ye do, but God
 Is well-acquainted therewith.

128. If a wife fears
 Cruelty or desertion
 On her husband's part,
 There is no blame on them
 If they arrange
 An amicable settlement
 Between themselves;
 And such settlement is best;

[p. 221]

Even though men's souls
 Are swayed by greed.
 But if ye do good
 And practise self-restraint,
 God is well-acquainted
 With all that ye do.

129. Ye are never able
 To be fair and just
 As between women,
 Even if it is
 Your ardent desire:
 But turn not away
 (From a woman) altogether,
 So as to leave her (as it were)
 Hanging (in the air).
 If ye come to a friendly
 Understanding, and practise
 Self-restraint, God is
 Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

130. But if they disagree
 (And must part), God
 Will provide abundance
 For all from His
 All-reaching bounty:
 For God is He
 That careth for all
 And is Wise.

131. To God belong all things
 In the heavens and on earth.

[p. 222]

Verily We have directed
 The People of the Book
 Before you, and you (O Muslims).
 To fear God. But if ye
 Deny Him, to! unto God
 Belong all things
 In the heavens and on earth,
 And God is free
 Of all wants, worthy
 Of all praise.

132. Yea, unto God belong
 All things in the heavens
 And on earth, and enough
 Is God to carry through
 All affairs.

133. If it were His Will,
 He could destroy you,
 O mankind, and create
 Another race; for He
 Hath power this to do.

134. If any one desires
 A reward in this life,
 In God's (gift) is the reward
 (Both) of this life
 And of the Hereafter:
 For God is He that heareth
 And seeth (all things).

[p. 223]

  

SECTION 20.

135. O ye who believe!
 Stand out firmly
 For justice, as witnesses
 To God, even as against
 Yourselves, or your parents,
 Or your kin, and whether
 It be (against) rich or poor:
 For God can best protect both.
 Follow not the lusts
 (Of your hearts), lest ye
 Swerve, and if ye
 Distort (justice) or decline
 To do justice, verily
 God is well-acquainted
 With all that ye do.

136. O ye who believe!
 Believe in God
 And His Apostle,
 And the scripture which He
 Hath sent to His Apostle
 And the scripture which He sent
 To those before (him)
 Any who denieth God,
 His angels, His Books,
 His Apostles, and the Day
 Of Judgment, hath gone
 Far, far astray.

[p. 224]

137. Those who believe,
 Then reject Faith,
 Then believe (again)
 And (again) reject Faith,
 And go on increasing
 In Unbelief,--God
 Will not forgive them
 Nor guide them on the Way.

138. To the Hypocrites give
 The glad tidings that
 There is for them
 (But) a grievous Penalty;--

139. Yea, to those who take
 For friends Unbelievers
 Rather than Believers:
 Is it honour they seek
 Among them? Nay,--
 All honour is with God.

140. Already has He sent you
 Word in the Book, that when
 Ye hear the Signs of God
 Held in defiance and ridicule,
 Ye are not to sit with them
 Unless they turn to a different
 Theme: if ye did, ye would be
 Like them. For God will
 Collect the Hypocrites and those
 Who defy Faith--all in Hell;--

[p. 225]

141. (These are) the ones who
 Wait and watch about you:
 If ye do gain
 A victory from God,
 They say: "Were we not
 With you?"--but if
 The Unbelievers gain
 A success, they say
 (To them): "Did we not
 Gain an advantage over you,
 And did we not guard
 You from the Believers?"
 But God will judge
 Betwixt you on the Day
 Of Judgment. And never
 Will God grant
 To the Unbelievers
 A way (to Triumph)
 Over the Believers.

  

SECTION 21.

142. The Hypocrites--they think
 They are over-reaching God,
 But He will over-reach them:
 When they stand up to prayer,
 They stand without earnestness,
 To be seen of men,
 But little do they hold
 God in remembrance;

143. (They are) distracted in mind
 Even in the midst of it,--
 Being (sincerely) for neither
 One group nor for another.
 Whom God leaves straying,--
 Never wilt thou find

[p. 226]

For him the Way.

144. O ye who believe!
 Take not for friends
 Unbelievers rather than
 Believers: do ye wish
 To offer God an open
 Proof against yourselves?

145. The Hypocrites will be
 In the lowest depths
 Of the Fire: no helper
 Wilt thou find for them;--

146. Except for those who repent,
 Mend (their life), hold fast
 To God, and purify their religion
 As in God's sight: if so
 They will be (numbered)
 With the Believers.
 And soon will God
 Grant to the Believers
 A reward of immense value.

147. What can God gain
 By your punishment,
 If ye are grateful
 And ye believe?
 Nay, it is God
 That recogniseth
 (All good), and knoweth
 All things.

[p. 227]

148. God loveth not that evil
 Should be noised abroad
 In public speech, except
 Where injustice hath been
 Done; for God
 Is He who heareth
 And knoweth all things.

149. Whether ye publish
 A good deed or conceal it
 Or cover evil with pardon,
 Verily God doth blot out
 (Sins) and hath power
 (In the judgment of values),

150. Those who deny God
 And His apostles, and (those
 Who) wish to separate
 God from His apostles,
 Saying: "We believe in some
 But reject others":
 And (those who) wish
 To take a course midway,--

151. They are in truth
 (Equally) Unbelievers;

[p. 228]

And We have prepared
 For Unbelievers a humiliating
 Punishment.

152. To those who believe
 In God and His apostles
 And make no distinction
 Between any of the apostles,
 We shall soon give
 Their (due) rewards:
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 22.

153. The People of the Book
 Ask thee to cause
 A book to descend to them
 From heaven: indeed
 They asked Moses
 For an even greater
 (Miracle), for they said:
 "Show us God in public,"
 But they were dazed
 For their presumption,
 With thunder and lightning.
 Yet they worshipped the calf
 Even after Clear Signs
 Had come to them;
 Even so We forgave them;
 And gave Moses manifest
 Proofs of authority.

[p. 229]

154. And for their Covenant
 We raised over them
 (The towering height)
 Of Mount (Sinai);
 And (on another occasion)
 We said: "Enter the gate
 With humility"; and (once again)
 We commanded them:
 "Transgress not in the matter
 Of the Sabbath."
 And We took from them
 A solemn Covenant.

155. (They have incurred divine
 Displeasure): in that they
 Broke their Covenant;
 That they rejected the Signs
 Of God; that they slew
 The Messengers in defiance
 Of right; that they said,
 "Our hearts are the wrappings
 (Which preserve God's Word;
 We need no more)";--nay,
 God hath set the seal on their hearts
 For their blasphemy,
 And little is it they believe;--

156. That they rejected Faith;
 That they uttered against Mary

[p. 230]

A grave false charge;

157. That they said (in boast),
 "We killed Christ Jesus
 The son of Mary,
 The Apostle of God";--
 But they killed him not,
 Nor crucified him,
 But so it was made
 To appear to them,
 And those who differ
 Therein are full of doubts,
 With no (certain) knowledge,
 But only conjecture to follow,
 For of a surety
 They killed him not:--

158. Nay, God raised him up
 Unto Himself; and God
 Is Exalted in Power, Wise;--

159. And there is none
 Of the People of the Book

[p. 231]

But must believe in him
 Before his death;
 And on the Day of Judgment
 He will be a witness
 Against them;--

160. For the iniquity of the Jews
 We made unlawful for them
 Certain (foods) good and wholesome
 Which had been lawful for them;--
 In that they hindered many
 From God's Way;--

161. That they took usury,
 Though they were forbidden;
 And that they devoured
 Men's substance wrongfully;--
 We have prepared for those
 Among them who reject Faith
 A grievous punishment.

162. But those among them
 Who are well-grounded in knowledge,
 And the Believers,
 Believe in what hath been
 Revealed to thee and what was
 Revealed before thee:
 And (especially) those
 Who establish regular prayer
 And practise regular charity
 And believe in God
 And in the Last Day:
 To them shall We soon
 Give a great reward.

[p. 232]

  

SECTION 23.

163. We have sent thee
 Inspiration, as We sent it
 To Noah and the Messengers
 After him: We sent
 Inspiration to Abraham,
 Ismail, Isaac, Jacob
 And the Tribes, to Jesus,
 Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon,
 And to David We gave
 The Psalms.

164. Of some apostles We have
 Already told thee the story;
 Of others we have not;--
 And to Moses God spoke direct;--

165. Apostles who gave good news
 As well as warning,
 That mankind, after (the coming)
 Of the apostles, should have
 No plea against God:
 For God is Exalted in Power,
 Wise.

166. But God beareth witness
 That what He hath sent
 Unto thee He hath sent
 From His (own) knowledge,

[p. 233]

And the angels bear witness:
 But enough is God for a witness.

167. Those who reject Faith
 And keep off (men)
 From the Way of God,
 Have verily strayed far,
 Far away from the Path.

168. Those who reject Faith
 And do wrong,--God
 Will not forgive them
 Nor guide them
 To any way--

169. Except the way of Hell,
 To dwell therein for ever.
 And this to God is easy.

170. O mankind! the Apostle
 Hath come to you in truth
 From God: believe in him:
 It is best for you. But if
 Ye reject Faith, to God
 Belong all things in the heavens
 And on earth: and God
 Is All-knowing, All-wise.

171. O People of the Book!
 Commit no excesses
 In your religion: nor say
 Of God aught but the truth.

[p. 234]

Christ Jesus the son of Mary
 Was (no more than)
 An apostle of God,
 And His Word,
 Which He bestowed on Mary,
 And a Spirit proceeding
 From Him: so believe
 In God and His apostles.
 Say not "Trinity": desist:
 It will be better for you:
 For God is One God:
 Glory be to Him:
 (Far Exalted is He) above
 Having a son, To Him
 Belong all things in the heavens
 And on earth. And enough
 Is God as a Disposer of affairs.

  

SECTION 24.

172. Christ disdaineth not
 To serve and worship God,
 Nor do the angels, those
 Nearest (to God):
 Those who disdain
 His worship and are arrogant,--
 He will gather them all
 Together unto Himself
 To (answer).

173. But to those who believe
 And do deeds of righteousness,
 He will give their (due)
 Rewards,--and more,
 Out of His bounty:
 But those who are
 Disdainful and arrogant,
 He will punish

[p. 235]

With a grievous penalty;
 Nor will they find,
 Besides God, any
 To protect or help them.

174. O mankind! Verily
 There hath come to you
 A convincing proof
 From your Lord:
 For We have sent unto you
 A light (that is) manifest.

175. Then those who believe
 In God, and hold fast
 To Him,--soon will He
 Admit them to Mercy
 And Grace from Himself,
 And guide them to Himself
 By a straight Way.

176. They ask thee
 For a legal decision.
 Say: God directs (thus)
 About those who leave
 No descendants or ascendants
 As heirs. If it is a man
 That dies, leaving a sister
 But no child, she shall

[p. 236]

Have half the inheritance:
 If (such a deceased was)
 A woman, who left no child,
 Her brother takes her inheritance:
 If there are two sisters,
 They shall have two-thirds
 Of the inheritance
 (Between them): if there are
 Brothers and sisters, (they share),
 The male having twice
 The share of the female.
 Thus doth God make clear
 To you (His law), lest
 Ye err. And God
 Hath knowledge of all things.

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 237] [p. 238]

  

Sura V.

  

Maida, or The Table Spread.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1.  O ye who believe!
 Fulfil (all) obligations
  Lawful unto you (for food)
 Are all four-footed animals,
 With the exceptions named:
 But animals of the chase
 Are forbidden while ye
 Are in the Sacred Precincts
 Or in pilgrim garb:
 For God doth command
 According to His Will and Plan

2.  O ye who believe!
 Violate not the sanctity

[p. 239]

Of the Symbols of God,
 Nor of the Sacred Month,
 Nor of the animals brought
 For sacrifice, nor the garlands
 That mark out such animals,
 Nor the people resorting
 To the Sacred House,
 Seeking of the bounty
 And good pleasure
 Of their Lord.
 But when ye are clear
 Of the Sacred Precincts
 And of pilgrim garb,
 Ye may hunt
 And let not the hatred
 Of some people
 In (once) shutting you out
 Of the Sacred Mosque
 Lead you to transgression
 (And hostility on your part).
 Help ye one another
 In righteousness and piety,
 But help ye not one another
 In sin and rancour:
 Fear God: for God
 Is strict in punishment.

3.  Forbidden to you (for food)
 Are: dead meat, blood,

[p. 240]

The flesh of swine, and that
 On which hath been invoked
 The name of other than God;
 That which hath been
 Killed by strangling,
 Or by a violent blow,
 Or by a headlong fall,
 Or by being gored to death;
 That which hath been (partly)
 Eaten by a wild animal;
 Unless ye are able
 To slaughter it (in due form);
 That which is sacrificed
 On stone (altars);
 (Forbidden) also is the division
 (Of meat) by raffling
 With arrows: that is impiety.
 This day have those who
 Reject Faith given up
 All hope of your religion:
 Yet fear them not
 But fear Me.
 This day have I
 Perfected your religion
 For you, completed
 My favour upon you,
 And have chosen for you
 Islam as your religion.
 But if any is forced
 By hunger, with no inclination
 To transgression, God is
 Indeed Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

[p. 241]

4.  They ask thee what is
 Lawful to them (as food)
 Say: Lawful unto you
 Are (all) things good and pure:
 And what ye have taught
 Your trained hunting animals
 (To catch) in the manner
 Directed to you by God:
 Eat what they catch for you,
 But pronounce the name
 Of God over it: and fear
 God; for God is swift
 In taking account.

5.  This day are (all) things
 Good and pure made lawful
 Unto you. The food
 Of the People of the Book
 Is lawful unto you
 And yours is lawful
 Unto them.
 (Lawful unto you in marriage)
 Are (not only) chaste women
 Who are believers, but
 Chaste women among
 The People of the Book,

[p. 242]

Revealed before your time,--
 When ye give them
 Their due dowers, and desire
 Chastity, not lewdness,
 Nor secret intrigues.
 If any one rejects faith,
 Fruitless is his work,
 And in the Hereafter
 He will be in the ranks
 Of those who have lost
 (All spiritual good).

  

SECTION 2.

6.  O ye who believe!
 When ye prepare
 For prayer, wash
 Your faces, and your hands
 (And arms) to the elbows;
 Rub your heads (with water);
 And (wash) your feet
 To the ankles.
 If ye are in a state
 Of ceremonial impurity,
 Bathe your whole body.
 But if ye are ill,
 Or on a journey,
 Or one of you cometh
 From offices of nature,
 Or ye have been
 In contact with women,
 And ye find no water,
 Then take for yourselves
 Clean sand or earth,

[p. 243]

And rub therewith
 Your faces and hands.
 God doth not wish
 To place you in a difficulty,
 But to make you clean,
 And to complete
 His favour to you,
 That ye may be grateful.

7.  And call in remembrance
 The favour of God
 Unto you, and His Covenant,
 Which He ratified
 With you, when ye said:
 "We hear and we obey":
 And fear God, for God
 Knoweth well
 The secrets of your hearts.

8.  O ye who believe!
 Stand out firmly
 For God, as witnesses
 To fair dealing, and let not
 The hatred of others
 To you make you swerve
 To wrong and depart from
 Justice. Be just: that is
 Next to Piety: and fear God.
 For God is well-acquainted
 With all that ye do.

9.  To those who believe
 And do deeds of righteousness
 Hath God promised forgiveness
 And a great reward.

[p. 244]

10.  Those who reject faith
 And deny Our Signs
 Will be Companions
 Of Hell-fire.

11.  O ye who believe
 Call in remembrance
 The favour of God
 Unto you when
 Certain men formed the design
 To stretch out
 Their hands against you,
 But (God) held back
 Their hands from you:
 So fear God. And on God
 Let Believers put
 (All) their trust.

  

SECTION 3.

12.  God did aforetime
 Take a Covenant from
 The Children of Israel,
 And We appointed twelve
 Captains among them.
 And God said: "I am
 With you: if ye (but)
 Establish regular Prayers,

[p. 245]

Practise regular Charity,
 Believe in My apostles,
 Honour and assist them,
 And loan to God
 A beautiful loan,
 Verily I will wipe out
 From you your evils,
 And admit you to Gardens
 With rivers flowing beneath;
 But if any of you, after this,
 Resisteth faith, he hath truly
 Wandered from the path
 Of rectitude."

13.  But because of their breach
 Of their Covenant, We
 Cursed them, and made
 Their hearts grow hard:
 They change the words
 From their (right) places
 And forget a good part
 Of the Message that was
 Sent them, nor wilt thou
 Cease to find them
 Barring a few--ever
 Bent on (new) deceits:
 But forgive them, and overlook
 (Their misdeeds): for God
 Loveth those who are kind.

14.  From those, too, who call
 Themselves Christians,

[p. 246]

We did take a Covenant,
 But they forgot a good part
 Of the Message that was
 Sent them: so We estranged
 Them, with enmity and hatred
 Between the one and the other,
 To the Day of Judgment.
 And soon will God show
 Them what it is
 They have done.

15.  O People of the Book!
 There hath come to you
 Our Apostle, revealing
 To you much that ye
 Used to hide in the Book,
 And passing over much
 (That is now unnecessary):
  There hath come to you
 From God a (new) light
 And a perspicuous Book,--

16.  Wherewith God guideth all
 Who seek His good pleasure
 To ways of peace and safety,
 And leadeth them out
 Of darkness, by His Will,
 Unto the light,--guideth them
 To a Path that is Straight.

17.  In blasphemy indeed
 Are those that say
 That God is Christ
 The son of Mary.
 Say: "Who then
 Hath the least power

[p. 247]

Against God, if His Will
 Were to destroy Christ
 The son of Mary, his mother,
 And all--every one
 That is on the earth?
 For to God belongeth
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth, and all
 That is between. He createth
 What He pleaseth. For God
 Hath power over all things."

18.  (Both) the Jews and the Christians
 Say: "We are sons
 Of God, and His beloved."
 Say: "Why then doth He
 Punish you for your sins?
 Nay, ye are but men,
 Of the men He hath created:
 He forgiveth whom He pleaseth,
 And He punisheth whom He pleaseth:
 And to God belongeth
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth, and all
 That is between:
 And unto Him
 Is the final goal (of all)"

19.  O People of the Book!
 Now hath come unto you,
 Making (things) clear unto you,
 Our Apostle, after the break

[p. 248]

In (the series of) our apostles,
 Lest ye should say:
 "There came unto us
 No bringer of glad tidings
 And no warner (from evil)":
 But now hath come
 Unto you a bringer
 Of glad tidings
 And a warner (from evil).
 And God hath power
 Over all things.

  

SECTION 4.

20.  Remember Moses said
 To his people: "O my People!
 Call in remembrance the favour
 Of God unto you, when He
 Produced prophets among you,
 Made you kings, and gave
 You what He had not given
 To any other among the peoples.

21.  "O my people! enter
 The holy land which
 God hath assigned unto you,
 And turn not back
 Ignominiously, for then
 Will ye be overthrown,
 To your own ruin."

[p. 249]

22.  They said: "O Moses!
 In this land are a people
 Of exceeding strength:
 Never shall we enter it
 Until they leave it:
 If (once) they leave,
 Then shall we enter."

23.  (But) among (their) God-fearing men
 Were two on whom
 God had bestowed His grace:
 They said: "Assault them
 At the (proper) Gate:
 When once ye are in,
 Victory will be yours;
  But on God put your trust
 If ye have faith."

24.  They said: "O Moses!
 While they remain there,
 Never shall we be able
 To enter, to the end of time.
 Go thou, and thy Lord,
 And fight ye two,
 While we sit here"
 (And watch)."

25.  He said: "O my Lord!
 I have power only

[p. 250]

Over myself and my brother:
 So separate us from this
 Rebellious people!"

26.  God said: "Therefore
 Will the land be out
 Of their reach for forty years:
 In distraction will they
 Wander through the land:
 But sorrow thou not
 Over these rebellious people.

  

SECTION 5.

27.  Recite to them the truth
 Of the story of the two sons

[p. 251]

Of Adam. Behold! they each
 Presented a sacrifice (to God):
 It was accepted from one,
 But not from the other.
 Said the latter: "Be sure
 I will slay thee." "Surely,"
 Said the former, "God
 Doth accept of the sacrifice
 Of those who are righteous.

28. "If thou dost stretch thy hand
 Against me, to slay me,
 It is not for me to stretch
 My hand against thee
 To slay thee: for I do fear
 God, the Cherisher of the Worlds.

29.  "For me, I intend to let
 Thee draw on thyself
 My sin as well as thine,
 For thou wilt be among
 The Companions of the Fire,
 And that is the reward
 Of those who do wrong."

30.  The (selfish) soul of the other
 Led him to the murder
 Of his brother: he murdered
 Him, and became (himself)
 One of the lost ones.

31.  Then God sent a raven,
 Who scratched the ground,

[p. 252]

To show him how to hide
 The shame of his brother.
 "Woe is me!" said he;
 "Was I not even able
 To be as this raven,
 And to hide the shame
 Of my brother?" Then he became
 Full of regrets--

32.  On that account: We ordained
 For the Children of Israel
 That if any one slew
 A person--unless it be
 For murder or for spreading
 Mischief in the land--
 It would be as if
 He slew the whole people:
 And if any one saved a life,
 It would be as if he saved
 The life of the whole people.
 Then although there came
 To them Our Apostles
 With Clear Signs, yet,
 Even after that, many
 Of them continued to commit
 Excesses in the land.

33.  The punishment of those
 Who wage war against God
 And His Apostle, and strive
 With might and main
 For mischief through the land
 Is: execution, or crucifixion,

[p. 253]

Or the cutting off of hands
 And feet from opposite sides,
 Or exile from the land:
 That is their disgrace
 In this world, and
 A heavy punishment is theirs
 In the Hereafter;

34.  Except for those who repent
 Before they fall
 Into your power:
 In that case, know
 That God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 6.

35.  O ye who believe!
 Do your duty to God,
 Seek the means
 Of approach unto Him,
 And strive with might
 And main in His cause:
 That ye may presper.

36.  As to those who reject
 Faith,--if they had
 Everything on earth,
 And twice repeated,
 To give as ransom
 For the penalty of the Day
 Of Judgment, it would
 Never be accepted of them.
 Theirs would be
 A grievous Penalty.

37.  Their wish will be
 To get out of the Fire,
 But never will they
 Get out therefrom:

[p. 254]

Their Penalty will be
 One that endures.

38.  As to the thief,
 Male or female,
 Cut off his or her hands:
 A punishment by way
 Of example, from God,
 For their crime:
 And God is Exalted in Power.

39.  But if the thief repent
 After his crime,
 And amend his conduct,
 God turneth to him
 In forgiveness; for God
 Is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

40.  Knowest thou not
 That to God (alone)
 Belongeth the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth?
 He punisheth whom He pleaseth,
 And He forgiveth whom He pleaseth:
 And God hath power
 Over all things.

41.  O Apostle! let not
 Those grieve thee, who race
 Each other into Unbelief:
 (Whether it be) among those
 Who say "We believe"
 With their lips but
 Whose hearts have no faith;

[p. 255]

Or it be among the Jews,--
 Men who will listen
 To any lie,--will listen
 Even to others who have
 Never so much as come
 To thee. They change the words
 From their (right) times
 And places; they say,
 "If ye are given this,
 Take it, but if not,
 Beware!" If any one's trial
 Is intended by God, thou hast
 No authority in the least
 For him against God.
 For such--it is not
 God's will to purify
 Their hearts. For them
 There is disgrace
 In this world, and
 In the Hereafter
 A heavy punishment.

42.  (They are fond of) listening
 To falsehood, of devouring
 Anything forbidden.
 If they do come to thee,
 Either judge between them,
 Or decline to interfere.
 If thou decline, they cannot
 Hurt thee in the least.
 If thou judge, judge
 In equity between them.
 For God loveth those
 Who judge in equity.

[p. 256]

43.  But why do they come
 To thee for decision,
 When they have (their own)
 Law before them?
 Therein is the (plain)
 Command of God; yet
 Even after that, they would
 Turn away. For they
 Are not (really)
 People of Faith.

  

SECTION 7.

44.  It was We who revealed
 The Law (to Moses): therein
 Was guidance and light.'
 By its standard have been judged
 The Jews, by the Prophets
 Who bowed (as in Islam)
 To God's Will, by the Rabbis
 And the Doctors of Law:

[p. 257]

For to them was entrusted
 The protection of God's Book,
 And they were witnesses thereto:
 Therefore fear not men,
 But fear Me, and sell not
 My Signs for a miserable price.
 If any do fail to judge
 By (the light of) what God
 Hath revealed, they are
 (No better than) Unbelievers.

45.  We ordained therein for them:
 "Life for life, eye for eye,
 Nose for nose, ear for ear,
 Tooth for tooth, and wounds
 Equal for equal." But if
 Any one remits the retaliation
 Byway of charity, it is
 An act of atonement for himself.
 And if any fail to judge
 By (the light of) what God
 Hath revealed, they are
 (No better than) wrong-doers.

46.  And in their footsteps
 We sent Jesus the son

[p. 258]

Of Mary, confirming
 The Law that had come
 Before him: We sent him
 The Gospel: therein
 Was guidance and light,
 And confirmation of the Law
 That had come before him:
 A guidance and an admonition
 To those who fear God.

47.  Let the People of the Gospel
 Judge by what God hath revealed
 Therein. If any do fail
 To judge by (the light of)
 What God hath revealed,
 They are (no better than)
 Those who rebel.

48.  To thee We sent the Scripture
 In truth, confirming
 The scripture that came
 Before it, and guarding it's
 In safety: so judge
 Between them by what
 God hath revealed,
 And follow not their vain
 Desires, diverging
 From the Truth that hath come
 To thee. To each among you
 Have We prescribed a Law
 And an Open Way.
 If God had so willed.
 He would have made you
 A single People, but (His

[p. 259]

Plan is) to test you in what
 He hath given you: so strive
 As in a race in all virtues.
 The goal of you all is to God;
 It is He that will show you
 The truth of the matters
 In which ye dispute;

49.  And this (He commands):
 Judge thou between them
 By what God hath revealed,
 And follow not their vain
 Desires, but beware of them
 Lest they beguile thee
 From any of that (teaching)
 Which God hath sent down
 To thee. And if they turn
 Away, be assured that
 For some of their crimes
 It is God's purpose to punish
 Them. And truly most men
 Are rebellious.

50.  Do they then seek after
 A judgment of (the Days
 Of) Ignorance? But who,
 For a people whose faith
 Is assured, can give
 Better judgment than God?

  

SECTION 8.

51.  O ye who believe!
 Take not the Jews
 And the Christians
 For your friends and protectors:
 They are but friends and protectors)
 To each other. And he

[p. 260]

Amongst you that turns to them
 (For friendship) is of them.
 Verily God guideth not
 A people unjust.

52.  Those in whose hearts
 Is a disease--thou seest
 How eagerly they run about
 Amongst them, saying:
 "We do fear lest a change
 Of fortune bring us disaster."
 Ah! perhaps God will give
 (Thee) victory, or a decision
 According to His Will.
 Then will they repent
 Of the thoughts which they secretly
 Harboured in their hearts.

53.  And those who believe
 Will say: "Are these
 The men who swore
 Their strongest oaths by God,
 That they were with you?"
 All that they do
 Will be in vain,
 And they will fall
 Into (nothing but) ruin.

54.  O ye who believe!
 If any from among you
 Turn back from his Faith,
 Soon will God produce
 A people whom He will love
 As they will love Him,--
 Lowly with the Believers,
 Mighty against the Rejecters,
 Fighting in the Way of God,
 And never afraid
 Of the reproaches

[p. 261]

Of such as find fault.
 That is the Grace of God,
 Which He will bestow
 On whom He pleaseth.
 And God encompasseth all,
 And He knoweth all things.

55.  Your (real) friends are
 (No less than) God,
 His Apostle, and the (Fellowship
 Of) Believers,--those who
 Establish regular prayers
 And regular charity,
 And they bow
 Down humbly (in worship).

56.  As to those who turn
 (For friendship) to God,
 His Apostle, and the (Fellowship
 Of) Believers,--it is
 The Fellowship of God
 That must certainly triumph.

  

SECTION 9.

57.  O ye who believe!
 Take not for friends
 And protectors those
 Who take your religion
 For a mockery or sport,--
 Whether among those
 Who received the Scripture
 Before you, or among those

[p. 262]

Who reject Faith;
 But fear ye God,
 If ye have Faith (indeed).

58.  When ye proclaim
 Your call to prayer,
 They take it (but)
 As mockery and sport;
 That is because they are
 A people without understanding.

59.  Say: "O People of the Book!
 Do ye disapprove of us
 For no other reason than
 That we believe in God,
 And the revelation
 That hath come to us
 And that which came
 Before (us), and (perhaps)
 That most of you
 Are rebellious and disobedient?

60.  Say: "Shall I point out
 To you something much worse
 Than this, (as judged)
 By the treatment it received
 From God? Those who
 Incurred the curse of God
 And His wrath, those of whom some
 He transformed into apes and swine,
 Those who worshipped Evil;--
 These are (many times) worse
 In rank, and far more astray
 From the even Path!"

61.  When they come to thee,
 They say: "We believe":

[p. 263]

But in fact they enter
 With a mind against Faith,
 And they go out
 With the same.
 But God knoweth fully
 All that they hide.

62.  Many of them dost thou
 See, racing each other
 In sin and rancour,
 And their eating of things
 Forbidden. Evil indeed
 Are the things that they do.

63.  Why do not the Rabbis
 And the doctors of law forbid
 Them from their (habit
 Of) uttering sinful words
 And eating things forbidden?
 Evil indeed are their works.

64.  The Jews say: "God's hand
 Is tied up." Be their hands
 Tied up and be they accursed
 For the (blasphemy) they utter.
 Nay, both His hands
 Are widely outstretched:
 He giveth and spendeth
 (Of His bounty) as He pleaseth.
 But the revelation that
 Cometh to thee from God
 Increaseth in most of them
 Their obstinate rebellion
 And blasphemy. Amongst them
 We have placed enmity

[p. 264]

And hatred till the Day
 Of Judgment. Every time
 They kindle the fire of war,
 God doth extinguish it;
 But they (ever) strive
 To do mischief on earth.
 And God loveth not
 Those who do mischief.

65.  If only the People of the Book
 Had believed and been righteous,
 We should indeed have
 Blotted out their iniquities
 And admitted them
 To Gardens of Bliss.

66.  If only they had stood fast
 By the Law, the Gospel,
 And all the revelation that was sent
 To them from their Lord,
 They would have enjoyed
 Happiness from every side.'
 There is from among them
 A party on the right course:
 But many of them
 Follow a course that is evil.

  

SECTION 10.

67.  O Apostle! proclaim
 The (Message) which hath been
 Sent to thee from thy Lord.
 If thou didst not, thou

[p. 265]

Wouldst not have fulfilled
 And proclaimed His Mission.
 And God will defend thee
 From men (who mean mischief).
 For God guideth not
 Those who reject Faith.

68.  Say: "O People of the Book!
 Ye have no ground
 To stand upon unless
 Ye stand fast by the Law,
 The Gospel, and all the revelation
 That has come to you from
 Your Lord." It is the revelation
 That cometh to thee from
 Thy Lord, that increaseth in most
 Of them their obstinate
 Rebellion and blasphemy.
 But sorrow thou not
 Over (these) people without Faith.

69.  Those who believe (in the Qur-an),
 Those who follow the Jewish (scriptures),
 And the Sabians and the Christians,--
 Any who believe in God
 And the Last Day,
 And work righteousness,--
 On them shall be no fear,
 Nor shall they grieve.

70.  We took the Covenant
 Of the Children of Israel
 And sent them apostles.
 Every time there came
 To them an apostle
 With what they themselves
 Desired not--some
 (Of these) they called

[p. 266]

Impostors, and some they
 (Go so far as to) slay.

71.  They thought there would be
 No trial (or punishment);
 So they became blind and deaf;
 Yet God (in mercy) turned
 To them; yet again many
 Of them became blind and deaf.
 But God sees well
 All that they do.

72.  They do blaspheme who say:
 "God is Christ the son
 Of Mary" But said Christ:
 "O Children of Israel!
 Worship God, my Lord
 And your Lord." Whoever
 Joins other gods with God,--
 God will forbid him
 The Garden, and the Fire
 Will be his abode. There will
 For the wrong-doers
 Be no one to help.

73.  They do blaspheme who say:
 God is one of three
 In a Trinity: for there is
 No god except One God.
 If they desist not
 From their word (of blasphemy),
 Verily a grievous penalty
 Will befall the blasphemers
 Among them.

74.  Why turn they not to God,
 And seek His forgiveness?
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

75.  Christ the son of Mary
 Was no more than
 An Apostle; many were
 The apostles that passed away

[p. 267]

Before him. His mother
 Was a woman of truth.
 They had both to eat
 Their (daily) food.
 See how God doth make
 His Signs clear to them;
 Yet see in what ways
 They are deluded
 Away from the truth!

76.  Say: "Will ye worship,
 Besides God, something
 Which hath no power either
 To harm or benefit you?
 But God,--He it is
 That heareth and knoweth
 All things."

77.  Say: "O People of the Book!
 Exceed not in your religion
 The bounds (of what is proper),
 Trespassing beyond the truth,
 Nor follow the vain desires
 Of people who went wrong
 In times gone by,--who misled
 Many, and strayed (themselves)
 From the even Way.

  

SECTION 11.

78.  Curses were pronounced
 On those among the Children
 Of Israel who rejected Faith,
 By the tongue of David
 And of Jesus the son of Mary:
 Because they disobeyed
 And persisted in Excesses.

[p. 268]

79.  Nor did they (usually)
 Forbid one another
 The iniquities which they
 Committed: evil indeed
 Were the deeds which they did.

80.  Thou seest many of them
 Turning in friendship
 To the Unbelievers.
 Evil indeed are (the works) which
 Their souls have sent forward
 Before them (with the result),
 That God's wrath
 Is on them,
 And in torment
 Will they abide.

81.  If only they had believed
 In God, in the Apostle,
 And in what hath been
 Revealed to him, never
 Would they have taken
 Them for friends and protectors,
 But most of them are
 Rebellious wrong-doers.

82.  Strongest among men in enmity
 To the Believers wilt thou
 Find the Jews and Pagans;
 And nearest among them in love
 To the Believers wilt thou
 Find those who say,
 "We are Christians":
 Because amongst these are
 Men devoted to learning
 And men who have renounced
 The world, and they
 Are not arrogant.

[p. 269]

83.  And when they listen
 To the revelation received
 By the Apostle, thou wilt
 See their eyes overflowing
 With tears, for they
 Recognise the truth:
 They pray: "Our Lord!
 We believe; write us
 Down among the witnesses.

84.  "What cause can we have
 Not to believe in God
 And the truth which has
 Come to us, seeing that
 We long for our Lord
 To admit us to the company
 Of the righteous?"

85.  And for this their prayer
 Hath God rewarded them
 With Gardens, with rivers
 Flowing underneath,--their eternal
 Home. Such is the recompense
 Of those who do good.

86.  But those who reject Faith
 And belie Our Signs,--
 They shall be Companions
 Of Hell-fire.

  

SECTION 12.

87.  O ye who believe!
 Make not unlawful

[p. 270]

The good things which God
 Hath made lawful for you,
 But commit no excess:
 For God loveth not
 Those given to excess.

88.  Eat of the things which
 God hath provided for you,
 Lawful and good; but fear
 God, in Whom ye believe.

89.  God will not call you
 To account for what is
 Futile in your oaths,
 But He will call you
 To account for your deliberate
 Oaths: for expiation, feed
 Ten indigent persons,
 On a scale of the average
 For the food of your families;
 Or clothe them; or give
 A slave his freedom.
 If that is beyond your means,
 Fast for three days.
 That is the expiation
 For the oaths ye have sworn.
 But keep to your oaths.
 Thus doth God make clear
 To you His Signs, that ye
 May be grateful.

90.  O ye who believe!
 Intoxicants and gambling,

[p. 271]

(Dedication of) stones,
 And (divination by) arrows,
 Are an abomination,--
 Of Satan's handiwork:
 Eschew such (abomination),
 That ye may prosper.

91.  Satan's plan is (but)
 To excite enmity and hatred
 Between you, with intoxicants
 And gambling, and hinder you
 From the remembrance
 Of God, and from prayer:
 Will ye not then abstain?

92.  Obey God, and obey the Apostle,
 And beware (of evil):
 If ye do turn back,
 Know ye that it is
 Our Apostle's duty
 To proclaim (the Message)
 In the clearest manner.

93.  On those who believe
 And do deeds of righteousness
 There is no blame
 For what they ate (in the past),
 When they guard themselves
 From evil, and believe,
 And do deeds of righteousness,--
 (Or) again, guard themselves
 From evil and believe,--
 (Or) again, guard themselves
 From evil and do good.

[p. 272]

For God loveth those
 Who do good.

  

SECTION 13.

94.  O ye who believe!
 God doth but make a trial of you
 In a little matter
 Of game well within reach
 Of your hands and your lances,
 That He may test
 Who feareth Him unseen:
 Any who transgress
 Thereafter, will have
 A grievous penalty.

95.  O ye who believe!
 Kill not game
 While in the Sacred
 Precincts or in pilgrim garb.
 If any of you doth so
 Intentionally, the compensation
 Is an offering, brought
 To the Ka'ba, of a domestic animal
 Equivalent to the one he killed,

[p. 273]

As adjudged by two just men
 Among you; or by way
 Of atonement, the feeding
 Of the indigent; or its
 Equivalent in fasts: that he
 May taste of the penalty
 Of his deed. God
 Forgives what is past:
 For repetition God will
 Exact from him the penalty.
 For God is Exalted,
 And Lord of Retribution.

96.  Lawful to you is the pursuit
 Of water-game and its use
 For food,--for the benefit
 Of yourselves and those who
 Travel; but forbidden
 Is the pursuit of land-game;--
 As long as ye are
 In the Sacred Precincts
 Or in pilgrim garb.
 And fear God, to Whom
 Ye shall be gathered back.

97.  God made the Ka'ba,
 The Sacred House, an asylum
 Of security for men, as
 Also the Sacred Months,
 The animals for offerings,
 And the garlands that mark them:
 That ye may know
 That God hath knowledge
 Of what is in the heavens
 And on earth and that God
 Is well acquainted
 With all things.

98.  Know ye that God
 Is strict in punishment

[p. 274]

And that God is
 Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

99.  The Apostle's duty is
 But to proclaim (the Message).
 But God knoweth all
 That ye reveal and ye conceal.

100.  Say: "Not equal are things
 That are bad and things
 That are good, even though
 The abundance of the bad
 May dazzle thee;
 So fear God, O ye
 That understand;
 That (so) ye may prosper."

  

SECTION 14.

101.  O ye who believe!
 Ask not questions
 About things which,
 If made plain to you,
 May cause you trouble.
 But if ye ask about things
 When the Qur-an is being
 Revealed, they will be
 Made plain to you,
 God will forgive those:
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Forbearing.

102.  Some people before you
 Did ask such questions,

[p. 275]

And on that account
 Lost their faith.

103.  It was not God
 Who instituted (superstitions
 Like those of) a slit-ear
 She-camel, or a she-camel
 Let loose for free pasture,
 Or idol sacrifices for
 Twin-births in animals,
 Or stallion-camels
 Freed from work
 It is blasphemers
 Who Invent a lie
 Against God; but most
 Of them lack wisdom.

104.  When it is said to them:
 "Come to what God
 Hath revealed; come
 To the Apostle":
 They say: "Enough for us
 Are the ways we found
 Our fathers following."
 What! even though their fathers
 Were void of knowledge
 And guidance?

105.  O ye who believe!
 Guard your own souls:
 If ye follow (right) guidance,
 No hurt can come to you
 From those who stray.
 The goal of you all
 Is to God: it is He
 That will show you
 The truth of all
 That ye do.

[p. 276]

106.  O ye who believe!
 When death approaches
 Any of you, (take) witnesses
 Among yourselves when making
 Bequests,--two just men
 Of your own (brotherhood)
 Or others from outside
 If ye are journeying
 Through the earth,
 And the chance of death
 Befalls you (thus).
 If ye doubt (their truth),
 Detain them both
 After prayer, and let them both
 Swear by God:
 "We wish not in this
 For any worldly gain,
 Even though the (beneficiary)
 Be our near relation:
 We shall hide not
 The evidence before God:
 If we do, then behold!
 The sin be upon us!"

107.  But if it gets known
 That these two were guilty
 Of the sin (of perjury),
 Let two others stand forth
 In their places,--nearest
 In kin from among those
 Who claim a lawful right:
 Let them swear by God:
 "We affirm that our witness
 Is truer than that
 Of those two, and that we
 Have not trespassed (beyond
 The truth): if we did,
 Behold! the wrong be
 Upon us!"

108.  That is most suitable:
 That they may give the evidence

[p. 277]

In its true nature and shape,
 Or else they would fear
 That other oaths would be
 Taken after their oaths.
 Hut fear God, and listen
 (To His counsel): for God
 Guideth not a rebellious people:

  

SECTION 15.

109.  One day will God
 Gather the apostles together,
 And ask: "What was
 The response ye received
 (From men to your teaching)?"
 They will say: "We
 Have no knowledge: it is Thou
 Who knowest in full
 All that is hidden."

110.  When will God say:
 "O Jesus the son of Mary!
 Recount My favour"'
 To thee and to thy mother.
 Behold! I strengthened thee
 With the holy spirit,
 So that thou didst speak
 To the people in childhood
 And in maturity.
 Behold! I taught thee
 The Book and Wisdom,
 The Law and the Gospel.
 And behold! thou makest
 Out of clay, as it were,

[p. 278]

The figure of a bird,
 By My leave,
 And thou breathest into it,
 And it becometh a bird
 By My leave,
 And thou healest those
 Born blind, and the lepers,
 By My leave.
 And behold! thou
 Bringest forth the dead
 By My leave ego
 And behold! I did
 Restrain the Children of Israel
 From (violence to) thee
 When thou didst show them
 The Clear Signs,
 And the unbelievers among them
 Said: 'This is nothing
 But evident magic.

111.  "And behold! I inspired
 The Disciples to have faith
 In Me and Mine Apostle:
 They said, 'We have faith,
 And do thou bear witness
 That we bow to God
 As Muslims'."

112.  Behold! the Disciples said:
 "O Jesus the son of Mary!
 Can thy Lord send down to us
 A Table set (with viands)

[p. 279]

From heaven?" Said Jesus:
 "Fear God, if ye have faith."

113.  They said: "We only wish
 To eat thereof and satisfy
 Our hearts, and to know
 That thou hast indeed
 Told us the truth; and
 That we ourselves may be
 Witnesses to the miracle."

114.  Said Jesus the son of Mary:
 "O God our Lord!
 Send us from heaven
 A Table set (with viands),
 That there may be for us
 For the first and the last of us--
 A solemn festival
 And a. Sign from Thee;
 And provide for our sustenance,
 For Thou art the best
 Sustainer (of our needs)."

115.  God said: "I will
 Send it down unto you:
 But if any of you
 After that resisteth faith,
 I will punish him
 With a penalty such
 As I have not inflicted
 On any one among

[p. 280]

All the peoples."

  

SECTION 16.

116.  And behold! God will say:
 "O Jesus the son of Mary!
 Didst thou say unto men,
 Worship me and my mother
 As gods in derogation of God'?"
 He will say: "Glory to Thee!
 Never could I say
 What I had no right
 (To say). Had I said
 Such a thing, Thou wouldst
 Indeed have known it.
 Thou knowest what is
 In my heart, though I
 Know not what is
 In Thine. For Thou
 Knowest in full
 All that is hidden.

117.  "Never said I to them
 Aught except what Thou
 Didst command me
 To say, to wit, 'Worship
 God, my Lord and your Lord';
 And I was a witness
 Over them whilst I dwelt
 Amongst them; when thou
 Didst take me up
 Thou wast the Watcher
 Over them, and Thou
 Art a witness to all things.

118.  "If Thou dost punish them,
 They are Thy servants:

[p. 281]

If Thou dost forgive them,
 Thou art the Exalted in power,
 The Wise."

119.  God will say: "This is
 A day on which
 The truthful will profit
 From their truth: theirs
 Are Gardens, with rivers
 Flowing beneath,--their eternal
 Home: God well-pleased
 With them, and they with God:
 That is the great Salvation,
 (The fulfilment of all desires).

120.  To God doth belong the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth,
 And all that is therein,
 And it is He who hath power
 Over all things.

[p. 282]

[p. 283]

[p. 284]

[p. 285]

[p. 286]

[p. 287]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 288] [p. 289]

  

Sura VI.

  

An'am, or Cattle.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Praise be to God,
 Who created the heavens
 And the earth,
 And made the Darkness
 And the Light.
 Yet those who reject Faith
 Hold (others) as equal.
 With their Guardian-Lord.

2. He it is Who created
 You from clay, and then
 Decreed a stated term
 (For you). And there is
 In His Presence another
 Determined term; yet
 Ye doubt within yourselves!

3. And He is God
 In the heavens
 And on earth.
 He knoweth what ye
 Hide, and what ye reveal,
 And He knoweth
 The (recompense) which
 Ye earn (by your deeds)

[p. 290]

4. But never did a single
 One of the Signs
 Of their Lord reach them,
 But they turned
 Away therefrom.

5. And now they reject
 The truth when it reaches
 Them: but soon shall they
 Learn the reality of what
 They used to mock at.

6. See they not how many
 Of those before them
 We did destroy?--
 Generations We had established
 On the earth, in strength
 Such as We have not given
 To you--for whom
 We poured out rain
 From the skies in abundance,
 And gave (fertile) streams
 Flowing beneath their (feet):
 Yet for their sins
 We destroyed them,
 And raised in their wake
 Fresh generations
 (To succeed them).

7. If We had sent
 Unto thee a written
 (Message) on parchment,
 So that they could
 Touch it with their hands,
 The Unbelievers would
 Have been sure to say:
 "This is nothing but

[p. 291]

Obvious magic!"

8. They say: "Why is not
 An angel sent down to him?"
 If We did send down
 An angel, the matter
 Would be settled at once,
 And no respite
 Would be granted them.

9. If We had made it
 An angel, We should
 Have sent him as a man,
 And We should certainly
 Have caused them confusion
 In a matter which they have
 Already covered with confusion.

10. Mocked were (many)
 Apostles before thee;
 But their scoffers
 Were hemmed in
 By the thing that they mocked.

  

SECTION 2.

11. Say: "Travel through the earth
 And see what was the end
 Of those who rejected Truth".

12. Say: "To whom I elongeth
 All that is in the heavens

[p. 292]

And on earth?" Say:
 "To God. He hath inscribed
 For Himself (the rule of) Mercy.
 That He will gather you
 Together for the Day of Judgment,
 There is no doubt whatever.
 It is they who have lost
 Their own souls, that will
 Not believe.

13. To him belongeth all
 That dwelleth (or lurketh)
 In the Night and the Day.
 For He is the One
 Who heareth and knoweth
 All things."

14. Say: "Shall I take
 For my protector
 Any other than God,
 The Maker of the heavens
 And the earth?
 And He it is that
 Feedeth but is not fed."
 Say: "Nay! but I am
 Commanded to be the first
 Of those who bow
 To God (in Islam),
 And be not thou
 Of the company of those
 Who join gods with God."

[p. 293]

15. Say: "I would, if I
 Disobeyed my Lord,
 Indeed have fear
 Of the Penalty
 Of a Mighty Day.

16. "On that day, if the Penalty
 Is averted from any,
 It is due to God's Mercy;
 And that would be (Salvation),
 The obvious fulfilment
 Of all desire.

17. "If God touch thee
 With affliction, none
 Can remove it but He;
 If He touch thee with happiness,
 He hath power over all things.

18. "He is the Irresistible, (watching)
 From above over His worshippers;
 And He is the Wise,
 Acquainted with all things."

19. Say: "What thing is most
 Weighty in evidence?"
 Say: "God is witness
 Between me and you;
 This Qur-an hath been
 Revealed to me by inspiration,
 That I may warn you
 And all whom it reaches.
 Can ye possibly bear witness
 That besides God there is
 Another God?" Say:
 "Nay! I cannot bear witness!"
 Say: But in truth
 He is the One God,

[p. 294]

And I truly am innocent
 Of (your blasphemy of) joining
 Others with Him."

20. Those to whom
 We have given the Book
 Know this as they know
 Their own sons.
 Those who have lost
 Their own souls
 Refuse therefore to believe.

  

SECTION 3.

21. Who doth more wrong
 Than he who inventeth
 A lie against God
 Or rejecteth His Signs?
 But verily the wrong-doers
 Never shall prosper.

22. One day shall We gather
 Them all together: We
 Shall say to those
 Who ascribed partners (to Us):
 "Where are the partners
 Whom ye (invented
 And) talked about?"

23. There will then be (left)
 No subterfuge for them
 But to say: "By God
 Our Lord, we were not
 Those who joined gods
 With God."

24. Behold! how they lie
 Against their own souls!

[p. 295]

But the (lie) which they
 Invented will leave themes:
 In the lurch.

25. Of them there are some
 Who (pretend to) listen to thee;
 But We have thrown
 Veils on their hearts,
 So they understand it not,
 And deafness in their ears;
 If they saw every one
 Of the Signs, not they
 Will believe in them;
 In so much that
 When they come to thee,
 They (but) dispute with thee;
 The Unbelievers say:
 "These are nothing
 But tales of the ancients."

26. Others they keep away from it,
 And themselves they keep away;
 But they only destroy
 Their own souls,
 And they perceive it not.

27. If thou couldst but see
 When they are confronted
 With the Fire!
 They will say:
 "Would that we were
 But sent back!
 Then would we not reject
 The Signs of our Lord,
 But would be amongst those
 Who believe!"

28. Yea, in their own (eyes)
 Will become manifest
 What before they concealed.
 But if they were returned,
 They would certainly relapse
 To the things they were forbidden,

[p. 296]

For they are indeed liars.

29. And they (sometimes) say:
 "There is nothing except
 Our life on this earth,
 And never shall we be
 Raised up again."

30. If thou couldst but see
 When they are confronted
 With their Lord!
 He will say:
 "Is not this the truth?"
 They will say:
 "Yea, by our Lord!"
 He will say:
 "Taste ye then the Penalty,
 Because ye rejected Faith."

  

SECTION 4.

31. Lost indeed are they
 Who treat it as a falsehood
 That they must meet God,
 Until on a sudden
 The hour is on them,
 And they say: "Ah! woe
 Unto us that we took
 No thought of it";
 For they bear their burdens
 On their backs,

[p. 297]

And evil indeed are
 The burdens that they bear?

32. What is the life of this world
 But play and amusement? ess
 But best is the Home
 In the Hereafter, for those
 Who are righteous.
 Will ye not then understand?

33. We know indeed the grief
 Which their words do cause thee:
 It is not thee they reject:
 It is the Signs of God,
 Which the wicked contemn.

34. Rejected were the Apostles
 Before thee: with patience
 And constancy they bore
 Their rejection and their wrongs,
 Until Our aid did reach
 Them: there is none
 That can alter the Words
 (And Decrees) of God.
 Already hast thou received
 Some account of those Apostles.

35. If their spurning is hard
 On thy mind, yet if
 Thou wert able to seek
 A tunnel in the ground
 Or a ladder to the skies
 And bring them a Sign,--
 (What good?). If it were
 God's Will, He could
 Gather them together
 Unto true guidance:

[p. 298]

So be not thou
 Amongst those who are swayed
 By ignorance (and impatience)!

36. Those who listen (in truth),
 Be sure, will accept:
 As to the dead, God will
 Raise them up; then will they
 Be turned unto Him.

37. Whey say: "Why is not
 A Sign sent down
 To him from his Lord?"
 Say: "God hath certainly
 Power to send down a Sign:
 But most of them
 Understand not."

38. There is not an animal
 (That lives) on the earth,
 Nor a being that flies
 On its wings, but (forms
 Part of) communities like you.
 Nothing have we omitted
 From the Book, and they (all)
 Shall be gathered to their Lord
 In the end.

39. Those who reject our Signs
 Are deaf and dumb,--

[p. 299]

In the midst of darkness
 Profound: whom God willeth,
 He leaveth to wander:
 Whom He willeth, He placeth
 On the Way that is Straight.

40. Say: "Think ye to yourselves,
 If there come upon you
 The Wrath of God,
 Or the Hour (that ye dread),
 Would ye then call upon
 Other than God?--
 (Reply) if ye are truthful!

41. "Nay,--On Him would ye
 Call, and if it be
 His Will, He would remove
 (The distress) which occasioned
 Your call upon Him,
 And ye would forget
 (The false gods) which ye
 Join with Him!"

  

SECTION 5.

42. Before thee We sent
 (Apostles) to many nations,
 And We afflicted the nations
 With suffering and adversity,
 That they might learn humility.

43. When the suffering reached
 Them from Us, why then
 Did they not learn humility?
 On the contrary their hearts
 Became hardened, and Satan
 Made their (sinful) acts
 Seem alluring to them.

44. But when they forgot
 The warning they had received,

[p. 300]

We opened to them the gates
 Of all (good) things,
 Until, in the midst
 Of their enjoyment
 Of our gifts,
 On a sudden, We called
 Them to account, when lo!
 They were plunged in despair!

45. Of the wrong-doers the last
 Remnant was cut off.
 Praise be to God,
 The Cherisher of the Worlds.

46. Say:"Think ye, if God
 Took away your hearing
 And your sight, and sealed up
 Your hearts, who--a god
 Other than God--could
 Restore them to you?"
 See how We explain
 The Signs by various (symbols);
 Yet they turn aside.

47. Say:"Think ye, if
 The Punishment of God
 Comes to you,
 Whether suddenly or openly,
 Will any be destroyed
 Except those who do wrong?

48. We send the apostles
 Only to give good news

[p. 301]

And to warn: so those
 Who believe and mend
 (Their lives),--upon them
 Shall be no fear,
 Nor shall they grieve.

49. But those who reject
 Our Signs,--them
 Shall punishment touch,
 For that they ceased not
 From transgressing.

50. Say:"I tell you not
 That with me
 Are the Treasures of God,
 Nor do I know
 What is hidden,
 Nor do I tell you I am
 An angel. I but follow
 What is revealed to me."
 Say:"Can the blind
 Be held equal to the seeing?"
 Will ye then consider not?

  

SECTION 6.

51. Give this warning to those
 In whose (hearts) is the fear
 That they will be brought
 (To Judgment) before their Lord:
 Except for Him
 They will have no protector
 Nor intercessor:
 That they may guard
 (Against evil).

[p. 302]

52. Send not away those
 Who call on their Lord
 Morning and evening,
 Seeking His Face.
 In naught art thou accountable
 For them, and in naught are they
 Accountable for thee,
 That thou shouldst turn
 Them away, and thus be
 (One) of the unjust.

53. Thus did We try
 Some of them by comparison
 With others, that they
 Should say:"Is it these
 Then that God hath
 Favoured from amongst us?"
 Doth not God know best
 Those who are grateful?

54. When those come to thee
 Who believe in Our Signs,
 Say: "Peace be on you:
 Your Lord hath inscribed
 For Himself (the rule
 Of) Mercy: verily,
 If any of you did evil
 In ignorance, and thereafter

[p. 303]

Repented, and amended
 (His conduct), lo! He is
 Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

55. Thus do We explain
 The Signs in detail:
 That the way of the sinners
 May be shown up.

  

SECTION 7.

56. Say: "I am forbidden
 To worship those--others
 Than God--whom ye
 Call upon." Say: "I will
 Not follow your vain desires:
 If I did, I would stray
 From the path, and be not
 Of the company of those
 Who receive guidance."

57. Say; "For me, I (work)
 On a clear Sign from my Lord,
 But ye reject Him. What ye
 Would see hastened, is not
 In my power. The Command
 Rests with none but God:
 He declares the Truth,
 And He is the best of judges."

58. Say: "If what ye would see
 Hastened were in my power,
 The matter would be settled
 At once between you and me.

[p. 304]

But God knoweth best
 Those who do wrong."

59. With Him are the keys
 Of the Unseen, the treasures
 That none knoweth but He.
 He knoweth whatever there is
 On the earth and in the sea.
 Not a leaf doth fall
 But with His knowledge:
 There is not a grain
 In the darkness (or depths)
 Of the earth, nor anything
 Fresh or dry (green or withered),
 But is (inscribed) in a Record
 Clear (to those who can read).

60. It is He Who doth take
 Your souls by night,
 And hath knowledge of all
 That ye have done by day:
 By day doth He raise
 You up again; that a term
 Appointed be fulfilled;
 In the end unto Him
 Will be your return;
 Then will He show you
 The truth of all
 That ye did.

[p. 305]

  

SECTION 8.

61He is the Irresistible, (watching)
 From above over His worshippers,
 And He sets guardians 
 Over you. At length,
 When death approaches
 One of you, Our angels
 Take his soul, and they
 Never fail in their duty.

62. Then are men returned
 Unto God, their Protector,
 The (only) Reality:
 Is not His the Command?
 And He is the Swiftest
 In taking account.

63. Say: "Who is it
 That delivereth you
 From the dark recesses
 Of land and sea,
 When ye call upon Him
 In humility

[p. 306]

And silent terror:
 If He only delivers us
 From these (dangers),
 (We vow) we shall truly
 Show our gratitude?"

64. Say: "It is God
 That delivereth you
 From these and all (other)
 Distresses: and yet
 Ye worship false gods!"

65. Say: "He hath power
 To send calamities
 On you, from above
 And below, or to cover
 You with confusion
 In party strife,
 Giving you a taste
 Of mutual vengeance--
 Each from the other."
 See how We explain
 The Signs by various (symbols);
 That they may understand.

66. But thy people reject
 This, though it is
 The Truth. Say: "Not mine
 Is the responsibility
 For arranging your affairs;

67. For every Message
 Is a limit of time,
 And soon shall ye
 Know it."

[p. 307]

68. When thou seest men
 Engaged in vain discourse
 About Our Signs, turn
 Away from them unless
 They turn to a different
 Theme. If Satan ever
 Makes thee forget, then
 After recollection, sit not
 Thou in the company
 Of those who do wrong.

69. On their account
 No responsibility
 Falls on the righteous,
 But (their duty)
 Is to remind them,
 That they may (learn
 To) fear God.

70. Leave alone those
 Who take their religion
 To be mere play
 And amusement,
 And are deceived
 By the life of this world.
 But proclaim (to them)
 This (truth): that every soul
 Delivers itself to ruin
 By its own acts:
 It will find for itself
 No protector or intercessor
 Except God: if it offered
 Every ransom, (or
 Reparation), none
 Will be accepted: such is
 (The end of) those who
 Deliver themselves to ruin
 By their own acts:
 They will have for drink
 (Only) boiling water,

[p. 308]

And for punishment,
 One most grievous:
 For they persisted
 In rejecting God.

  

SECTION 9.

71. Say: "Shall we indeed
 Call on others besides God,
 Things that can do us
 Neither good nor harm,--
 And turn on our heels
 After receiving guidance
 From God?--like one
 Whom the evil ones
 Have made into a fool,
 Wandering bewildered
 Through the earth, his friends
 Calling 'Come to us',
 (Vainly) guiding him to the Path."

Say: "God's guidance
 Is the (only) guidance,
 And we have been directed
 To submit ourselves
 To the Lord of the worlds;--

72. "To establish regular prayers
 And to fear God:
 For it is to Him
 That we shall be
 Gathered together."

73. It is He Who created
 The heavens and the earth
 In true (proportions):
 The day He saith, "Be,"

[p. 309]

Behold! it is. His Word
 Is the Truth. His will be
 The dominion the day
 The trumpet will be blown.
 He knoweth the Unseen
 As well as that which is
 Open. For He
 Is the Wise, well acquainted
 (With all things).

74. Lo! Abraham said
 To his father Azar:
 "Takest thou idols for gods?
 For I see thee
 And thy people
 In manifest error."

75. So also did We show
 Abraham the power
 And the laws of the heavens
 And the earth, that he
 Might (with understanding)
 Have certitude.

76. When the night
 Covered him over,
 He saw a star:
 He said: "This is my Lord."
 But when it set,
 He said: "I love not
 Those that set."

77. When he saw the moon
 Rising in splendour,
 He said: "This is my Lord."
 But when the moon set,

[p. 310]

He said: "Unless my Lord
 Guide me, I shall surely
 Be among those
 Who go astray.

78. When he saw the sun
 Rising in splendour,
 He said: "This is my Lord;
 This is the greatest (of all)."
 But when the sun set,
 He said: "O my people!
 I am indeed free
 From your (guilt)
 Of giving partners to God.

79. "For me, I have set
 My face, firmly and truly,
 Towards Him Who created
 The heavens and the earth,
 And never shall I give
 Partners to God."

80. His people disputed
 With him. He said:
 "(Come) ye to dispute
 With me, about God,
 When He (Himself)
 Hath guided me?
 I fear not (the beings)
 Ye associate with God:

[p. 311]

Unless my Lord willeth,
 (Nothing can happen).
 My Lord comprehendeth
 In His knowledge all things.
 Will ye not (yourselves)
 Be admonished?

81. "How should I fear
 (The beings) ye associate
 With God, when ye
 Fear not to give partners
 To God without any warrant
 Having been given to you?
 Which of (us) two parties
 Hath more right to security?
 (Tell me) if ye know.

82. "It is those who believe
 And confuse not their beliefs
 With wrong--that are
 (Truly) in security, for they
 Are on (right) guidance."

  

SECTION 10.

83. That was the reasoning
 About Us, which
 We gave to Abraham
 (To use) against his people:

[p. 312]

We raise whom We will,
 Degree after degree:
 For thy Lord is full
 Of wisdom and knowledge.

84. We gave him Isaac
 And Jacob: all (three)
 We guided:
 And before him,
 We guided Noah,
 And among his progeny,
 David, Solomon, Job,
 Joseph, Moses, and Aaron:
 Thus do We reward
 Those who do good:

85. And Zakariya and John,
 And Jesus and Elias:
 All in the ranks
 Of the Righteous:

86. And Isma'il and Elisha,
 And Jonas, and Lot:

[p. 313]

And to all We gave
 Favour above the nations:

87. (To them) and to their fathers,
 And progeny and brethren:
 We chose them,
 And We guided them
 To a straight Way.

88. This is the Guidance
 Of God: He giveth
 That guidance to whom
 He pleaseth, of His worshippers.
 If they were to join
 Other gods with Him,
 All that they did
 Would be vain for them,

89. These were the men
 To whom We gave
 The Book, and Authority,
 And Prophethood: if these
 (Their descendants) reject them,
 Behold! We shall entrust
 Their charge to a new People
 Who reject them not.

90. Those were the (prophets)
 Who received God's guidance:
 Copy the guidance they received;
 Say: "No reward for this
 Do I ask of you:
 This is no less than
 A Message for the nations."

  

SECTION 11.

91. No just estimate of God
 Do they make when they say:

[p. 314]

"Nothing doth God send down
 To man (by way of revelation)":
 Say: "Who then sent down
 The Book which Moses brought?--
 A light and guidance to man:
 But ye make it into
 (Separate) sheets for show,
 While ye conceal much
 (Of its contents): therein
 Were ye taught that
 Which ye knew not
 Neither ye nor your fathers."
 Say: "God (sent it down)":
 Then leave them to plunge
 In vain discourse and trifling.

92. And this is a Book
 Which We have sent down,
 Bringing blessings, and confirming
 (The revelations) which came
 Before it: that thou
 Mayest warn the Mother
 Of Cities and all around her.
 Those who believe
 In the Hereafter
 Believe in this (Book),
 And they are constant
 In guarding their Prayers.

93. Who can be more wicked
 Than one who inventeth

[p. 315]

A lie against God,
 Or saith, "I have
 Received inspiration,"
 When he hath received
 None, or (again) who saith,
 "I can reveal the like
 Of what God hath revealed"?
 If thou couldst but see
 How the wicked (do fare)
 In the flood of confusion
 At death!--the angels
 Stretch forth their hands,
 (Saying), "Yield up your souls:
 This day shall ye receive
 Your reward,--a penalty
 Of shame, for that ye used
 To tell lies against God,
 And scornfully to reject
 Of His Signs!"

94. "And behold! ye come
 To Us bare and alone
 As We created you
 For the first time:
 Ye have left behind you
 All (the favours) which
 We bestowed on you:
 We see not with you
 Your intercessors
 Whom ye thought to be
 Partners in your affairs:
 So now all relations
 Between you have been
 Cut off, and your (pet) fancies
 Have left you in the lurch!

[p. 316]

  

SECTION 12.

95. It is God Who causeth
 The seed-grain
 And the date-stone
 To split and sprout.
 He causeth the living
 To issue from the dead,
 And He is the One
 To cause the dead
 To issue from the living.
 That is God: then how
 Are ye deluded
 Away from the truth?

[p. 317]

96. He it is that cleaveth
 The day-break (from the dark):
 He makes the night
 For rest and tranquillity,
 And the sun and moon
 For the reckoning (of time):
 Such is the judgment
 And ordering of (Him),
 The Exalted in Power,
 The Omniscient.

97. It is He Who maketh
 The stars (as beacons) for you,
 That ye may guide yourselves,
 With their help,
 Through the dark spaces
 Of land and sea:
 We detail Our Signs
 For people who know.

98. It is He Who hath
 Produced you
 From a single person:
 Here is a place of sojourn
 And a place of departure:
 We detail Our signs
 For people who understand.

[p. 318]

99. It is He Who sendeth down
 Rain from the skies:
 With it We produce
 Vegetation of all kinds:
 From some We produce
 Green (crops), out of which
 We produce grain,
 Heaped up (at harvest);
 Out of the date-palm
 And its sheaths (or spathes)
 (Come) clusters of dates
 Hanging low and near:
 And (then there are) gardens
 Of grapes, and olives,
 And pomegranates,
 Each similar (in kind)
 Yet different (in variety):
 When they begin to bear fruit,
 Feast your eyes with the fruit
 And the ripeness thereof.
 Behold! in these things
 There are Signs for people
 Who believe.

[p. 319]

100.Yet they make
 The Jinns equals
 With God, though God
 Did create the Jinns;
 And they falsely,
 Having no knowledge,
 Attribute to Him
 Sons and daughters.
 Praise and glory be
 To Him! (for He is) above
 What they attribute to Him!

  

SECTION 13.

101. To Him is due
 The primal origin
 Of the heavens and the earth:
 How can He have a son
 When He hath no consort?
 He created all things,
 And He hath full knowledge
 Of all things.

102. That is God, your Lord!
 There is no god but He,
 The Creator of all things:
 Then worship ye Him:
 And He hath power
 To dispose of all affairs.

103. No vision can grasp Him,
 But His grasp is over

[p. 320]

All vision: He is
 Above all comprehension,
 Yet is acquainted with all things.

104. "Now have come to you,
 From your Lord, proofs
 (To open your eyes):
 If any will see,
 It will be for (the good
 Of) his own soul;
 If any will be blind,
 It will be to his own
 (Harm): I am not (here)
 To watch over your doings.

105. Thus do We explain
 The Signs by various (symbols):
 That they may say,
 "Thou hast taught (us) diligently,"
 And that We may make
 The matter clear
 To those who know.

106. Follow what thou art taught
 By inspiration from thy Lord:
 There is no god but He:
 And turn aside from those
 Who join gods with God.

[p. 321]

107. If it had been God's Plan,
 They would not have taken
 False gods: but We
 Made thee not one
 To watch over their doings,
 Nor art thou set
 Over them to dispose
 Of their affairs.

108. Revile not ye
 Those whom they call upon
 Besides God, lest
 They out of spite
 Revile God
 In their ignorance.
 Thus have We made
 Alluring to each people'
 Its own doings.
 In the end will they
 Return to their Lord,
 And We shall then

[p. 322]

Tell them the truth
 Of all that they did.

109. They swear their strongest
 Oaths by God, that if
 A (special) Sign came
 To them, by it they would
 Believe. Say: "Certainly
 (All) Signs are in the power
 Of God: but what will
 Make you (Muslims) realise
 That (even) if (special) Signs
 Came, they will not believe."?

110. We (too) shall turn
 To (confusion) their hearts
 And their eyes, even as they
 Refused to believe in this
 In the first instance:
 We shall leave them
 In their trespasses,
 To wander in distraction.

[p. 323]

  

SECTION 14.

111. Even if We did send
 Unto them angels,
 And the dead did speak
 Unto them, and We gathered
 Together all things before
 Their very eyes, they are not
 The ones to believe,
 Unless it is in God's Plan.
 But most of them
 Ignore (the truth).

112. Likewise did We make
 For every Messenger
 An enemy,--evil ones
 Among men and Jinns,
 Inspiring each other
 With flowery discourses
 By way of deception.
 If thy Lord had so planned,
 They would not have
 Done it: so leave them
 And their inventions alone.

113. To such (deceit)
 Let the hearts of those
 Incline, who have no faith
 In the Hereafter: let them
 Delight in it, and let them
 Earn from it what they may

[p. 324]

114. Say: "Shall I seek
 For judge other than God?--
 When He it is
 Who hath sent unto you
 The Book, explained in detail."
 They know full well,
 To whom We have given
 The Book, that it hath been
 Sent down from thy Lord
 In truth. Never be then
 Of those who doubt.

115. The Word of thy Lord
 Doth find its fulfilment
 In truth and in justice:
 None can change His Words:
 For He is the one Who
 Heareth and knoweth all.

116. Wert thou to follow
 The common run of those
 On earth, they will lead
 Thee away from the Way
 Of God. They follow
 Nothing but conjecture: they
 Do nothing but lie.

117. Thy Lord knoweth best
 Who strayeth from His Way:
 He knoweth best
 Who they are that receive
 His guidance.

118. So eat of (meats)
 On which God's name
 Hath been pronounced,
 If ye have faith
 In His Signs.

119. Why should ye not
 Eat of (meats) on which
 God's name hath been
 Pronounced, when He hath
 Explained to you in detail
 What is forbidden to you--

[p. 325]

Except under compulsion
 Of necessity?
 But many do mislead (men)
 By their appetites unchecked
 By knowledge. Thy Lord
 Knoweth best those who transgress

120. Eschew all sin,
 Open or secret:
 Those who earn sin
 Will get due recompense
 For their "earnings."

121. Eat not of (meats)
 On which God's name
 Hath not been pronounced:
 That would be impiety.
 But the evil ones
 Ever inspire their friends
 To contend with you
 If ye were to obey them,
 Ye would indeed be Pagans.

  

SECTION 15.

122. Can he who was dead,
 To whom We gave life,
 And a Light whereby
 He can walk amongst men,
 Be like him who is
 In the depths of darkness,
 From which he can
 Never come out?
 Thus to those without Faith
 Their own deeds seem pleasing.

123. Thus have We placed
 Leaders in every town,

[p. 326]

Its wicked men, to plot
 (And burrow) therein:
 But they only plot
 Against their own souls,
 And they perceive it not.

124. When there comes to them
 A Sign (from God),
 They say: "We shall not
 Believe until we receive
 One (exactly) like those
 Received by God's apostles."
 God knoweth best where
 (And how) to carry out
 His mission. Soon
 Will the wicked
 Be overtaken by
 Humiliation before God,
 And a severe punishment,
 For all their plots.

125. Those whom God (in His Plan)
 Willeth to guide,--He openeth
 Their breast to Islam;
 Those whom He willeth
 To leave straying,--He maketh
 Their breast close and constricted,
 As if they had to climb
 Up to the skies: thus
 Doth God (heap) the penalty
 On those who refuse to believe.

126. This is the Way
 Of thy Lord, leading straight:

[p. 327]

We have detailed the Signs
 For those who
 Receive admonition.

127. For them will be a Home
 Of Peace in the presence
 Of their Lord: He will be
 Their Friend, because
 They practised (righteousness).

128. One day will He gather
 Them all together, (and say):
 "O ye assembly of Jinns!
 Much (toll) did ye take
 Of men." Their friends
 Amongst men will say:
 "Our Lord! we made profit no
 From each other: but (alas!)
 We reached our term--
 Which Thou didst appoint
 For us." He will say:
 "The Fire be your dwelling-place:
 You will dwell therein for ever,
 Except as God willeth."
 For thy Lord is full
 Of wisdom and knowledge.

129. Thus do We make
 The wrong-doers turn
 To each other, because
 Of what they earn.

[p. 328]

  

SECTION 16.

130. "O ye assembly of Jinns
 And men! came there not
 Unto you apostles from amongst you
 Setting forth unto you
 My Signs, and warning you
 Of the meeting of this Day
 Of yours?" They will say:
 "We bear witness against
 Ourselves." It was
 The life of this world
 That deceived them. So
 Against themselves will they
 Bear witness that they
 Rejected Faith.

131. (The apostles were sent) thus,
 For thy Lord would not
 Destroy for their wrong-doing
 Men's habitations whilst
 Their occupants were unwarned.

132. To all are degrees (or ranks)
 According to their deeds:
 For thy Lord
 Is not unmindful
 Of anything that they do.

133. Thy Lord is Self-sufficient,
 Full of Mercy: if it were
 His Will, He could destroy
 You, and in your place
 Appoint whom He will
 As your successors, even as
 He raised you up
 From the posterity
 Of other people.

[p. 329]

134. All that hath been
 Promised unto you
 Will come to pass:
 Nor can ye frustrate it
 (In the least bit).

135. Say: "O my people!
 Do whatever ye can:
 I will do (my part):
 Soon will ye know
 Who it is whose end
 Will be (best) in the Hereafter:
 Certain it is that
 The wrong-doers will not prosper."

136. Out of what God
 Hath produced in abundance
 In tilth and in cattle,
 They assigned Him a share:
 They say, according to their fancies:
 "This is for God, and this"--
 For Our "partners"!
 But the share of their "partners"
 Reacheth not God, whilst
 The share of God reacheth
 Their "partners"! Evil
 (And unjust) is their assignment!

[p. 330]

137. Even so, in the eyes
 Of most of the Pagans,
 Their "partners" made alluring
 The slaughter of their children,
 In order to lead them
 To their own destruction,
 And cause confusion
 In their religion.
 If God had willed,
 They would not have done so:
 But leave alone
 Them and their inventions.

138. And they say that
 Such and such cattle and crops
 Are taboo, and none should
 Eat of them except those
 Whom--so they say--We
 Wish; further, there are
 Cattle forbidden to yoke
 Or burden, and cattle
 On which, (at slaughter),
 The name of God is not
 Pronounced;--inventions
 Against God's name: soon
 Will He requite them
 For their inventions.

139. They say: "What is
 In the wombs of
 Such and such cattle
 Is specially reserved
 (For food) for our men,
 And forbidden to our women;
 But if it is still-born,
 Then all have shares therein.

[p. 331]

For their (false) attribution
 (Of superstitions to God),
 He will soon punish them:
 For He is full
 Of wisdom and knowledge.

140. Lost are those who slay
 Their children, from folly,
 Without knowledge, and forbid
 Food which God hath provided
 For them, inventing (lies)
 Against God. They have
 Indeed gone astray
 And heeded no guidance.

  

SECTION 17.

141. It is He who produceth
 Gardens, with trellises
 And without, and dates,
 And tilth with produce
 Of all kinds, and olives
 And pomegranates,
 Similar (in kind)
 And different (in variety):
 Eat of their fruit
 In their season, but render
 The dues that are proper
 On the day that the harvest
 Is gathered. But waste not
 By excess: for God
 Loveth not the wasters.

142. Of the cattle are some
 For burden and some for meat:

[p. 332]

Eat what God hath provided
 For you, and follow not
 The footsteps of Satan:
 For he is to you
 An avowed enemy.

143. (Take) eight (head of cattle)
 In (four) pairs:
 Of sheep a pair,
 And of goats a pair;
 Say, hath He forbidden
 The two males,
 Or the two females,
 Or (the young) which the wombs
 Of the two females enclose?
 Tell me with knowledge
 If ye are truthful:

144. Of camels a pair,
 And of oxen a pair;
 Say, hath He forbidden
 The two males,
 Or the two females,
 Or (the young) which the wombs
 Of the two females enclose?--
 Were ye present when God
 Ordered you such a thing?
 But who doth more wrong
 Than one who invents
 A lie against God,
 To lead astray men
 Without knowledge?
 For God guideth not
 People who do wrong

  

SECTION 18.

145. Say: "I find not
 In the Message received
 By me by inspiration
 Any (meat) forbidden
 To be eaten by one
 Who wishes to eat it,
 Unless it be dead meat,
 Or blood poured forth,

[p. 333]

Or the flesh of swine,--
 For it is an abomination--
 Or, what is impious, (meat)
 On which a name has been
 Invoked, other than God's."
 But (even so), if a person
 Is forced by necessity,
 Without wilful disobedience,
 Nor transgressing due limits,--
 Thy Lord is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

146. For those who followed
 The Jewish Law, We forbade
 Every (animal) with
 Undivided hoof,
 And We forbade them
 The fat of the ox
 And the sheep, except
 What adheres to their backs
 Or their entrails,
 Or is mixed up
 With a bone:
 This in recompense
 For their wilful disobedience:
 For We are True
 (In Our ordinances).

147. If they accuse thee
 Of falsehood, say:
 "Your Lord is full
 Of mercy all-embracing;
 But from people in guilt
 Never will His wrath
 Be turned back.

148. Those who give partners
 (To God) will say:

[p. 334]

"If God had wished,
 We should not have
 Given partners to Him,
 Nor would our fathers;
 Nor should we have had
 Any taboos." So did
 Their ancestors argue
 Falsely, until they tasted
 Of Our wrath. Say:
 "Have ye any (certain)
 Knowledge? If so, produce
 It before us. Ye follow
 Nothing but conjecture:
 Ye do nothing but lie."

149. Say: "With God is the argument
 That reaches home: if it had
 Been His Will, He could
 Indeed have guided you all."

150. Say: "Bring forward your witnesses
 To prove that God did
 Forbid so and so." If they
 Bring such witnesses,
 Be not thou amongst them:
 Nor follow thou the vain
 Desires of such as treat
 Our Signs as falsehoods,
 And such as believe not
 In the Hereafter: for they
 Hold others as equal
 With their Guardian-Lord.

[p. 335]

  

SECTION 19.

151. Say: "Come, I will rehearse
 What God hath (really)
 Prohibited you from": join not
 Anything as equal with Him;
 Be good to your parents;
 Kill not your children
 On a plea of want;--We
 Provide sustenance for you
 And for them;--come not
 Nigh to shameful deeds,
 Whether open or secret;
 Take not life, which God
 Hath made sacred, except
 By way of justice and law:
 Thus doth He command you,
 That ye may learn wisdom.

152. And come not nigh
 To the orphan's property,
 Except to improve it,
 Until he attain the age
 Of full strength; give measure
 And weight with (full) justice;--
 No burden do We place
 On any soul, but that
 Which it can bear;--
 Whenever ye speak, speak justly,

[p. 336]

Even if a near relative
 Is concerned; and fulfil
 The Covenant of God:
 Thus doth He command you,
 That ye may remember.

153. Verily, this is My Way,
 Leading straight: follow it:
 Follow not (other) paths:
 They will scatter you about
 From His (great) Path:
 Thus doth He command you,
 That ye may be righteous.

154. Moreover, We gave Moses
 The Book, completing
 (Our favour) to those
 Who would do right,
 And explaining all things
 In detail,--and a guide
 And a mercy, that they
 Might believe in the meeting
 With their Lord.

  

SECTION 20.

155. And this is a Book
 Which We have revealed
 As a blessing: so follow it
 And be righteous, that ye
 May receive mercy:

156. Lest ye should say:
 "The Book was sent down
 To two Peoples before us,
 And for our part, we
 Remained unacquainted

[p. 337]

With all that they learned
 By assiduous study;"

157. Or lest ye should say:
 "If the Book had only
 Been sent down to us,
 We should have followed
 Its guidance better than they."
 Now then hath come
 Unto you a Clear (Sign)
 From your Lord,--and a guide
 And a mercy: then who
 Could do more wrong
 Than one who rejecteth
 God's Signs, and turneth
 Away therefrom? In good time
 Shall We requite those
 Who turn away from Our Signs,
 With a dreadful penalty,
 For their turning away.

158. Are they waiting to see
 If the angels come to them,
 Or thy Lord (Himself),
 Or certain of the Signs
 Of thy Lord!
 The day that certain
 Of the Signs of thy Lord
 Do come, no good
 Will it do to a soul
 To believe in them then,
 If it believed not before
 Nor earned righteousness
 Through its Faith. Say:
 "Wait ye: we too
 Are waiting."

[p. 338]

159. As for those who divide
 Their religion and break up
 Into sects, thou hast
 No part in them in the least:
 Their affair is with God:
 He will in the end
 Tell them the truth
 Of all that they did.

160. He that doeth good
 Shall have ten times
 As much to his credit:
 He that doeth evil
 Shall only be recompensed
 According to his evil:
 No wrong shall be done
 Unto (any of) them.

161. Say: "Verily, my Lord
 Hath guided me to
 A Way that is straight,--
 A religion of right,
 The Path (trod) by Abraham
 The true in faith,
 And he (certainly)
 Joined not gods with God."

162. Say: "Truly, my prayer
 And my service of sacrifice,
 My life and my death,
 Are (all) for God,
 The Cherisher of the Worlds:

163. No partner hath He:
 This am I commanded,
 And I am the first
 Of those who bow
 To His Will.

164. Say: "Shall I seek
 For (my) Cherisher

[p. 339]

Other than God,
 When He is the Cherisher
 Of all things (that exist)?
 Every soul draws the meed
 Of its acts on none
 But itself: no bearer
 Of burdens can bear
 The burden of another.
 Your goal in the end
 Is towards God: He will tell
 You the truth of the things
 Wherein ye disputed."

165. It is He Who hath made
 You (His) agents, inheritors
 Of the earth: He hath raised
 You in ranks, some above
 Others: that He may try you
 In the gifts He hath given you:
 For thy Lord is quick
 In punishment: yet He
 Is indeed Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

[p. 340]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 341]

  

Sura VII.

  

A'raf, or the Heights

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. Alif, Lam, Mim, Sad.

2. A Book revealed unto thee,--
 So let thy heart be oppressed'
 No more by any difficulty
 On that account,
 That with it thou mightest
 Warn (the erring) and teach
 The Believers.

3. Follow (O men!) the revelation
 Given unto you from your Lord,
 And follow not, as friends
 Or protectors, other than Him.
 Little it is ye remember
 Of admonition.

4. How many towns have We
 Destroyed (for their sins)?
 Our punishment took them
 On a sudden by night
 Or while they slept
 For their afternoon rest.

[p. 342]

5. When (thus) Our punishment
 Took them, no cry
 Did they utter but this:
 "Indeed we did wrong."

6. When shall we question
 Those to whom Our Message
 Was sent and those by whom
 We sent it.

7. And verily We shall recount
 Their whole story
 With knowledge, for We
 Were never absent
 (At any time or place).

8. The balance that day
 Will be true (to a nicety):
 Those whose scale (of good)
 Will be heavy, will prosper:

9. Those whose scale will be light,
 Will find their souls
 In perdition, for that they
 Wrongfully treated Our Signs.

10. It is We Who have
 Placed you with authority
 On earth, and provided
 You therein with means
 For the fulfilment of your life:
 Small are the thanks
 That ye give!

[p. 343]

  

SECTION 2.

11. It is We Who created you
 And gave you shape;
 Then We bade the angels
 Bow down to Adam, and they
 Bowed down; not so Iblis;
 He refused to be of those
 Who bow down.

12. (God) said: "What prevented
 Thee from bowing down
 When I commanded thee?"
 He said: "I am better
 Than he: Thou didst create
 Me from fire, and him from clay."

13. (God) said: "Get thee down
 From this: it is not
 For thee to be arrogant
 Here: get out, for thou
 Art of the meanest (of creatures)."

14. He said: "Give me respite
 Till the day they are
 Raised up."

15. (God) said: "Be thou
 Among those who have respite."

[p. 344]

16. He said: "Because thou
 Hast thrown me out
 Of the Way, lo! I will
 Lie in wait for them
 On Thy Straight Way:

17. "Then will I assault them
 From before them and behind them,
 From their right and their left:
 Nor wilt Thou find,
 In most of them,
 Gratitude (for Thy mercies).

18. (God) said: "Get out
 From this, disgraced
 And expelled. If any
 Of them follow thee,--
 Hell will I fill
 With you all.

19. "O Adam! dwell thou
 And thy wife in the Garden,
 And enjoy (its good things)
 As ye wish: but approach not
 This tree, or ye run
 Into harm and transgression."

20. Then began Satan to whisper
 Suggestions to them, bringing
 Openly before their minds
 All their shame

[p. 345]

That was hidden from them
 (Before): he said: "Your Lord
 Only forbade you this tree,
 Lest ye should become angels
 Or such beings as live for ever."

21. And he swore to them
 Both, that he was
 Their sincere adviser.

22. So by deceit he brought about
 Their fall: when they
 Tasted of the tree,
 Their shame became manifest
 To them, and they began
 To sew together the leaves
 Of the Garden over their bodies.
 And their Lord called
 Unto them: "Did I not
 Forbid you that tree,
 And tell you that Satan
 Was an avowed
 Enemy unto you?"

23. They said: "Our Lord!
 We have wronged our own souls:
 If Thou forgive us not
 And bestow not upon us
 Thy Mercy, we shall
 Certainly be lost."

24. (God) said: "Get ye down,
 With enmity between yourselves.
 On earth will be your dwelling-place
 And your means of livelihood,--
 For a time."

25. He said: "Therein shall ye
 Live, and therein shall ye
 Die; but from it shall ye
 Be taken out (at last)."

[p. 346]

  

SECTION 3.

26. O ye Children of Adam!
 We have bestowed raiment
 Upon you to cover
 Your shame, as well as
 To be an adornment to you.
 But the raiment of righteousness,--
 That is the best.
 Such are among the Signs
 Of God, that they
 May receive admonition!

27. O ye Children of Adam!
 Let not Satan seduce you,
 In the same manner as
 He got your parents out
 Of the Garden, stripping them
 Of their raiment, to expose
 Their shame: for he
 And his tribe watch you
 From a position where ye
 Cannot see them: We made
 The Evil Ones friends
 (Only) to those without Faith.

28. When they do aught
 That is shameful, they say:
 "We found our fathers
 Doing so"; and "God
 Commanded us thus":
 Say: "Nay, God never

[p. 347]

Commands what is shameful:
 Do ye say of God
 What ye know not?"

29. Say: "My Lord hath commanded
 Justice; and that ye set
 Your whole selves (to Him)
 At every time and place
 Of prayer, and call upon Him,
 Making your devotion sincere
 As in His sight:
 Such as He created you
 In the beginning, so
 Shall ye return."

30. Some He hath guided:
 Others have (by their choice)
 Deserved the loss of their way;
 In that they took
 The Evil Ones, in preference
 To God, for their friends
 And protectors, and think
 That they receive guidance.

31. O Children of Adam!
 Wear your beautiful apparel
 At every time and place
 Of prayer: eat and drink:
 But waste not by excess,
 For God loveth not the wasters.

[p. 348]

  

SECTION 4.

32. Say: Who hath forbidden
 The beautiful (gifts) of God,
 Which He hath produced
 For His servants,
 And the things, clean and pure,
 (Which He hath provided)
 For sustenance?
 Say: They are, in the life
 Of this world, for those
 Who believe, (and) purely
 For them on the Day
 Of Judgment. Thus do We
 Explain the Signs in detail
 For those who understand.

33. Say: The things that my Lord
 Hath indeed forbidden are:
 Shameful deeds, whether open
 Or secret; sins and trespasses
 Against truth or reason; assigning
 Of partners to God, for which
 He hath given no authority;
 And saying things about God
 Of which ye have no knowledge.

[p. 349]

34. To every People is a term.
 Appointed: when their term
 Is reached, not an hour
 Can they cause delay,
 Nor (an hour) can they
 Advance (it in anticipation).

35. O ye Children of Adam!
 Whenever there come to you
 Apostles from amongst you,
 Rehearsing My Signs unto you,
 Those who are righteous
 And mend (their lives),--
 On them shall be no fear
 Nor shall they grieve.

36. But those who reject
 Our Signs and treat them
 With arrogance,--they
 Are Companions of the Fire,
 To dwell therein (for ever).

37. Who is more unjust
 Than one who invents
 A lie against God
 Or rejects His Signs?
 For such, their portion
 Appointed must reach them
 From the Book (of Decrees):
 Until, when Our messengers
 (Of death) arrive and take
 Their souls, they say:
 "Where are the things
 That ye used to invoke
 Besides God?"
 They will reply, "They

[p. 350]

Have left us in the lurch,"
 And they will bear witness
 Against themselves, that they
 Had rejected God.

38. He will say: "Enter ye
 In the company of
 The Peoples who passed away
 Before you--men and Jinns,--
 Into the Fire. Every time
 A new People enters,
 It curses its sister-People
 (That went before), until
 They follow each other, all
 Into the Fire. Saith the last
 About the first: "Our Lord!
 It is these that misled us:
 So give them a double
 Penalty in the Fire."
 He will say: "Doubled
 For all": but this
 Ye do not understand.

39. Then the first will say
 To the last: "See then!
 No advantage have ye
 Over us; so taste ye
 Of the Penalty for all
 That ye did!"

  

SECTION 5.

40. To those who reject
 Our Signs and treat them
 With arrogance, no opening
 Will there be of the gates

[p. 351]

Of heaven, nor will they
 Enter the Garden, until
 The camel can pass
 Through the eye of the needle:
 Such is Our reward
 For those in sin.

41. For them there is
 Hell, as a couch
 (Below) and folds and folds
 Of covering above: such
 Is Our requital of those
 Who do wrong.

42. But those who believe
 And work righteousness,--
 No burden do We place
 On any soul, but that
 Which it can bear,
 They will be Companions
 Of the Garden, therein
 To dwell (for ever).

43. And We shall remove
 From their hearts any
 Lurking sense of injury;--
 Beneath them will be
 Rivers flowing;--and they
 Shall say: "Praise be, to God,
 Who hath guided us
 To this (felicity): never
 Could we have found
 Guidance, had it not been
 For the guidance of God:
 Indeed it was the truth.
 That the Apostles of our Lord
 Brought unto us." And they
 Shall hear the cry:
 "Behold! the Garden before you!

[p. 352]

Ye have been made
 Its inheritors, for your
 Deeds (of righteousness)."

44. The Companions of the Garden
 Will call out to the Companions
 Of the Fire: "We have
 Indeed found the promises
 Of our Lord to us true:
 Have you also found
 Your Lord's promises true?"
 They shall say, "Yes"; but
 A Crier shall proclaim
 Between them: "The curse
 Of God is on the wrong-doers;--

45. "Those who would hinder (men)
 From the path of God
 And would seek in it
 Something crooked:
 They were those who
 Denied the Hereafter."

46. Between them shall be
 A veil, and on the Heights

[p. 353]

Will be men
 Who would know every one
 By his marks: they will call
 Out to the Companions
 Of the Garden, "Peace on you":
 They will not have entered,
 But they will have
 An assurance (thereof.)

47. When their eyes shall be turned
 Towards the Companions
 Of the Fire, they will say:
 "Our Lord! send us not
 To the company
 Of the wrong-doers."

  

SECTION 6.

48. The men on the Heights
 Will call to certain men
 Whom they will know
 From their m arks, saying:
 "Of what profit to you
 Were your hoards and your
 Arrogant ways?

49. "Behold! are these not
 The men whom you swore
 That God with His Mercy
 Would never bless?
 Enter ye the Garden:
 No fear shall be on you,
 Nor shall ye grieve."

50. The Companions of the Fire
 Will call to the Companions
 Of the Garden: "Pour down
 To us water or anything

[p. 354]

That God doth provide
 For your sustenance."
 They will say: "Both
 These things hath God forbidden
 To those who rejected Him;--

51. "Such as took their religion
 To be mere amusement
 And play, and were deceived
 By the life of the world."
 That day shall We forget them
 As they forgot the meeting
 Of this day of theirs,
 And as they were wont
 To reject Our Signs.

52. For We had certainly
 Sent unto them a Book,
 Based on knowledge,
 Which We explained
 In detail,--a guide
 And a mercy
 To all who believe.

53. Do they just wait
 For the final fulfilment
 Of the event? On the day
 The event is finally fulfilled,
 Those who disregarded it
 Before will say: "The apostles
 Of our Lord did indeed
 Bring true (tidings). Have we
 No intercessors now to intercede
 On our behalf? Or could we

[p. 355]

Be sent back? Then should eve
 Behave differently from our
 Behaviour in the past."
 In fact they will have lost
 Their souls, and the things
 They invented will leave
 Them in the lurch.

  

SECTION 7.

54. Your Guardian-Lord
 Is God, Who created
 The heavens and the earth
 In six Days, and is firmly
 Established on the Throne
 (Of authority): He draweth
 The night as a veil
 O'er the day, each seeking
 The other in rapid succession:
 He created the sun,
 The moon, and the stars,
 (All) governed by laws
 Under His Command.
 Is it not His to create
 And to govern? Blessed
 Be God, the Cherisher
 And Sustainer of the Worlds!

55. Call on your Lord
 With humility and in private:

[p. 356]

For God loveth not
 Those who trespass beyond bounds.

56. Do no mischief on the earth,
 After it hath been
 Set in order, but call
 On Him with fear
 And longing (in your hearts):
 For the Mercy of God
 Is (always) near
 To those who do good.

57. It is He Who sendeth
 The Winds like heralds
 Of glad tidings, going before
 His Mercy: when they have
 Carried the heavy-laden
 Clouds, We drive them
 To a land that is dead,
 Make rain to descend thereon,
 And produce every kind
 Of harvest therewith: thus
 Shall We raise up the dead:
 Perchance ye may remember.

58. From the land that is clean
 And good, by the Will
 Of its Cherisher, springs up
 Produce, (rich) after its kind:

[p. 357]

But from the land that is
 Bad, springs up nothing
 But that which is niggardly:
 Thus do we explain the Signs
 By various (symbols) to those
 Who are grateful.

  

SECTION 8.

59. We sent Noah to his people.
 He said: "O my people!
 Worship God! ye have
 No other god but Him.
 I fear for you the Punishment
 Of a dreadful Day!

60. The leaders of his people
 Said: "Ah! we see thee
 Evidently wandering (in mind)."

[p. 358]

61. He said: "O my people!
 No wandering is there
 In my (mind): on the contrary
 I am an apostle from
 The Lord and Cherisher
 Of the Worlds!

62."I but fulfil towards you
 The duties of my Lord's mission:
 Sincere is my advice to you,
 And I know from God
 Something that ye know not.

63. "Do ye wonder that
 There hath come to you
 A message from your Lord,
 Through a man of your own
 People, to warn you,--
 So that ye may fear God
 And haply receive His Mercy?"

64. But they rejected him,
 And We delivered him,
 And those with him,
 In the Ark:
 But We overwhelmed
 In the Flood those
 Who rejected Our Signs.
 They were indeed
 A blind people!

  

SECTION 9.

65. To the 'Ad people,
 (We sent) Hud, one

[p. 359]

Of their (own) brethren:
 He said: "O my people!
 Worship God! ye have
 No other god but Him.
 Will ye not fear (God)?

66. The leaders of the unbelievers
 Among his people said:
 "Ah! we see thou art
 An imbecile!" and "We think
 Thou art a liar!"

67. He said: "O my people!
 I am no imbecile, but
 (I am) an apostle from
 The Lord and Cherisher
 Of the Worlds!

68. "I but fulfil towards you
 The duties of my Lord's mission:
 I am to you a sincere
 And trustworthy adviser.

69. "Do ye wonder that
 There hath come to you
 A message from your Lord
 Through a man of your own
 People, to warn you?
 Call in remembrance
 That He made you
 Inheritors after the people
 Of Noah, and gave you
 A stature tall among the nations.
 Call in remembrance
 The benefits (ye have received)
 From God: that so
 Ye may prosper."

70. They said: "Comest thou
 To us, that we may worship
 God alone, and give up
 The cult of our fathers?
 Bring us what thou
 Threatenest us with,
 If so be that thou
 Tellest the truth!"

[p. 360]

71. He said: "Punishment
 And wrath have already
 Come upon you from your Lord
 Dispute ye with me
 Over names which ye
 Have devised--ye
 And your fathers,
 Without authority from God?
 Then wait: I am
 Amongst you, also waiting."

72. We saved him and those
 Who adhered to him,
 By Our Mercy, and We
 Cut off the roots of those
 Who rejected Our Signs
 And did not believe.

  

SECTION 10.

73. To the Thamud people
 (We sent) Salih, one

[p. 361]

Of their own brethren:
 He said: "O my people!
 Worship God; ye have
 No other god but Him.
 Now hath come unto you
 A clear (Sign) from your Lord!
 This she-camel of God
 Is a Sign unto you:
 So leave her to graze
 In God's earth, and let her
 Come to no harm,
 Or ye shall be seized
 With a grievous punishment.

74. "And remember how He
 Made you inheritors
 After the 'Ad people
 And gave you habitations
 In the land: ye build
 For yourselves palaces and castles
 In (open) plains, and carve out
 Homes in the mountains;
 So bring to remembrance
 The benefits (ye have received)
 From God, and refrain
 From evil and mischief
 On the earth."

75. The leaders of the arrogant
 Party among his people said

[p. 362]

To those who were reckoned
 Powerless--those among them
 Who believed: "Know ye
 Indeed that Salih is
 An apostle from his Lord?"
 They said: "We do indeed
 Believe in the revelation
 Which hath been sent
 Through him."

76. The arrogant party said:
 "For our part, we reject
 What ye believe in."

77. Then they ham-strung
 The she-camel, and insolently
 Defied the order of their Lord,
 Saying: "O Salih! bring about
 Thy threats, if thou art
 An apostle (of God)!"

78. So the earthquake took them
 Unawares, and they lay
 Prostrate in their homes
 In the morning!

[p. 363]

79. So Salih left them,
 Saying: "O my people!
 I did indeed convey to you
 The message for which
 I was sent by my Lord:
 I gave you good counsel,
 But ye love not good counsellors!"

80. We also (sent) Lut:
 He said to his people:
 "Do ye commit lewdness
 Such as no people
 In creation (ever) committed
 Before you?

81. "For ye practise your lusts
 On men in preference
 To women: ye are indeed
 A people transgressing
 Beyond bounds."

82. And his people gave
 No answer but this:
 They said, "Drive them out
 Of your city: these are

[p. 364]

Indeed men who want
 To be clean and pure!"

83. But we saved him
 And his family, except
 His wife: she was
 Of those who lagged behind

84. And we rained down on them
 A shower (of brimstone):
 Then see what was the end
 Of those who indulged
 In sin and crime!

  

SECTION 11.

85. To the Madyan people

[p. 365]

We sent Shu'aib, one
 Of their own brethren: he said:
 "O my people! worship God;
 Ye have no other god
 But Him. Now hath come
 Unto you a clear (Sign)
 From your Lord! Give just
 Measure and weight, nor withhold
 From the people the things
 That are their due; and do
 No mischief on the earth
 After it has been set
 In order: that will be best
 For you, if ye have Faith.

86. "And squat not on every road,
 Breathing threats, hindering
 From the path of God
 Those who believe in Him,
 And seeking in it
 Something crooked;
 But remember how ye were
 Little, and He gave you increase.
 And hold in your mind's eye
 What was the end

[p. 366]

Of those who did mischief.

87. "And if there is a party
 Among you who believes
 In the Message with which
 I have been sent, and a party
 Which does not believe,
 Hold yourselves in patience
 Until God doth decide
 Between us: for He
 Is the best to decide."

[p. 367]

88. The leaders, the arrogant
 Party among his people, said:
 "O Shu'aib! we shall
 Certainly drive thee out
 Of our city--(thee) and those
 Who believe with thee;
 Or else ye (thou and they)
 Shall have to return
 To our ways and religion."
 He said: "What! even
 Though we do detest (them)?

89. "We should indeed invent
 A lie against God,
 If we returned to your ways
 After God hath rescued
 Us therefrom; nor could we
 By any manner of means
 Return thereto unless it be
 As in the will and plan of God,
 Our Lord. Our Lord
 Can reach out to the utmost
 Recesses of things by His
 knowledge.
 In God is our trust.
 Our Lord! Decide thou
 Between us and our people

[p. 368]

In truth, for thou
 Art the best to decide."

90. The leaders, the Unbelievers
 Among his people, said:
 "If ye follow Shu'aib,
 Be sure then ye are ruined!"

91. But the earthquake took them
 Unawares, and they lay
 Prostrate in their homes
 Before the morning!"

92. The men who rejected
 Shu'aib became as if
 They had never been
 In the homes where they
 Had flourished: the men
 Who rejected Shu'aib--
 It was they who were ruined!

93. So Shu'aib left them,
 Saying: "O my people!
 I did indeed convey to you
 The Messages for which
 I was sent by my Lord:
 I gave you good counsel,
 But how shall I lament

[p. 369]

Over a people who refuse
 To believe!"

  

SECTION 12.

94. Whenever We sent a prophet
 To a town, We took up
 Its people in suffering
 And adversity, in order
 That they might learn humility.

95. Then We changed their suffering
 Into prosperity, until they grew
 And multiplied, and began
 To say: "Our fathers (too)
 Were touched by suffering
 And affluence"... Behold!
 We called them to account
 Of a sudden, while they
 Realised not (their peril).

96. If the people of the towns
 Had but believed and feared
 God, We should indeed
 Have opened out to them

[p. 370]

(All kinds of) blessings
 From heaven and earth;
 But they rejected (the truth),
 And We brought them
 To book for their misdeeds.

97. Did the people of the towns
 Feel secure against the coming
 Of Our wrath by night
 While they were asleep?

98. Or else did they feel
 Secure against its coming
 In broad daylight while they
 Played about (care-free)?

99. Did they then feel secure
 Against the Plan of God?--
 But no one can feel
 Secure from the Plan
 Of God, except those
 (Doomed) to ruin!

[p. 371]

  

SECTION 13.

100. To those who inherit
 The earth in succession
 To its (previous) possessors,
 Is it not a guiding (lesson)
 That, if We so willed,
 We could punish them (too)
 For their sins, and seal up
 Their hearts so that they
 Could not hear?

101. Such were the towns
 Whose story We (thus)
 Relate unto thee:
 There came indeed to them
 Their apostles with clear (Signs):
 But they would not believe
 What they had rejected before.
 Thus doth God seal up
 The hearts of those
 Who reject Faith.

102. Most of them We found not
 Men (true) to their covenant:
 But most of them We found
 Rebellious and disobedient.

103. Then after them We sent
 Moses with Our Signs
 To Pharaoh and his chiefs,
 But they wrongfully rejected them:
 So see what was the end
 Of those who made mischief.

[p. 372]

104. Moses said: "O Pharaoh!
 I am an apostle from
 The Lord of the Worlds,--

105. One for whom it is right
 To say nothing but truth
 About God. Now have I
 Come unto you (people), from
 Your Lord, with a clear (Sign):
 So let the Children of Israel
 Depart along with me."

106. (Pharaoh) said: "If indeed
 Thou hast come with a Sign,

[p. 373]

Show it forth,
 If thou tellest the truth."

107. Then (Moses) threw his rod,
 And behold! it was
 A serpent, plain (for all to see)!

108. And he drew out his hand,
 And behold! it was white
 To all beholders!

  

SECTION 14.

109. Said the Chiefs of the people
 Of Pharaoh: "This is indeed
 A sorcerer well-versed.

110. "His plan is to get you out
 Of your land: then
 What is it ye counsel?"

[p. 374]

111. They said: "Keep him
 And his brother in suspense
 (For a while); and send
 To the cities men to collect--

112. And bring up to thee
 All (our) sorcerers well-versed.

113. So there came
 The sorcerers to Pharaoh:
 They said, "Of course
 We shall have a (suitable)
 Reward if we win!"

114. He said: "Yea, (and more),--
 For ye shall in that case
 Be (raised to posts)
 Nearest (to my person)."

115. They said: "O Moses!
 Wilt thou throw (first),
 Or shall we have
 The (first) throw?"

116. Said Moses: "Throw ye (first)."
 So when they threw,
 They bewitched the eyes
 Of the people, and struck
 Terror into them: for they
 Showed a great (feat of) magic.

[p. 375]

117. We put it into Moses's mind
 By inspiration: "Throw (now)
 Thy rod": and behold!
 It swallows up straightway
 All the falsehoods
 Which they fake!

118. Thus truth was confirmed.
 And all that they did
 Was made of no effect.

119. So the (great ones) were vanquished
 There and then, and were
 Made to look small.

120. But the sorcerers fell down
 Prostrate in adoration,

121. Saying: "We believe
 In the Lord of the Worlds,--

122. "The Lord of Moses and Aaron.

123. Said Pharaoh: "Believe ye
 In Him before I give
 You permission? Surely
 This is a trick which ye
 Have planned in the City
 To drive out its people:
 But soon shall ye know
 (The consequences).

[p. 376]

124. "Be sure I will cut off
 Your hands and your feet
 On opposite sides, and I
 Will cause you all
 To die on the cross."

125. They said: "For us,
 We are but sent back
 Unto our Lord:

126. "But thou dost wreak
 Thy vengeance on us
 Simply because we believed
 In the Signs of our Lord
 When they reached us!
 Our Lord! pour out on us
 Patience and constancy, and take
 Our souls unto Thee
 As Muslims (who bow
 To Thy Will)!

  

SECTION 15.

127. Said the chiefs of Pharaoh's
 People: "Wilt thou leave
 Moses and his people,
 To spread mischief in the land,
 And to abandon thee
 And thy gods?" He said:
 "Their male children will we
 Slay; (only) their females
 Will we save alive;
 And we have over them

[p. 377]

(Power) irresistible."

128. Said Moses to his people:
 "Pray for help from God,.
 And (wait) in patience and
 constancy:
 For the earth is God's,
 To give as a heritage
 To such of His servants
 As He pleaseth; and the end
 Is (best) for the righteous.

129. They said: "We have had
 (Nothing but) trouble, both before
 And after thou camest
 To us." He said:
 "It may be that your Lord
 Will destroy your enemy
 And make you inheritors 
 In the earth; that so
 He may try you
 By your deeds."

  

SECTION 16.

130. We punished the people
 Of Pharaoh with years

[p. 378]

(Of drought) and shortness
 Of crops; that they might
 Receive admonition.

131. But when good (times) came,
 They said, "This is due
 To us;" when gripped
 By calamity, they ascribed it
 To evil omens connected
 With Moses and those with him!
 Behold! in truth the omens
 Of evil are theirs
 In God's sight, but most
 Of them do not understand!

132. They said (to Moses):
 "Whatever be the Signs
 Thou bringest, to work
 Therewith thy sorcery on us,"
 We shall never believe
 In thee."

133. So We sent (plagues) on them:
 Wholesale Death,
 Locusts, Lice, Frogs,
 And Blood: Signs openly
 Self-explained: but they
 Were steeped in arrogance,--
 A people given to sin.

134. Every time the Penalty
 Fell on them, they said:

[p. 379]

"O Moses! on our behalf
 Call on thy Lord in virtue
 Of his promise to thee:
 If thou wilt remove
 The Penalty from us,
 We shall truly believe in thee,
 And we shall send away
 The Children of Israel
 With thee."

135. But every tune We removed
 The Penalty from them
 According to a fixed term
 Which they had to fulfil,--
 Behold! they broke their word!

136. So We exacted retribution
 From them: We drowned them
 In the sea, because they
 Rejected Our Signs, and failed
 To take warning from them.

137. And We made a people,
 Considered weak (and of no account),
 Inheritors of lands
 In both East and West,--

[p. 380]

Lands whereon We sent
 Down Our blessings.
 The fair promise of thy Lord
 Was fulfilled for the Children
 Of Israel, because they had
 Patience and constancy,
 And We levelled to the ground
 The great Works and fine Buildings
 Which Pharaoh and his people
 Erected (with such pride).

138. We took the Children of Israel
 (With safety) across the sea.
 They came upon a people
 Devoted entirely to some idols
 They had. They said:
 "O Moses! fashion for us
 A god like unto the gods
 They have." He said:

[p. 381]

"Surely ye are a people
 Without knowledge.

139. "As to these folk,--
 The cult they are in
 Is (but) a fragment of a ruin,
 And vain is the (worship)
 Which they practise."

140. He said: "Shall I seek for you
 A god other than the (true)
 God, when it is God
 Who hath endowed you
 With gifts above the nations?"

141. And remember We rescued you
 From Pharaoh's people,
 Who afflicted you with
 The worst of penalties,
 Who slew your male children
 And saved alive your females:
 In that was a momentous
 Trial from your Lord.

  

SECTION 17.

142. We appointed for Moses
 Thirty nights, and completed
 (The period) with ten (more):
 Thus was completed the term
 (Of communion) with his Lord,
 Forty nights. And Moses
 Had charged his brother Aaron
 (Before he went up):

[p. 382]

"Act for me amongst my people:
 Do right, and follow not
 The way of those
 Who do mischief."

143. When Moses came
 To the place appointed by Us,
 And his Lord addressed him,
 He said: "O my Lord!
 Show (Thyself) to me,
 That I may look upon Thee."
 God said, "By no means
 Canst thou see Me (direct);
 But look upon the mount;
 If it abide
 In its place, then
 Shalt thou see Me."
 When his Lord manifested
 His glory on the Mount,
 He made it as dust,
 And Moses fell down
 In a swoon. When he
 Recovered his senses he said:
 "Glory be to Thee! To Thee
 I turn in repentance, and I
 Am the first to believe."

[p. 383]

144. (God) said: "O Moses!
 I have chosen thee
 Above (other) men,
 By the mission I (have
 Given thee) and the words
 I (have spoken to thee):
 Take then the (revelation)
 Which I give thee,
 And be of those
 Who give thanks."

145. And We ordained laws
 For him in the Tablets
 In all matters, both
 Commanding and explaining
 All things, (and said):
 "Take and hold these
 With firmness, and enjoin
 Thy people to hold fast
 By the best in the precepts:
 Soon shall I show you
 The homes of the wicked,--
 (How they lie desolate)."

146. Those who behave arrogantly
 On the earth in defiance

[p. 384]

Of right--them will I
 Turn away from My Signs:
 Even if they see all the Signs,
 They will not believe in them;
 And if they see the way
 Of right conduct, they will
 Not adopt it as the Way;
 But if they see the way
 Of error, that is
 The Way they will adopt.
 For they have rejected
 Our Signs, and failed
 To take warning from them.

147. Those who reject Our Signs
 And the Meeting in the Hereafter,--
 Vain are their deeds:
 Can they expect to be rewarded
 Except as they have wrought?

  

SECTION 18.

148. The people of Moses made,
 In his absence, out of their ornaments,

[p. 385]

The image of a calf,
 (for worship):
 It seemed to low: did they
 Not see that it could
 Neither speak to them, nor
 Show them the Way?
 They took it for worship
 And they did wrong.

149. When they repented, and saw
 That they had erred,
 They said: "if our Lord
 Have not mercy upon us
 And forgive us, we shall
 Indeed be of those who perish."

150. When Moses came back
 To his people, angry and grieved,
 He said: "Evil it is that ye
 Have done in my place
 In my absence: did ye
 Make haste to bring on
 The judgment of your Lord?"
 He put down the Tablets,

[p. 386]

Seized his brother by (the hair
 Of) his head, and dragged him
 To him. Aaron said:
 "Son of my mother! The people
 Did indeed reckon me
 As naught, and went near
 To slaying me! Make not
 The enemies rejoice over
 My misfortune, nor count thou
 Me amongst the people
 Of sin."

151. Moses prayed: "O my Lord!
 Forgive me and my brother!
 Admit us to Thy mercy!
 For Thou art the Most Merciful
 Of those who show mercy!"

  

SECTION 19.

152. Those who took the calf
 (For worship) will indeed
 Be overwhelmed with wrath
 From their Lord, and with
 Shame in this life:
 Thus do We recompense
 Those who invent (falsehoods).

153. But those who do wrong
 But repent thereafter and
 (Truly) believe,--verily
 Thy Lord is thereafter
 Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

[p. 387]

154. When the anger of Moses
 Was appeased, he took up
 The Tablets: in the writing
 Thereon was Guidance and Mercy
 For such as fear their Lord.

155. And Moses chose seventy
 Of his people for Our place
 Of meeting: when they
 Were seized with violent quaking,
 He prayed: "O my Lord!
 If it had been Thy Will
 Thou couldst have destroyed,
 Long before, both them
 And me: wouldst Thou
 Destroy us for the deeds
 Of the foolish ones among us?
 This is no more than
 Thy trial: by it Thou causest
 Whom Thou wilt to stray,
 And Thou leadest whom
 Thou wilt into the right path.
 Thou art our Protector:
 So forgive us and give us
 Thy mercy; for Thou art
 The Best of those who forgive.

156. "And ordain for us
 That which is good,
 In this life
 And in the Hereafter:
 For we have turned unto Thee."
 He said: "With My Punishment

[p. 388]

I visit whom I will;
 But My Mercy extendeth
 To all things. That (Mercy)
 I shall ordain for those
 Who do right, and practise
 Regular charity, and those
 Who believe in Our Signs;--

157. "Those who follow the Apostle,
 The unlettered Prophet,
 Whom they find mentioned
 In their own (Scriptures),--
 In the Law and the Gospel;--
 For he commands them
 What is just and forbids them
 What is evil; he allows
 Them as lawful what is good
 (And pure) and prohibits them
 From what is bad (and impure);
 He releases them
 From their heavy burdens
 And from the yokes
 That are upon them.
 So it is those who believe
 In him, honour him,
 Help him, and follow the Light
 Which is sent down with him,--

[p. 389]

It is they who will prosper."

  

SECTION 20.

158. Say: "O men! I am sent
 Unto you all, as the Apostle
 Of God, to Whom belongeth
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth: there is no god
 But He: it is He that giveth
 Both life and death. So believe
 In God and His Apostle,
 The unlettered Prophet,
 Who believeth in God
 And His Words: follow him
 That (so) ye may be guided."

159. Of the people of Moses
 There is a section
 Who guide and do justice
 In the light of truth.

[p. 390]

160. We divided them into twelve Tribes
 Or nations. We directed
 Moses by inspiration,
 When his (thirsty) people asked
 Him for water: "Strike the rock
 With thy staff": out of it
 There gushed forth twelve springs:
 Each group knew its own place
 For water. We gave them
 The shade of clouds, and sent
 Down to them manna and quails,
 (Saying): "Eat of the good things
 We have provided for you":
 (But they rebelled); to Us
 They did no harm, but
 They harmed their own souls.

161. And remember it was
 Said to them:
 "Dwell in this town
 And eat therein as ye wish,
 But say the word of humility
 And enter the gate
 In a posture of humility:
 We shall forgive you
 Your faults; We shall increase
 (The portion of) those who do good."

162. But the transgressors among them
 Changed the word from that
 Which had been given them
 So we sent on them
 A plague from heaven.
 For that they repeatedly transgressed.

  

SECTION 21.

163. Ask them concerning the town
 Standing close by the sea.
 Behold! they transgressed

[p. 391]

In the matter of the Sabbath.
 For on the day of their Sabbath
 Their fish did come to them,
 Openly holding up their heads,
 But on the day they had
 No Sabbath, they came not:
 Thus did We make a trial
 Of them, for they were
 Given to transgression.

164. When some of them said:
 "Why do ye preach
 To a people whom God
 Will destroy or visit
 With a terrible punishment?"--
 Said the preachers: "To discharge
 Our duty to your Lord,
 And perchance they may fear Him."

165. When they disregarded the warnings
 That had been given them,
 We rescued those who forbade
 Evil; but We visited
 The wrong-doers with a
 Grievous , because
 They were given to transgression.

166. When in their insolence
 They transgressed (all) prohibitions,
 We said to them:
 "Be ye apes,
 Despised and rejected."

[p. 392]

167. Behold! thy Lord did declare
 That He would send
 Against them, to the Day
 Of Judgment, those who would
 Afflict them with grievous
 Penalty. Thy Lord is quick
 In retribution, but He is also
 Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

168. We broke them up
 Into sections on this earth.
 There are among them some
 That are the righteous, and some
 That are the opposite.
 We have tried them
 With both prosperity and adversity:
 In order that they
 Might turn (to Us).

169. After them succeeded
 An (evil) generation: they
 Inherited the Book, but
 They chose (for themselves)
 The vanities of this world,
 Saying (for excuse): "(Everything)
 Will be forgiven us."
 (Even so), if similar vanities
 Came their way, they would
 (Again) seize them.
 Was not the Covenant
 Of the Book taken from them,
 That they would not
 Ascribe to God anything

[p. 393]

But the truth? And they
 Study what is in the Book.
 But best for the righteous
 Is the Home in the Hereafter.
 Will ye not understand?

170. As to those who hold fast
 By the Book and establish
 Regular Prayer,--never
 Shall we suffer the reward
 Of the righteous to perish.

171. When We shook the Mount
 Over them, as if it had been
 A canopy, and they thought
 It was going to fall on them
 (We said): "Hold firmly
 To what We have given you,
 And bring (ever) to remembrance
 What is therein;
 Perchance ye may fear God."

  

SECTION 22.

172. When thy Lord drew forth
 From the Children of Adam--

[p. 394]

From their loins--
 Their descendants, and made them
 Testify concerning themselves, (saying):
 "Am I not your Lord
 (Who cherishes and sustains you)?"--
 They said: "Yea!
 We do testify!" (This), lest
 Ye should say on the Day
 Of Judgment: "Of this we
 Were never mindful":

173. Or lest ye should say:
 "Our fathers before us
 May have taken false gods,
 But we are (their) descendants
 After them: wilt Thou then
 Destroy us because of the deeds
 Of men who were futile?"

174. Thus do We explain
 The Signs in detail;
 And perchance they may turn
 (Unto Us).

175. Relate to them the story
 Of the man to whom
 We sent Our Signs,
 But he passed them by:

[p. 395]

So Satan followed him up,
 And he went astray.

176. If it had been Our Will,
 We should have elevated him
 With Our Signs; but he
 Inclined to the earth,
 And followed his own vain desires.
 His similitude is that
 Of a dog: if you attack
 Him, he lolls out his tongue,
 Or if you leave him alone,
 He (still) lolls out his tongue.
 That is the similitude
 Of those who reject Our Signs;
 So relate the story;
 Perchance they may reflect.

177. Evil as an example are
 People who reject Our Signs
 And wrong their own souls.

178. Whom God doth guide,
 He is on the right path:
 Whom He rejects from His guidance,--
 Such are the persons who perish.

179. Many are the Jinns and men
 We have made for Hell:
 They have hearts wherewith they
 Understand not, eyes wherewith

[p. 396]

They see not, and ears wherewith
 They hear not. They are
 Like cattle,--nay more
 Misguided: for they
 Are heedless (of warning).

180. The most beautiful names
 Belong to God:
 So call on him by them;
 But shun such men as
 Use profanity in His names:
 For what they do, they will
 Soon be requited.

181. Of those We have created
 Are people who direct
 (Others) with truth.
 And dispense justice therewith,

  

SECTION 23.

182. Those who reject Our Signs,
 We shall gradually visit
 With punishment, in ways
 They perceive not;

183. Respite will I grant
 Unto them: for My scheme
 Is strong (and unfailing).

184. Do they not reflect?
 Their Companion is not seized

[p. 397]

With madness: he is but
 A perspicuous warner.

185. Do they see nothing
 In the government of the heavens
 And the earth and all
 That God hath created?
 (Do they not see) that
 It may well be that
 Their term is nigh
 Drawing to an end?
 In what Message after this
 Will they then believe?

186. To such as God rejects
 From His guidance, there can be
 No guide: He will
 Leave them in their trespasses,
 Wandering in distraction.

187. Whey ask thee about
 The (final) Hour--when
 Will be its appointed time?
 Say: "The knowledge thereof
 Is with my Lord (alone):
 None but He can reveal
 As to when it will occur.
 Heavy were its burden through
 The heavens and the earth.
 Only, all of a sudden
 Will it come to you."
 They ask thee as if thou

[p. 398]

Wert eager in search thereof:
 Say: "The knowledge thereof
 Is with God (alone),
 But most men know not."

188. Say: "I have no power
 Over any good or harm
 To myself except as God
 Willeth. If I had knowledge
 Of the unseen, I should have
 Multiplied all good, and no evil
 Should have touched me:
 I am but a warner,
 And a bringer of glad tidings
 To those who have faith."

  

SECTION 24.

189. It is He Who created
 You from a single person,
 And made his mate
 Of like nature, in order
 That he might dwell with her
 (In love). When they are
 United, she bears a light
 Burden and carries it about
 (Unnoticed). When she grows
 Heavy, they both pray
 To God their Lord, (saying):
 "If Thou givest us
 A goodly child,

[p. 399]

We vow we shall
 (Ever) be grateful."

190. But when He giveth them
 A goodly child, they ascribe
 To others a share in the gift
 They have received:
 But God is exalted
 High above the partners
 They ascribe to Him.

191. Do they indeed ascribe
 To Him as partners things
 That can create nothing,
 But are themselves created?

192. No aid can they give them,
 Nor can they aid themselves!

193. If ye call them to guidance,
 They will not obey:
 For you it is the same
 Whether ye call them
 Or ye hold your peace!

194. Verily those whom ye
 Call upon besides God
 Are servants like unto you:
 Call upon them, and let them
 Listen to your prayer,
 If ye are (indeed) truthful!

195. Have they feet to walk with?
 Or hands to lay hold with?

[p. 400]

Or eyes to see with?
 Or ears to hear with?
 Say: "Call your 'god-partners',
 Scheme (your worst) against me,
 And give me no respite!

196. "For my Protector is God,
 Who revealed the Book
 (From time to time),
 And He will choose
 And befriend the righteous.

197. "But those ye call upon
 Besides Him, are unable
 To help you, and indeed
 To help themselves."

198. If thou callest them
 To guidance, they hear not.
 Thou wilt see them
 Looking at thee, but
 They see not.

199. Hold to forgiveness;
 Command what is right;
 But turn away from the ignorant.

200. If a suggestion from Satan
 Assail thy (mind)

[p. 401]

Seek refuge with God;
 For He heareth and knoweth
 (All things).

201. Those who fear God,
 When a thought of evil
 From Satan assaults them,
 Bring God to remembrance,
 When lo! they see (aright)!

202. But their brethren (the evil ones)
 Plunge them deeper into error,
 And never relax (their efforts).

203. If thou bring them not
 A revelation, they say:
 "Why hast thou not
 Got it together?"
 Say: "I but follow
 What is revealed to me
 From my Lord:
 This is (nothing but)
 Lights from your Lord,
 And Guidance, and Mercy,
 For any who have Faith."

204. When the Qur-an is read,
 Listen to it with attention,

[p. 402]

And hold your peace:
 That ye may receive Mercy.

205. And do thou (O reader!)
 Bring thy Lord to remembrance
 In thy (very) soul,
 With humility and in reverence,
 Without loudness in words,
 In the mornings and evenings;
 And be not thou
 Of those who are unheedful.

206. Those who are near
 To thy Lord, disdain not
 To do Him worship:
 They celebrate His praises,
 And bow down before Him.

[p. 403] [p. 404] [p. 405] [p. 406] [p. 407] [p. 408] [p. 409] [p. 410] [p. 411] [p. 412] [p. 413] [p. 414]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 415]

  

Sura VIII.

  

Anfal, or the Spoils of War.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. They ask thee concerning
 (Things taken as) spoils of war.
 Say: "(Such) spoils are
 At the disposal of God
 And the Apostle: so fear
 God, and keep straight
 The relations between yourselves:
 Obey God and His Apostle,
 If ye do believe."

2. For, Believers are those
 Who, when God is mentioned,
 Feel a tremor in their hearts,
 And when they hear
 His Signs rehearsed, find
 Their faith strengthened,
 And put (all) their trust
 In their Lord;

3. Who establish regular prayers
 And spend (freely) out of
 The gifts We have given
 Them for sustenance:

4. Such in truth are the Believers:
 They have grades of dignity
 With their Lord, and forgiveness,
 And generous sustenance:

[p. 416]

5. Just as thy Lord ordered thee
 Out of thy house in truth,
 Even though a party among
 The Believers disliked it,

6. Disputing with thee concerning
 The truth after it was made
 Manifest, as if they were
 Being driven to death
 And they (actually) saw it.

7. Behold! God promised you
 One of the two (enemy) parties,
 That it should be yours:
 Ye wished that the one
 Unarmed should be yours,
 But God willed
 To justify the Truth
 According to His words,
 And to cut off the roots
 Of the Unbelievers;--

8. That He might justify Truth
 And prove Falsehood false,
 Distasteful though it be
 To those in guilt.

[p. 417]

9. Remember ye implored
 The assistance of your Lord,
 And He answered you:
 "I will assist you
 With a thousand of the angels,
 Ranks on ranks."

10. God made it but a message
 Of hope, and an assurance
 To your hearts: (in any case)
 There is no help.
 Except from God:
 And God is Exalted in Power,
 Wise.

  

SECTION 2.

11. Remember He covered you
 With a sort of drowsiness,
 To give you calm as from
 Himself, and he caused
 Rain to descend on you
 From heaven, to clean you
 Therewith, to remove from you
 The stain of Satan,
 To strengthen your hearts,
 And to plant your feet
 Firmly therewith.

12. Remember thy Lord inspired
 The angels (with the message):
 "I am with you: give
 Firmness to the Believers:

[p. 418]

I will instil terror
 Into the hearts of the Unbelievers:
 Smite ye above their necks
 And smite all their
 Finger-tips off them.

13. This because they contended
 Against God and His Apostle:
 If any contend against God
 And His Apostle, God
 Is strict in punishment.

14. Thus (will it be said): "Taste ye
 Then of the (punishment):
 For those who resist God,
 Is the penalty of the Fire."

15. O ye who believe!
 When ye meet
 The Unbelievers
 In hostile array,
 Never turn your backs
 To them.

16. If any do turn his back
 To them on such a day--
 Unless it be in a stratagem
 Of war, or to retreat
 To a troop (of his own)--
 He draws on himself
 The wrath of God,
 And his abode is Hell,--
 An evil refuge (indeed)!

17. It is not ye who
 Slew them; it was God:

[p. 419]

When thou threwest (a handful
 Of dust), it was not
 Thy act, but God's:
 In order that He might
 Test the Believers
 By a gracious trial
 From Himself: for God
 Is He Who heareth
 And knoweth (all things).

18. That, and also because
 God is He Who makes feeble
 The plans and stratagems
 Of the Unbelievers.

19. (O Unbelievers!) if ye prayed
 For victory and judgment,
 Now hath the judgment
 Come to you: if ye desist
 (From wrong), it will be
 Best for you: if ye return
 (To the attack), so shall We.
 Not the least good
 Will your forces be to you
 Even if they were multiplied:
 For verily God
 Is with those who believe!

[p. 420]

  

SECTION 3.

20. O ye who believe!
 Obey God and His Apostle,
 And turn not away from him
 When ye hear (him speak).

21. Nor be like those who say,
 "We hear," but listen not:

22. For the worst of beasts
 In the sight of God
 Are the deaf and the dumb,--
 Those who understand not.

23. If God had found in them
 Any good, He would indeed
 Have made them listen:
 (As it is), if He had made them
 Listen, they would but have
 Turned back and declined (faith).

24. O ye who believe!
 Give your response to God
 And His Apostle, when He
 Calleth you to that which
 Will give you life;
 And know that God
 Cometh in between a man
 And his heart, and that
 It is He to Whom
 Ye shall (all) be gathered.

[p. 421]

25. And fear tumult or oppression,
 Which affecteth not in particular
 (Only) those of you who do wrong:
 And know that God
 Is strict in punishment.

26. Call to mind when ye
 Were a small (band),
 Despised through the land,
 And afraid that men might
 Despoil and kidnap you;
 But He provided a safe asylum
 For you, strengthened you
 With His aid, and gave you
 Good things for sustenance:
 That ye might be grateful.

27. O ye that believe!
 Betray not the trust
 Of God and the Apostle,
 Nor misappropriate knowingly
 Things entrusted to you.

28. And know ye
 That your possessions

[p. 422]

And your progeny
 Are but a trial;
 And that it is God
 With whom lies
 Your highest reward.

  

SECTION 4

29. O ye who believe!
 If ye fear God,
 He will grant you a Criterion
 (To judge between right and wrong),
 Remove from you (all) evil
 (That may afflict) you,
 And forgive you:
 For God is the Lord
 Of grace unbounded.

30. Remember how the Unbelievers
 Plotted against thee, to keep
 Thee in bonds, or slay thee,
 Or get thee out (of thy home).
 They plot and plan,
 And God too plans,
 But the best of planners
 Is God.

31. When Our Signs are rehearsed
 To them, they say: "We
 Have heard this (before):
 If we wished, we could
 Say (words) like these:
 These are nothing
 But tales of the ancients."

[p. 423]

32. Remember how they said:
 "O God! if this is indeed
 The Truth from Thee,
 Rain down on as a shower
 Of stones from the sky,
 Or send us a grievous Penalty.

33. But God was not going
 To send them a Penalty
 Whilst thou wast amongst them;
 Nor was He going to send it
 Whilst they could ask for pardon

34. But what plea have they
 That God should not punish
 Them, when they keep out
 (Men) from the Sacred Mosque--
 And they are not its guardians?
 No men can be its guardians
 Except the righteous; but most
 Of them do not understand.

35. Their prayer at the House
 (Of God) is nothing but
 Whistling and clapping of hands:
 (Its only answer can be),
 "Taste ye the Penalty
 Because ye blasphemed."

36. The Unbelievers spend their wealth
 To hinder (men) from the path
 Of God, and so will they
 Continue to spend; but
 In the end they will have
 (Only) regrets and sighs;

[p. 424]

At length they will be overcome:
 And the Unbelievers will be
 Gathered together to Hell;--

37. In order that God may separate
 The impure from the pure,
 Put the impure, one on another,
 Heap them together, and cast them
 Into Hell. They will be
 The ones to have lost.

  

SECTION 5.

38. Say to the Unbelievers,
 If (now) they desist (from Unbelief),
 Their past would be forgiven them;
 But if they persist, the punishment
 Of those before them is already
 (A matter of warning for them).

39. And fight them on
 Until there is no 
 Tumult or oppression,
 And there prevail
 Justice and faith in God
 Altogether and everywhere;
 But if they cease, verily God
 Doth see all that they do.

40. If they refuse, be sure
 That God is your Protector--
 The Best to protect
 And the Best to help.

[p. 425]

41. And know that out of
 All the booty that ye
 May acquire (in war),
 A fifth share is assigned
 To God,--and to the Apostle,
 And to near relatives,
 Orphans, the needy,
 And the wayfarer,
 If ye do believe in God
 And in the revelation
 We sent down to Our Servant
 On the Day of Testing,--
 The Day of the meeting
 Of the two forces.
 For God hath power
 Over all things.

42. Remember ye were
 On the hither side
 Of the valley, and they
 On the farther side,
 And the caravan
 On lower ground than ye.
 Even if ye had made
 A mutual appointment
 To meet, ye would certainly:
 Have failed in the appointment:

[p. 426]

But (thus ye met),
 That God might accomplish
 A matter already enacted;
 That those who died might
 Die after a clear Sign
 (Had been given), and those who lived
 Might live after a Clear Sign
 (Had been given). And verily
 God is He who heareth
 And knoweth (all things).

43. Remember in thy dream
 God showed them to thee
 As few: if He had shown
 Them to thee as many,
 Ye would surely have been
 Discouraged, and ye would
 Surely have disputed
 In (your) decision: but God
 Saved (you): for He knoweth
 Well the (secrets) of (all) hearts.

44. And remember when ye met,
 He showed them to you
 As few in your eyes,
 And He made you appear
 As contemptible in their eyes:
 That God might accomplish
 A matter already enacted.
 For to God do all questions
 Go back (for decision).

  

SECTION 6.

45. O ye who believe!
 When ye meet a force,
 Be firm, and call God
 In remembrance much (and often);
 That ye may prosper:

46. And obey God and His Apostle;
 And fall into no disputes,

[p. 427]

Lest ye lose heart
 And your power depart;
 And be patient and persevering:
 For God is with those
 Who patiently persevere:

47. And be not like those
 Who started from their homes
 Insolently and to be seen of men,
 And to hinder (men)
 From the path of God:
 For God compasseth round about
 All that they do.

48. Remember Satan made
 Their (sinful) acts seem
 Alluring to them, and said:
 "No one among men
 Can overcome you this day,
 While I am near to you":
 But when the two forces
 Came in sight of each other,
 He turned on his heels,
 And said: "Lo! I am clear
 Of you; to! I see
 What ye see not;
 Lo! I fear God; for God
 Is strict in punishment.

  

SECTION 7.

49. Lo! the Hypocrites say, and those
 In whose hearts is a disease:
 "These people,--their religion
 Has misled them." But
 If any trust in God, behold!
 God is Exalted in might, Wise.

[p. 428]

50. If thou couldst see,
 When the angels take the souls
 Of the Unbelievers (at death),
 (How) they smite their faces
 And their backs, (saying):
 "Taste the Penalty of the blazing Fire--

51. "Because of (the deeds) which
 Your (own) hands sent forth:
 For God is never unjust
 To His servants:

52. "(Deeds) after the manner
 Of the People of Pharaoh
 And of those before them:
 They rejected the Signs of God,
 And God punished them
 For their crimes: for God
 Is Strong, and Strict in punishment:

53. "Because God will never change
 The Grace which He hath bestowed
 On a people until they change
 What is in their (own) souls:
 And verily God is He
 Who heareth and knoweth (all things)."

54. "(Deeds) after the manner
 Of the People of Pharaoh
 And those before them":
 They treated as false the Signs
 Of their Lord: so We

[p. 429]

Destroyed them for their crimes,
 And We drowned the People
 Of Pharaoh: for they were all
 Oppressors and wrong-doers.

55. For the worst of beasts
 In the sight of God
 Are those who reject Him:
 They will not believe.

56. They are those with whom
 Thou didst make a covenant,
 But they break their covenant
 Every time, and they have not
 The fear (of God).

57. If ye gain the mastery
 Over them in war,
 Disperse, with them, those
 Who follow them,
 That they may remember.

58. If thou fearest treachery
 From any group, throw back
 (Their Covenant) to them, (so as
 To be) on equal terms:
 For God loveth not the treacherous.

  

SECTION 8.

59. Let not the Unbelievers
 Think that they can
 Get the better (of the godly):
 They will never frustrate (them).

[p. 430]

60. Against them make ready
 Your strength to the utmost
 Of your power, including
 Steeds of war, to strike terror
 Into (the hearts of) the enemies,
 Of God and your enemies,
 And others besides, whom
 Ye may not know, but whom
 God doth know. Whatever
 Ye shall spend in the Cause
 Of God, shall be repaid
 Unto you, and ye shall not
 Be treated unjustly.

61. But if the enemy
 Incline towards peace,
 Do thou (also) incline
 Towards peace, and trust
 In God: for He is the One
 That heareth and knoweth
 (All things).

62. Should they intend
 To deceive thee,--verily God
 Sufficeth thee: He it is
 That hath strengthened thee
 With his aid and
 With (the company of)
 The Believers;

63. And (moreover) He hath put
 Affection between their hearts:

[p. 431]

Not if thou hadst spent
 All that is in the earth,
 Couldst thou have produced
 That affection, but God
 Hath done it: for He
 Is Exalted in might, Wise.

64. O Apostle! Sufficient
 Unto thee is God,--
 (Unto thee) and unto those
 Who follow thee
 Among the Believers.

  

SECTION 9.

65. O Apostle! rouse the Believers
 To the fight. If there are
 Twenty amongst you, patient
 And persevering, they will
 Vanquish two hundred: if a hundred,
 They will vanquish a thousand
 Of the Unbelievers: for these
 Are a people without understanding.

[p. 432]

66. For the present, God
 Hath lightened your (task),
 For He knoweth that there is
 A weak spot in you:
 But (even so), if there are
 A hundred of you, patient
 And persevering, they will
 Vanquish two hundred, and if
 A thousand, they will vanquish
 Two thousand, with the leave
 Of God: for God is with those
 Who patiently persevere.

67. It is not fitting
 For an Apostle
 That he should have
 Prisoners of war until
 He hath thoroughly subdued
 The land. Ye look
 For the temporal goods
 Of this world; but God
 Looketh to the Hereafter:
 And God is Exalted in might, Wise.

68. Had it not been for
 A previous ordainment

[p. 433]

From God, a severe penalty
 Would have reached you
 For the (ransom) that ye took.

69. But (now) enjoy what ye took
 In war, lawful and good:
 But fear God: for God
 Is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 10.

70, O Apostle! say to those
 Who are captives in your hands:
 "If God findeth any good
 In your hearts, He will
 Give you something better
 Than what has been taken
 From you, and He will
 Forgive you: for God
 Is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful."

71. But if they have
 Treacherous designs against thee,
 (O Apostle!), they have already
 Been in treason against God,
 And so hath He given
 (Thee) power over them.
 And God is He who hath
 (Full) knowledge and wisdom.

72. Those who believed,
 And adopted exile,

[p. 434]

And fought for the Faith,
 With their property
 And their persons,
 In the cause of God,
 As well as those
 Who gave (them) asylum
 And aid,--these are (all)
 Friends and protectors,
 One of another.
 As to those who believed
 But came not into exile,
 Ye owe no duty
 Of protection to them
 Until they come into exile;
 But if they seek
 Your aid in religion,
 It is your duty
 To help them,
 Except against a people
 With whom ye have
 A treaty of mutual alliance.
 And (remember) God
 Seeth all that ye do.

73. The Unbelievers are
 Protectors, one of another:
 Unless ye do this,
 (Protect each other),
 There would be
 Tumult and oppression
 On earth, and great mischief.

[p. 435]

74. Those who believe,
 And adopt exile,
 And tight for the Faith,
 In the cause of God,
 As well as those
 Who give (them) asylum
 And aid,--these are (all)
 In very truth the Believers:
 For them is the forgiveness
 Of sins and a provision
 Most generous.

75. And those who
 Accept Faith subsequently,
 And adopt exile,
 And fight for the Faith
 In your company,
 They are of you.
 But kindred by blood
 Have prior rights
 Against each other
 In the Book of God.
 Verily God is well-acquainted
 With all things.

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 436] [p. 437] [p. 438]

  

Sura IX.

  

Tauba (Repentance) or Baraat (Immunity).

1. A (declaration) of immunity
 From God and His Apostle,
 To those of the Pagans
 With whom ye have contracted
 Mutual alliances:--

2. Go ye, then, for four months,
 Backwards and forwards,
 (As ye will), throughout the land,
 But know ye that ye cannot
 Frustrate God (lay your falsehood)
 But that God will cover
 With shame those who reject Him.

3. And an announcement from God
 And His Apostle, to the people
 (Assembled) on the day
 Of the Great Pilgrimage,--
 That God and His Apostle
 Dissolve (treaty) obligations
 With the Pagans.
 If, then, ye repent,
 It were best for you;
 But if ye turn away,

[p. 439]

Know ye that ye cannot
 Frustrate God. And proclaim
 A grievous penalty to those
 Who reject Faith.

4. (But the treaties are)not dissolved
 With those Pagans with whom
 Ye have entered into alliance
 And who have not subsequently
 Failed you in aught,
 Nor aided any one against you.
 So fulfil your engagements
 With them to the end
 Of their term: for God
 Loveth the righteous.

5. But when the forbidden months
 Are past, then fight and slay
 The Pagans wherever ye find them,
 And seize them, beleaguer them,
 And lie in wait for them
 In every stratagem (of war);
 But if they repent,
 And establish regular prayers
 And practise regular charity,
 Then open the way for them:
 For God is Oft-forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

[p. 440]

6. If one amongst the Pagans
 Ask thee for asylum,
 Grant it to him,
 So that he may hear the Word
 Of God; and then escort him
 To where he can be secure.
 That is because they are
 Men without knowledge.

  

SECTION 2.

7. How can there be a league,
 Before God and His Apostle,
 With the Pagans, except those
 With whom ye made a treaty
 Near the Sacred Mosque?
 As long as these stand true
 To you, stand ye true to them:
 For God doth love the righteous.

8. How (can there be such a league),
 Seeing that if they get an advantage
 Over you, they respect not
 In you the ties either of kinship

[p. 441]

Or of covenant? With (fair words
 From) their mouths they entice you,
 But their hearts are averse
 From you; and most of them
 Are rebellious and wicked.

9. The Signs of God have they sold
 For a miserable price,
 And (many) have they hindered
 From His Way: evil indeed
 Are the deeds they have done.

10. In a Believer they respect not
 The ties either of kinship
 Or of covenant! It is they
 Who have transgressed all bounds.

11. But (even so), if they repent,
 Establish regular prayers,
 And practise regular charity,--
 They are your brethren in Faith:
 (Thus) do We explain the Signs
 in detail, for those who understand.

12. But if they violate their oaths
 After their covenant,
 And taunt you for your Faith,--
 Fight ye the chiefs of Unfaith:
 For their oaths are nothing to them:
 That thus they may be restrained.

13. Will ye not fight people
 Who violated their oaths,

[p. 442]

Plotted to expel the Apostle,
 And took the aggressive
 By being the first (to assault) you?
 Do ye fear them? Nay,
 It is God Whom ye should
 More justly fear, if ye believe!

14. Fight them, and God will
 Punish them by your hands,
 Cover them with shame,
 Help you (to victory) over them,
 Heal the breasts of Believers,

15. And still the indignation of their hearts!
 For God will turn (in mercy)
 To whom He will; and God
 Is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

16. Or think ye that ye
 Shall be abandoned,
 As though God did not know'
 Those among you who strive
 With might and main, and take
 None for friends and protectors
 Except God, His Apostle,
 And the (community of) Believers?
 But God is well-acquainted
 With (all) that ye do.

[p. 443]

  

SECTION 3.

17. It is not for such
 As join gods with God,
 To visit or maintain
 The mosques of God
 While they witness
 Against their own souls
 To infidelity. The works
 Of such bear no fruit:
 In Fire shall they dwell.

18. The mosques of God
 Shall be visited and maintained
 By such as believe in God
 And the Last Day, establish
 Regular prayers, and practise
 Regular charity, and fear
 None (at all) except God.
 It is they who are expected
 To be on true guidance!

19. Do ye make the giving
 Of drink to pilgrims,

[p. 444]

Or the maintenance of
 The Sacred Mosque, equal
 To (the pious service of) those
 Who believe in God
 And the Last Day, and strive
 With might and main
 In the cause of God?
 They are not comparable
 In the sight of God:
 And God guides not
 Those who do wrong.

20. Those who believe, and suffer
 Exile and strive with might
 And main, in God's cause,
 With their goods and their persons,
 Have the highest rank
 In the sight of God:
 They are the people
 Who will achieve (salvation).

21. Their Lord doth give them
 Glad tidings of a Mercy
 From Himself, of His good pleasure,
 And of Gardens for them,
 Wherein are delights
 That endure:

22. They will dwell therein
 For ever. Verily in God's presence
 Is a reward, the greatest (of all).

23. O ye who believe! Take not
 For protectors your fathers
 And your brothers if they love
 Infidelity above Faith:

[p. 445]

If any of you do so,
 They do wrong.

24. Say; If it be that your fathers,
 Your sons, your brothers,
 Your mates, or your kindred;
 The wealth that ye have gained;
 The commerce in which ye fear
 A decline: or the dwellings
 In which ye delight--
 Are dearer to you than God,
 Or His Apostle, or the striving
 In His cause;--then wait
 Until God brings about
 His Decision: and God
 Guides not the rebellious.

  

SECTION 4.

25. Assuredly God did help you
 In many battle-fields
 And on the day of Hunain:
 Behold! your great numbers
 Elated you, but they availed
 You naught: the land,
 For all that it is wide,
 Did. constrain you, and ye

[p. 446]

Turned back in retreat.

26. But God did pour His calm
 On the Apostle and on the Believers,
 And sent down forces which ye
 Saw not: He punished
 The Unbelievers: thus doth He
 Reward those without Faith.

27. Again will God, after this,
 Turn (in mercy) to whom
 He will: for God
 Is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.

28. O ye who believe! Truly
 The Pagans are unclean;
 So let them not,
 After this year of theirs,

[p. 447]

Approach the Sacred Mosque.
 And if ye fear poverty,
 Soon will God enrich you,
 If He wills, out of His bounty,
 For God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

29. Fight those who believe not
 In God nor the Last Day,
 Nor hold that forbidden
 Which hath been forbidden
 By God and His Apostle,
 Nor acknowledge the Religion
 Of Truth, (even if they are)
 Of the People of the Book,
 Until they pay the Jizya
 With willing submission,
 And feel themselves subdued.

[p. 448]

  

SECTION 5.

30. The Jews call 'Uzair a son
 Of God, and the Christians
 Call Christ the Son of God.
 That is a saying from their mouth;
 (In this) they but imitate
 What the Unbelievers of old
 Used to say. God's curse
 Be on them: how they are deluded
 Away from the Truth!

31. They take their priests
 And their anchorites to be
 Their lords in derogation of God,
 And (they take as their Lord)
 Christ the son of Mary;
 Yet they were commanded
 To worship but One God:
 There is no god but He.
 Praise and glory to Him
 (Far is He) from having
 The partners they associate
 (With Him).

[p. 449]

32. Fain would they extinguish
 God's Light with their mouths,
 But God will not allow
 But that His Light should be
 Perfected, even though the Unbelievers
 May detest (it).

33. It is He Who hath sent
 His Apostle with Guidance
 And the Religion of Truth,
 To proclaim it
 Over all religion,
 Even though the Pagans
 May detest (it).

34. O ye who believe! There are
 Indeed many among the priests
 And anchorites, who in falsehood
 Devour the substance of men
 And hinder (them) from the Way
 Of God. And there are those
 Who bury gold and silver
 And spend it not in the Way.
 Of God: announce unto them
 A most grievous penalty--

[p. 450]

35. On the Day when heat
 Will be produced out of
 That (wealth) in the fire
 Of Hell, and with it will be
 Branded their foreheads,
 Their flanks, and their backs.
 --"This is the (treasure) which ye
 Buried for yourselves: taste ye,
 Then, the (treasures) ye buried!"

36. The number of months
 In the sight of God
 Is twelve (in a year)
 So ordained by Him
 The day He created
 The heavens and the earth;
 Of them four are sacred:
 That is the straight usage.
 So wrong not yourselves
 Therein, and fight the Pagans

[p. 451]

All together as they
 Fight you all together.
 But know that God
 Is with those who restrain
 Themselves.

37. Verily the transposing
 (Of a prohibited month)
 Is an addition to Unbelief:
 The Unbelievers are led
 To wrong thereby: for they make
 It lawful one year,
 And forbidden another year,
 In order to adjust the number
 Of months forbidden by God
 And make such forbidden ones
 Lawful. The evil of their course
 Seems pleasing to them.
 But God guideth not
 Those who reject Faith.

  

SECTION 6.

38. O ye who believe! what
 Is the matter with you,
 That, when ye are asked
 To go forth in the Cause of God,
 Ye cling heavily to the earth?
 Do ye prefer the life
 Of this world to the Hereafter?
 But little is the comfort
 Of this life, as compared
 With the Hereafter.

[p. 452]

39. Unless ye go forth,
 He will punish you
 With a grievous penalty,
 And put others in your place;
 But Him ye would not harm
 In the least. For God
 Hath power over all things.

40. If ye help not (your Leader),
 (it is no matter): for God
 Did indeed help him,
 When the Unbelievers
 Drove him out: he had
 No more than one companion:
 They two were in the Cave,
 And he said to his companion,
 "Have no fear, for God
 Is with us": then God
 Sent down His peace upon him,
 And strengthened him with forces
 Which ye saw not, and humbled
 To the depths the word
 Of the Unbelievers.
 But the word of God
 Is exalted to the heights:
 For God is Exalted in might, Wise

[p. 453]

41. Go ye forth, (whether equipped)
 Lightly or heavily, and strive
 And struggle, with your goods
 And your persons, in the Cause
 Of God. That is best
 For you, if ye (but) knew.

42. If there had been
 Immediate gain (in sight),
 And the journey easy,
 They would (all) without doubt
 Have followed thee, but
 The distance was long,
 (And weighed) on them.
 They would indeed swear
 By God, "If we only could,
 We should certainly
 Have come out with you:"
 They would destroy their own souls; 
 For God doth know
 That they are certainly lying.

[p. 454]

  

SECTION 7.

43. God give thee grace! Why
 Didst thou grant them exemption
 Until those who told the truth
 Were seen by thee in a clear light,
 And thou hadst proved the liars?

44. Those who believe in God
 And the Last Day ask thee
 For no exemption from fighting
 With their goods and persons.
 And God knoweth well
 Those who do their duty.

45. Only those ask thee for exemption
 Who believe not in God
 And the Last Day, and
 Whose hearts are in doubt,
 So that they are tossed
 In their doubts to and fro.

46. If they had intended
 To come out, they would
 Certainly have made
 Some preparation therefor;
 But God was averse
 To their being sent forth;
 So He made them lag behind,
 And they were told,
 "Sit ye among those
 Who sit (inactive)."

47. If they had come out
 With you, they would not

[p. 455]

Have added to your (strength)
 But only (made for) disorder,
 Hurrying to and fro in your midst
 And sowing sedition among you,
 And there would have been
 Some among you
 Who would have listened to them.
 But God knoweth well
 Those who do wrong.

48. Indeed they had plotted
 Sedition before, and upset
 Matters for thee,--until
 The Truth arrived, and the Decree
 Of God became manifest,
 Much to their disgust.

49. Among them is (many) a man
 Who says: "Grant me exemption
 And draw me not.
 Into trial." Have they not
 Fallen into trial already?
 And indeed Hell surrounds
 The Unbelievers (on all sides).

50. If good befalls thee,
 It grieves them; but if
 A misfortune befalls thee,
 They say, "We took indeed
 Our precautions beforehand,"
 And they turn away rejoicing.

[p. 456]

51. Say: "Nothing will happen to us
 Except what God has decreed
 For us: He is our Protector":
 And on God let the Believers
 Put their trust.

52. Say: "Can you expect for us
 (Any fate) other than one
 Of two glorious things--
 (Martyrdom or victory)?
 But we can expect for you
 Either that God will send
 His punishment from Himself,
 Or by our hands. So wait
 (Expectant); we too
 Will wait with you."

53. Say: "Spend (for the Cause)
 Willingly or unwillingly:
 Not from you will it be
 Accepted: for ye are indeed
 A people rebellious and wicked."

54. The only reasons why
 Their contributions are not
 Accepted are: that they reject
 God and His Apostle;
 That they come to prayer
 Without earnestness; and that
 They offer contributions unwillingly.

55. Let not their wealth rats
 Nor their (following in) sons

[p. 457]

Dazzle thee: in reality
 God's Plan is to punish them
 With these things in this life,
 And that their souls may perish
 In their (very) denial of God.

56. They swear by God
 That they are indeed
 Of you; but they are not
 Of you: yet they are afraid
 (To appear in their true colours).

57. If they could find
 A place to flee to,
 Or caves, or a place
 Of concealment, they would
 Turn straightway thereto,
 With an obstinate rush.

58. And among them are men
 Who slander thee in the matter
 Of (the distribution of) the alms:
 If they are given part thereof,
 They are pleased, but if not,
 Behold! they are indignant!

59. If only they had been content
 With what God and His Apostle
 Gave them, and had said,
 "Sufficient unto us is God!
 God and His Apostle will soon
 Give us of His bounty:
 To God do we turn our hopes!"
 (That would have been the right course).

[p. 458]

  

SECTION 8.

60. Alms are for the poor
 And the needy, and those
 Employed to administer the (funds);
 For those whose hearts
 Have been (recently) reconciled
 (To Truth); for those in bondage
 And in debt; in the cause
 Of God; and for the wayfarer:
 (Thus is it) ordained by God,
 And God is full of knowledge
 And wisdom.

61. Among them are men
 Who molest the Prophet
 And say, "He is (all) ear."
 Say, "He listens to what is
 Best for you: he believes
 In God, has faith
 In the Believers, and is a Mercy
 To those of you who believe."
 But those who molest the Apostle
 Will have a grievous penalty.

62. To you they swear by God.
 In order to please you:
 But it is more fitting
 That they should please
 God and His Apostle,
 If they are Believers.

[p. 459]

63. Know they not that for those
 Who oppose God and His Apostle,
 Is the Fire of Hell?--
 Wherein they shall dwell.
 That is the supreme disgrace.

64. The Hypocrites are afraid
 Lest a Sura should be sent down
 About them, showing them what
 Is (really passing) in their hearts.
 Say: "Mock ye! But verily
 God will bring to light all
 That ye fear (should be revealed).

65. If thou dost question them,
 They declare (with emphasis):
 "We were only talking idly
 And in play." Say: "Was it
 At God, and His Signs,
 And His Apostle, that ye
 Were mocking?"

66. Make ye no excuses:
 Ye have rejected Faith
 After ye had accepted it.
 If We pardon some of you,
 We will punish others amongst you,
 For that they are in sin.

  

SECTION 9.

67. The Hypocrites, men and women,
 (Have an understanding) with each other:

[p. 460]

They enjoin evil, and forbid
 What is just, and are close
 With their hands. They have
 Forgotten God; so He
 Hath forgotten them. Verily
 The Hypocrites are rebellious
 And perverse.

68. God hath promised the Hypocrites
 Men and women, and the rejecters,
 Of Faith, the fire of Hell:
 Therein shall they dwell:
 Sufficient is it for them:
 For them is the curse of God,
 And an enduring punishment,--

69. As in the case of those
 Before you: they were
 Mightier than you in power,
 And more flourishing in wealth
 And children. They had
 Their enjoyment of their portion:
 And ye have of yours, as did
 Those before you; and ye
 Indulge in idle talk
 As they did. They!--
 Their works are fruitless
 In this world and in the Hereafter,
 And they will lose
 (All spiritual good).

70. Hath not the story reached them
 Of those before them?--
 The people of Noah, and 'Ad,
 And Thamud; the people

[p. 461]

Of Abraham, the men
 Of Midian, and the Cities overthrown.
 To them came their apostles
 With Clear Signs. It is
 Not God Who wrongs them,
 But they wrong their own souls.

71. The Believers, men
 And women, are protectors,
 One of another: they enjoin
 What is just, and forbid
 What is evil: they observe
 Regular prayers, practise
 Regular charity, and obey
 God and His Apostle.
 On them will God pour
 His mercy: for God
 Is Exalted in power, Wise:

72. God hath promised to Believers,
 Men and women, Gardens
 Under which rivers flow,
 To dwell therein,
 And beautiful mansions
 In Gardens of everlasting bliss.
 But the greatest bliss
 Is the Good Pleasure of God:
 That is the supreme felicity.

[p. 462]

  

SECTION 10.

73. O Prophet! strive hard against
 The Unbelievers and the Hypocrites,
 And be firm against them.
 Their abode is Hell,--
 An evil refuge indeed.

74. They swear by God that they
 Said nothing (evil), but indeed
 They uttered blasphemy,
 And they did it after accepting
 Islam; and they meditated
 A plot which they were unable
 To carry out: this revenge
 Of theirs was (their) only return
 For the bounty with which
 God and His Apostle had enriched
 Them! If they repent,
 It will be best for them;
 But if they turn back
 (To their evil ways),
 God will punish them
 With a grievous penalty
 In this life and in the Hereafter:
 They shall have none on earth
 To protect or help them.

75. Amongst them are men
 Who made a Covenant with God,
 That if He bestowed on them
 Of His bounty, they would give
 (Largely) in charity, and be truly
 Amongst those who are righteous.

[p. 463]

76. But when He did bestow
 Of His bounty, they became
 Covetous, and turned back
 (From their Covenant), averse
 (From its fulfilment).

77. So He hath put as a consequence
 Hypocrisy into their hearts,
 (To last) till the Day whereon
 They shall meet Him: because
 They broke their Covenant
 With God, and because they
 Lied (again and again).

78. Know they not that God
 Doth know their secret (thoughts)
 And their secret counsels,
 And that God knoweth well
 All things unseen?

79. Those who slander such
 Of the Believers as give themselves
 Freely to (deeds of) charity,
 As well as such as can find
 Nothing to give except
 The fruits of their labour,--
 And throw ridicule on them,--
 God will throw back

[p. 464]

Their ridicule on them:
 And they shall have
 A grievous penalty.

80. Whether thou ask
 For their forgiveness,
 Or not, (their sin is unforgivable):
 If thou ask seventy times
 For their forgiveness, God
 Will not forgive them:
 Because they have rejected
 God and His Apostle: and God
 Guideth not those
 Who are perversely rebellious.

  

SECTION 11.

81. Those who were left behind
 (In the Tabuk expedition)
 Rejoiced in their inaction
 Behind the back of the Apostle
 Of God: they hated to strive
 And fight, with their goods
 And their persons, in the Cause
 Of God: they said,
 "Go not forth in the heat."
 Say, "The fire of Hell
 Is fiercer in heat." If
 Only they could understand!

82. Let them laugh a little:
 Much will they weep:

[p. 465]

A recompense for the (evil)
 That they do.

83. If, then, God bring thee back
 To any of them, and they ask
 Thy permission to come out
 (With thee), say: "Never shall ye
 Come out with me, nor fight
 An enemy with me:
 For ye preferred to sit
 Inactive on the first occasion:
 Then sit ye (now)
 With those who lag behind."

84. Nor do thou ever pray
 For any of them that dies,
 Nor stand at his grave;
 For they rejected God
 And His Apostle, and died
 In a state of perverse rebellion.

85. Nor let their wealth
 Nor their (following in) sons
 Dazzle thee: God's Plan
 Is to punish them
 With these things in this world,
 And that their souls may perish
 In their (very) denial of God.

[p. 466]

86. When a Sura comes down,
 Enjoining them to believe
 In God and to strive and fight
 Along with His Apostle,
 Those with wealth and influence
 Among them ask thee
 For exemption, and say:
 "Leave us (behind): we
 Would be with those
 Who sit (at home)."

87. They prefer to be with (the women),
 Who remain behind (at home):
 Their hearts are sealed
 And so they understand not.

88. But the Apostle, and those
 Who believe with him,
 Strive and fight with their wealth
 And their persons: for them
 Are (all) good things:
 And it is they
 Who will prosper.

89. God hath prepared for them
 Gardens under which rivers flow,

[p. 467]

To dwell therein:
 That is the supreme felicity.

  

SECTION 12.

90. And there were, among
 The desert Arabs (also),
 Men who made excuses
 And came to claim exemption;
 And those who were false
 To God and His Apostle
 (Merely) sat inactive.
 Soon will a grievous penalty
 Seize the Unbelievers
 Among them.

91. There is no blame
 On those who are infirm,

[p. 468]

Or ill, or who find
 No resources to spend
 (On the Cause), if they
 Are sincere (in duty) to God
 And His Apostle:
 No ground (of complaint)
 Can there be against such
 As do right: and God
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

92. Nor (is there blame)
 On those who came to thee
 To be provided with mounts,
 And when thou saidst,
 "I can find no mounts
 For you, "they turned back,
 Their eyes streaming with tears
 Of grief that they had
 No resources wherewith
 To provide the expenses.

93. The ground (of complaint)
 Is against such as claim
 Exemption while they are rich.
 They prefer to stay
 With the (women) who remain
 Behind: God hath sealed
 Their hearts; so they know not
 (What they miss).

[p. 469]

94. They will present their excuses
 To you when ye return
 To them. Say thou: "Present
 No excuses: we shall not
 Believe you: God hath already
 Informed us of the true state
 Of matters concerning you:
 It is your actions that God
 And His Apostle will observe:
 In the end will ye
 Be brought back to Him
 Who knoweth what is hidden
 And what is open:
 Then will He show you
 The truth of all
 That ye did."

95. They will swear to you by God,
 When ye return to them,
 That ye may leave them alone.
 So leave them alone:
 For they are an abomination,
 And Hell is their dwelling-place,--
 A fitting recompense
 For the (evil) that they did.

96. They will swear unto you,
 That ye may be pleased with them,
 But if ye are pleased with them,
 God is not pleased
 With those who disobey.

97. The Arabs of the desert
 Are the worst in unbelief
 And hypocrisy, and most fitted
 To be in ignorance
 Of the command which God
 Hath sent down to His Apostle:
 But God is All-Knowing,
 All-Wise.

98. Some of the desert Arabs
 Look upon their payments

[p. 470]

As a fine, and watch
 For disasters for you: on them
 Be the disaster of Evil:
 For God is He that heareth
 And knoweth (all things).

99. But some of the desert Arabs
 Believe in God and the Last Day,
 And look on their payments
 As pious gifts bringing them
 Nearer to God and obtaining
 The prayers of the Apostle.
 Aye, indeed they bring them
 Nearer (to Him): soon will God
 Admit them to His Mercy:
 For God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 13.

100. The vanguard (of Islam)--
 The first of those who forsook
 (Their homes) and of those
 Who gave them aid, and (also)
 Those who follow them
 In (all) good deeds,--
 Well-pleased is God with them,
 As are they with Him:

[p. 471]

For them hath He prepared
 Gardens under which rivers flow,
 To dwell therein for ever:
 That is the supreme Felicity.

101. Certain of the desert Arabs
 Round about you are Hypocrites,
 As well as (desert Arabs) among
 The Medina folk: they are
 Obstinate in hypocrisy: thou
 Knowest them not: We know them:
 Twice shall We punish them:
 And in addition shall they be
 Sent to a grievous Penalty.

102. Others (there are who) have
 Acknowledged their wrong-doings:
 They have mixed an act
 That was good with another
 That was evil. Perhaps God
 Will turn unto them (in mercy):
 For God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

103. Of their goods take alms,
 That so thou mightest
 Purify and sanctify them;
 And pray on their behalf.
 Verily thy prayers are a source
 Of security for them:
 And God is One
 Who heareth and knoweth.

[p. 472]

104. Know they not that God
 Doth accept repentance from
 His votaries and receives
 Their gifts of charity, and that
 God is verily He,
 The Oft-Returning, Most Merciful?

105. And say: "Work (righteousness):
 Soon will God observe your work,
 And His Apostle, and the Believers:
 Soon will ye be brought back
 To the Knower of what is
 Hidden and what is open:
 Then will He show you
 The truth of all that ye did."

106. There are (yet) others,
 Held in suspense for the command
 Of God, whether He will
 Punish them, or turn in mercy
 To them: and God
 Is All-Knowing, Wise.

107. And there are those
 Who put up a mosque

[p. 473]

By way of mischief and infidelity--
 To disunite the Believers
 And in preparation for one
 Who warred against God
 And His Apostle aforetime.
 They will indeed swear
 That their intention is nothing
 But good; but God doth declare
 That they are certainly liars.

108. Never stand thou forth therein.
 There is a mosque whose foundation
 Was laid from the first day
 On piety; it is more worthy
 Of thy standing forth (for prayer)
 Therein. In it are men who
 Love to be purified; and God
 Loveth those who make themselves pure.

109. Which then is best?--he that
 Layeth his foundation
 On piety to God
 And His Good Pleasure?--or he
 That layeth his foundation
 On an undermined sand-cliff
 Ready to crumble to pieces?
 And it doth crumble to pieces
 With him, into the fire
 Of Hell. And God guideth not
 People that do wrong.

110. The foundation of those
 Who so build is never free

[p. 474]

From suspicion and shakiness
 In their hearts, until
 Their hearts are cut to pieces.
 And God is All-Knowing, Wise.

  

SECTION 14.

111. God hath purchased of the Believers
 Their persons and their goods;
 For theirs (in return)
 Is the Garden (of Paradise):
 They fight in His Cause,
 And slay and are slain:
 A promise binding on Him
 In Truth, through the Law,
 The Gospel, and the Qur-an:
 And who is more faithful
 To his Covenant than God?
 Then rejoice in the bargain
 Which ye have concluded:
 That is the achievement supreme.

[p. 475]

112. Those that turn (to God)
 In repentance; that serve Him,
 And praise Him; that wander
 In devotion to the Cause of God;
 That bow down and prostrate themselves
 In prayer; that enjoin good
 And forbid evil; and observe
 The limits set by God;--
 (These do rejoice). So proclaim
 The glad tidings to the Believers.

113. It is not fitting,
 For the Prophet and those
 Who believe, that they should
 Pray for forgiveness
 For Pagans, even though
 They be of kin, after it is
 Clear to them that they
 Are companions of the Fire.

114. And Abraham prayed
 For his father's forgiveness
 Only because of a promise
 He had made to him.
 But when it became clear
 To him that he was
 An enemy to God, he
 Dissociated himself from him:
 For Abraham was most
 Tender-hearted, forbearing.

115. And God will not mislead
 A people after He hath

[p. 476]

Guided them, in order that
 He may make clear to them
 What to fear (and avoid)--
 For God hath knowledge
 Of all things.

116. Unto God belongeth
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth. He giveth life
 And He taketh it. Except for Him
 Ye have no protector
 Nor helper.

117. God turned with favour
 To the Prophet, the Muhajirs,
 And the Ansar,--who followed
 Him in a time of distress,
 After that the hearts of a part
 Of them had nearly swerved
 (From duty); but He turned
 To them (also): for He is
 Unto them Most Kind,
 Most Merciful.

118. (He turned in mercy also)
 To the three who were left
 Behind; (they felt guilty)
 To such a degree that the earth

[p. 477]

Seemed constrained to them,
 For all its speciousness,
 And their (very) Souls seemed
 Straitened to them,
 And they perceived that
 There is no fleeing from God
 (And no refuge) but to Himself.
 Then He turned to them,
 That they might repent:
 For God is Oft-Returning,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 15.

119. O ye who believe! Fear God
 And be with those
 Who are true (in word and deed).

120. It was not fitting
 For the people of Medina
 And the Bedouin Arabs
 Of the neighbourhood, to refuse
 To follow God's Apostle,
 Nor to prefer their own lives
 To his: because nothing
 Could they suffer or do,
 But was reckoned to their credit
 As a deed of righteousness,--
 Whether they suffered thirst,
 Or fatigue, or hunger, in the Cause
 Of God, or trod paths
 To raise the ire of the Unbelievers,
 Or received any injury

[p. 478]

Whatever from an enemy:
 For God suffereth not
 The reward to be lost
 Of those who do good;--

121, Nor could they spend anything
 (For the Cause)--small or great--
 Nor cut across a valley,
 But the deed is inscribed
 To their credit; that God
 May requite their deed
 With the best (possible reward).

122. Nor should the Believers
 All go forth together:
 If a contingent
 From every expedition
 Remained behind,
 They could devote themselves
 To studies in religion,
 And admonish the people
 When they return to them,--
 That thus they (may learn)
 To guard themselves (against evil)

  

SECTION 16.

123. O ye who believe! Fight
 The Unbelievers who gird you about,
 And let them find firmness
 In you: and know that God
 Is with those who fear Him.

[p. 479]

124. Whenever there cometh down'
 A Sura, some of them say:
 "Which of you has had
 His faith increased by it?"
 Yea, those who believe,--
 Their faith is increased,
 And they do rejoice.

125. But those in whose hearts
 Is a disease,--it will add doubt
 To their doubt, and they will die
 In a state of Unbelief.

126. See they not that they
 Are tried every year
 Once or twice? Yet they
 Turn not in repentance,
 And they take no heed.

127. Whenever there cometh down
 A Sura, they look at each other,
 (Saying), "Doth anyone see you?"
 Then they turn aside:
 God hath turned their hearts
 (From the light); for they
 Are a people that understand not.

128. Now hath come unto you
 An Apostle from amongst

[p. 480]

Yourselves: it grieves him
 That ye should perish:
 Ardently anxious is he
 Over you: to the Believers
 Is he most kind and merciful.

129. But if they turn away,
 Say: "God sufficeth me:
 There is no god but He:
 On Him is my trust,
 He the Lord of the Throne
 (Of Glory) Supreme!

[p. 481] [p. 482]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 483]

  

Sura X.

  

Yunus, or Jonah.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. A. L. R.
 These are the Ayats
 Of the Book of Wisdom.

2. Is it a matter
 Of wonderment to men
 That We have sent
 Our inspiration to a man
 From among themselves?--
 That he should warn mankind
 (Of their danger), and give
 The good news to the Believers
 That they have before their Lord
 The lofty rank of Truth.
 (But) say the Unbelievers:
 "This is indeed
 An evident sorcerer!"

3. Verily your Lord is God,
 Who created the heavens
 And the earth in six Days,

[p. 484]

And is firmly established
 On the Throne (of authority),
 Regulating and governing all things.
 No intercessor (can plead with Him)
 Except after His leave
 (Hath been obtained). This
 Is God your Lord; Him therefore
 Serve ye: will ye not
 Receive admonition?

4. To Him will be your return--
 Of all of you. The promise
 Of God is true and sure.
 It is He who beginneth
 The process of creation,
 And repeateth it, that He
 May reward with justice
 Those who believe
 And work righteousness;
 But those who reject Him
 Will have draughts
 Of boiling fluids,
 And a Penalty grievous,
 Because they did reject Him.

5. It is He who made the sun
 To be a shining glory

[p. 485]

And the moon to be a light
 (Of beauty), and measured out
 Stages for her; that ye might
 Know the number of years
 And the count (of time).
 Nowise did God create this
 But in truth and righteousness.
 (Thus) doth He explain His Signs
 In detail, for those who understand.

6. Verily, in the alternation
 Of the Night and the Day,
 And in all that God
 Hath created, in the heavens
 And the earth, are Signs
 For those who fear Him.

7. Those who rest not their hope
 On their meeting with Us,
 But are pleased and satisfied
 With the life of the Present,
 And those who heed not
 Our Signs,--

8. Their abode is the Fire,
 Because of the (evil)
 They earned.

9. Those who believe,
 And work righteousness,--
 Their Lord will guide them
 Because of their Faith:

[p. 486]

Beneath them will flow
 Rivers in Gardens of Bliss.

10. (This will be) their cry therein:
 "Glory to Thee, O God!"
 And "Peace" will be their greeting therein!
 And the close of their cry
 Will be: "Praise be to God,
 The Cherisher and Sustainer.
 Of the Worlds!"

  

SECTION 2.

11. If God were to hasten for men
 The ill (they have earned)
 As they would fain hasten on
 The good,--then would
 Their respite be settled at once.
 But We leave those
 Who rest not their hope
 On their meeting with Us,
 In their trespasses, wandering
 In distraction to and fro.

12. When trouble toucheth a man,
 He crieth unto Us
 (In all postures)--lying down 
 On his side, or sitting,
 Or standing. But when We
 Have solved his trouble,
 He passeth on his way as if
 He had never cried to Us
 For a trouble that touched him!
 Thus do the deeds of transgressors
 Seem fair in their eyes!

[p. 487]

13. Generations before you
 We destroyed when they
 Did wrong: their Apostles
 Came to them with Clear Signs,
 But they would not believe!
 Thus do We requite
 Those who sin!

14. Then We made you heirs
 In the land after them,
 To see how ye would behave!

15. But when Our Clear Signs
 Are rehearsed unto them,
 Those who rest not their hope
 On their meeting with Us,
 Say: "Bring us a Reading
 Other than this, or change this,"
 Say: "It is not for me,
 Of my own accord,
 To change it: I follow
 Naught but what is revealed
 Unto me: if I were
 To disobey my Lord,
 I should myself fear the Penalty
 Of a Great Day (to come)."

16. Say: "If God had so willed,
 I should not have rehearsed it
 To you, nor whould He
 Have made it known to you.
 A whole life-time before this
 Have I tarried amongst you:
 Will ye not then understand?

[p. 488]

17. Who doth more wrong
 Than such as forge a lie
 Against God, or deny
 His Signs? But never
 Will prosper those who sin.

18. They serve, besides God,
 Things that hurt them not
 Nor profit them, and they say:
 "These are our intercessors
 With God." Say: "Do ye
 Indeed inform God of something
 He knows not, in the heavens
 Or on earth?--Glory to Him!
 And far is He above the partners
 They ascribe (to Him)!"

19. Mankind was but one nation,
 But differed (later). Had it not
 Been for a Word
 That went forth before
 From thy Lord, their differences
 Would have been settled
 Between them.

20. They say: "Why is not
 A Sign sent down to him
 From his Lord?" Say:
 "The Unseen is only
 For God (to know).
 Then wait ye: I too

[p. 489]

Will wait with you.

  

SECTION 3.

21. When We make mankind
 Taste of some mercy after
 Adversity hath touched them,
 Behold! they take to plotting
 Against Our Signs! Say:
 "Swifter to plan is God!"
 Verily, Our messengers record
 All the plots that ye make!

22. He it is who enableth you
 To traverse through land
 And sea; so that ye even board
 Ships;--they sail with them
 With a favourable wind,
 And they rejoice thereat;
 Then comes a stormy wind
 And the waves come to them
 From all sides, and they think
 They are being overwhelmed:
 They cry unto God, sincerely
 Offering (their) duty unto Him,
 Saying, "If Thou dost deliver us
 From this, we shall truly

[p. 490]

Show our gratitude!"

23. But when he delivereth them,
 Behold! they transgress
 Insolently through the earth
 In defiance of right!
 O mankind! your insolence
 Is against your own souls,--
 An enjoyment of the life
 Of the Present: in the end,
 To Us is your return,
 And We shall show you
 The truth of all that ye did.

24. The likeness of the life
 Of the Present is
 As the rain which We
 Send down from the skies:
 By its mingling arises
 The produce of the earth--
 Which provides food
 For men and animals:
 (It grows) till the earth
 Is clad with its golden
 Ornaments and is decked out
 (In beauty): the people to whom
 It belongs think they have
 All powers of disposal over it:
 There reaches it Our command
 By night or by day,
 And We make it
 Like a harvest clean-mown,
 As if it had not flourished

[p. 491]

Only the day before!
 Thus do We explain
 The Signs in detail
 For those who reflect.

25. But God doth call
 To the Home of Peace:
 He doth guide whom He pleaseth
 To a Way that is straight.

26. To those who do right
 Is a goodly (reward)--
 Yea, more (than in measure)!
 No darkness nor shame
 Shall cover their faces!
 They are Companions of the Garden;
 They will abide therein
 (For aye)!

27. But those who have earned
 Evil will have a reward
 Of like evil: ignominy
 Will cover their (faces):
 No defender will they have
 From (the wrath of) God:
 Their faces will be covered,
 As it were, with pieces
 From the depth of the darkness
 Of Night: they are Companions

[p. 492]

Of the Fire: they will
 Abide therein (for aye)!

28. One Day shall We gather them
 All together. Then shall We say
 To those who joined gods (with Us):
 "To your place! ye and those
 Ye joined as "partners"."
 We shall separate them,
 And their "partners" shall say:
 "It was not us
 That ye worshipped!

29. "Enough is God for a witness
 Between us and you: we
 Certainly knew nothing
 Of your worship of us!"

30. There will every soul prove
 (The fruits of) the deeds
 It sent before : they will
 Be brought back to God
 Their rightful Lord,
 And their invented falsehoods
 Will leave them in the lurch.

  

SECTION 4.

31. Say: "Who is it that
 Sustains you (in life)
 From the sky and from the earth?

[p. 493]

Or who is it that
 Has power over hearing
 And sight? And who
 Is it that brings out
 The living from the dead
 And the dead from the living?
 And who is it that
 Rules and regulates all affairs?"
 They will soon say, "God".
 Say, "Will ye not then
 Show piety (to Him)?"

32. Such is God, your real
 Cherisher and Sustainer:
 Apart from Truth,
 What (remains) but error?
 How then are ye turned away?

33. Thus is the Word
 Of thy Lord proved true
 Against those who rebel:
 Verily they will not believe.

34. Say: "Of your 'partners',
 Can any originate creation
 And repeat it?" Say:
 "It is God Who originates
 Creation and repeats it: 
 Then how are ye deluded
 Away (from the truth)?"

[p. 494]

35. Say: "Of your "partners"
 Is there any that
 Can give any guidance
 Towards Truth?" Say: "It is God
 Who gives guidance
 Towards Truth. Is then He
 Who gives guidance to Truth
 More worthy to be followed,
 Or he who finds not guidance
 (Himself) unless he is guided?
 What then is the matter
 With you? How judge ye?"

36. But most of them follow
 Nothing but fancy: truly
 Fancy can be of no avail
 Against Truth. Verily God
 Is well aware of all
 That they do.

37. This Qur-an is not such
 As can be produced
 By other than God;
 On the contrary it is
 A confirmation of (revelations)
 That went before it,
 And a fuller explanation
 Of the Book--wherein
 There is no doubt
 From the Lord of the Worlds.

38. Or do they say,
 "He forged it"?
 Say: "Bring then
 A Sura like unto it,
 And call (to your aid)
 Anyone you can,
 Besides God, if it be
 Ye speak the truth!"

[p. 495]

39. Nay, they charge with falsehood
 That whose knowledge they
 Cannot compass, even before
 The elucidation thereof"
 Hath reached them: thus
 Did those before them
 Make charges of falsehood:
 But see what was the end
 Of those who did wrong!

40. Of them there are some
 Who believe therein,
 And some who do not:
 And thy Lord knoweth best
 Those who are out for mischief.

  

SECTION 5.

41. If they charge thee
 With falsehood, say:
 "My work to me,
 And yours to you!

[p. 496]

Ye are free from responsibility
 For what I do, and I
 For what ye do!"

42. Among them are some who
 (Pretend to) listen to thee:
 But canst thou make the deaf
 To hear,--even though
 They are without understanding?

43. And among them are some
 Who look at thee:
 But canst thou guide
 The blind,--even though
 They will not see?

44. Verily God will not deal
 Unjustly with man in aught:
 It is man that wrongs
 His own soul.

45. One day He will
 Gather them together:
 (It will be) as if
 They had tarried
 But an hour of a day:
 They will recognise each other:
 Assuredly those will be lost
 Who denied the meeting
 With God and refused
 To receive true guidance.

46. Whether We show thee
 (Realised in thy life-time)
 Some part of what We
 Promise them,--or We

[p. 497]

Take thy soul (to Our Mercy)
 (Before that),--in any case,
 To Us is their return:
 Ultimately God is witness.
 To all that they do.

47. To every people (was sent)
 An Apostle: when their Apostle
 Comes (before them), the matter
 Will be judged between them
 With justice, and they
 Will not be wronged.

48. They say: "When
 Will this promise
 Come to pass,
 If ye speak the truth?"

49. Say: "I have no power
 Over any harm or profit
 To myself except as God
 Willeth. To every People
 Is a term appointed:
 When their term is reached,
 Not an hour can they cause
 Delay, nor (an hour) can they
 Advance (it in anticipation)."

[p. 498]

50. Say: "Do ye see,
 If His punishment should come
 To you by night or by day,--
 What portion of it
 Would the Sinners
 Wish to hasten?

51. "Would ye then believe in it
 At last, when it actually cometh
 To pass? (It will then be said:)
 'Ah! now? and ye wanted
 (Aforetime) to hasten it on!'

52. "At length will be said
 To the wrong-doers: 'Taste ye
 The enduring punishment!
 Ye get but the recompense
 Of what ye earned!'"

53. They seek to be informed
 By thee: "Is that true?"
 Say: "Aye! by my Lord!
 It is the very truth!
 And ye cannot frustrate it!"

  

SECTION 6.

54. Every soul that hath sinned,
 If it possessed all
 That is on earth,
 Would fain give it in ransom:

[p. 499]

They would declare (their) repentance
 When they see the Penalty:
 But the judgment between them
 Will be with justice,
 And no wrong will be done
 Unto them.

55. Is it not (the case) that to God
 Belongeth whatever is
 In the heavens and on earth?
 Is it not (the case) that
 God's promise is assuredly true?
 Yet most of them understand not.

56. It is He who giveth life
 And who taketh it,
 And to Him shall ye
 All be brought back.

57. O mankind! there hath come
 To you a direction from your Lord
 And a healing for the (diseases)
 In your hearts,--and for those
 Who believe, a Guidance
 And a Mercy.

58. Say: "In the Bounty of God.
 And in His Mercy,--in that
 Let them rejoice": that is better
 Than the (wealth) they hoard.

59. Say: "See ye what things
 God hath sent down to you

[p. 500]

For sustenance? Yet ye
 Hold forbidden some things
 Thereof and (some things) lawful."
 Say: "Hath God indeed
 Permitted you, or do ye invent
 (Things) to attribute to God?"

60. And what think those
 Who invent lies against God,
 Of the Day of Judgment?
 Verily God is full of Bounty
 To mankind, but most
 Of them are ungrateful!"

  

SECTION 7.

61. In whatever business thou
 Mayest be, and whatever portion
 Thou mayest be reciting
 From the Qur-an,--and whatever
 Deed ye (mankind) may be doing,--
 We are Witnesses thereof
 When ye are deeply engrossed
 Therein. Nor is hidden
 From thy Lord (so much as)
 The weight of an atom
 On the earth or in heaven.
 And not the least
 And not the greatest
 Of these things but are recorded
 In a clear Record.

62. Behold! verily on the friends
 Of God there is no fear,

[p. 501]

Nor shall they grieve;

63. Those who believe
 And (constantly) guard
 Against evil;--

64. For them are Glad Tidings,
 In the life of the Present
 And in the Hereafter:
 No change can there be
 In the Words of God.
 This is indeed
 The supreme Felicity.

65. Let not their speech
 Grieve thee: for all power
 And honour belong to God:
 It is He Who heareth
 And knoweth (all things).

66. Behold! verily to God
 Belong all creatures,
 In the heavens and on earth.
 What do they follow
 Who worship as His "partners"
 Other than God? They follow
 Nothing but fancy, and
 They do nothing but lie.

67. He it is that hath
 Made you the Night
 That ye may rest therein,
 And the Day to make
 Things visible (to you).
 Verily in this are Signs
 For those who listen
 (To His Message).

[p. 502]

68. They say, "God hath begotten
 A son!"--Glory be to Him!
 He is Self-Sufficient! His
 Are all things in the heavens
 And on earth! No warrant
 Have ye for this! Say ye
 About God what ye know not?

69. Say: "Those who invent
 A lie against God
 Will never prosper."

70. A little enjoyment
 In this world!--
 And then, to Us
 Will be their return.
 Then shall We make them
 Taste the severest Penalty
 For their blasphemies.

  

SECTION 8.

71. Relate to them the story
 Of Noah. Behold! he said
 To his People: "O my People,
 If it be hard on your (mind)

[p. 503]

That I should stay (with you)
 And commemorate the Signs
 Of God,--yet I put
 My trust in God.
 Get ye then an agreement
 About your plan and among
 Your Partners, so your plan
 Be not to you dark and dubious.
 Then pass your sentence on me,
 And give me no respite.

72. "But if ye turn back, (consider):
 No reward have I asked
 Of you: my reward is only
 Due from God, and I
 Have been commanded to be
 Of those who submit
 To God's Will (in Islam)."

73. They rejected him,
 But We delivered him,
 And those with him,
 In the Ark, and We made
 Them inherit (the earth),
 While We overwhelmed
 In the Flood those
 Who rejected Our Signs.
 Then see what was the end
 Of those who were warned
 (But heeded not)!

74. Then after him We sent
 (Many) apostles to their Peoples:
 They brought them Clear Signs,
 But they would not believe
 What they had already rejected

[p. 504]

Beforehand. Thus do We seal
 The hearts of the transgressors.

75. Then after them sent We
 Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh
 And his chiefs with Our Signs.
 But they were arrogant:
 They were a people in sin.

76. When the Truth did come
 To them from Us, they said:
 "This is indeed evident sorcery!"

77. Said Moses: "Say ye (this)
 About the Truth when
 It hath (actually) reached you?
 Is sorcery (like) this?
 But sorcerers will not prosper."

78. They said: "Hast thou
 Come to us to turn us
 Away from the ways
 We found our fathers following,--
 In order that thou and thy brother
 May have greatness in the land?
 But not we shall believe in you!"

79. Said Pharaoh: "Bring me
 Every sorcerer well versed."

80. When the sorcerers came,
 Moses said to them:
 "Throw ye what ye (wish)
 To throw!"

[p. 505]

81. When they had had their throw,
 Moses said: "What ye
 Have brought is sorcery:
 God will surely make it
 Of no effect: for God
 Prospereth not the work
 Of those who make mischief.

82. "And God by His Words
 Doth prove and establish
 His Truth, however much
 The Sinners may hate it!"

  

SECTION 9.

83. But none believed in Moses
 Except some children of his People,
 Because of the fear of Pharaoh
 And his chiefs, lest they
 Should persecute them; and certainly
 Pharaoh was mighty on the earth
 And one who transgressed all bounds.

84. Moses said: "O my People!
 If ye do (really) believe
 In God, then in Him
 Put your trust if ye
 Submit (your will to His)."

85. They said: "In God
 Do we put our trust.

[p. 506]

Our Lord! make us not
 A trial for those
 Who practise oppression;

86."And deliver us by Thy Mercy
 From those who reject (Thee)."

87. We inspired Moses and his brother
 With this Message: "Provide
 Dwellings for your People
 In Egypt, make your dwellings
 Into places of worship,
 And establish regular prayers:
 And give Glad Tidings
 To those who believe!"

88. Moses prayed: "Our Lord!
 Thou hast indeed bestowed
 On Pharaoh and his Chiefs
 Splendour and wealth in the life
 Of the Present, and so,
 Our Lord, they mislead (men)
 From Thy Path. Deface.
 Our Lord, the features of their wealth,
 And send hardness to their hearts,
 So they will not believe

[p. 507]

Until they see
 The grievous Penalty."

89. God said: "Accepted is
 Your prayer (O Moses and Aaron)
 So stand ye straight,
 And follow not the path
 Of those who know not.

90. We took the Children
 Of Israel across the sea:
 Pharaoh and his hosts followed them
 In insolence and spite.
 At length, when overwhelmed
 With the flood, he said:
 "I believe that there is no god
 Except Him Whom the Children
 Of Israel believe in:
 I am of those who submit
 (To God in Islam)."

91. (It was said to him:)
 "Ah now!--But a little while
 Before, wast thou in rebellion!--
 And thou didst mischief (and violence)!

92. "This day shall We save thee
 In thy body, that thou
 Mayest be a Sign to those
 Who come after thee!
 But verily, many among mankind
 Are heedless of Our Signs!"

[p. 508]

  

SECTION 10.

93. We settled the Children
 Of Israel in a beautiful
 Dwelling-place, and provided
 For them sustenance of the best:
 It was after knowledge had been
 Granted to them, that they
 Fell into schisms. Verily
 God will judge between them
 As to the schisms amongst them,
 On the Day of Judgment.

94. If thou wert in doubt
 As to what We have revealed
 Unto thee, then ask those
 Who have been reading
 The Book from before thee:
 The Truth hath indeed come
 To thee from thy Lord:
 So be in no wise
 Of those in doubt.

95. Nor be of those who reject
 The Signs of God,
 Or thou shalt be of those
 Who perish.

96. Whose against whom the Word
 Of thy Lord hath been verified

[p. 509]

Would not believe--

97. Even if every Sign was brought
 Unto them,--until they see
 (For themselves) the Penalty Grievous.

98. Why was there not
 A single township (among those
 We warned), which believed,--
 So its Faith should have
 Profited it,--except the People
 Of Jonah? When they believed,
 We removed from them
 The Penalty of Ignominy
 In the life of the Present,
 And permitted them to enjoy
 (Their life) for a while.

99. If it had been thy Lord's Will,
 They would all have believed,--
 All who are on earth!
 Wilt thou then compel mankind,

[p. 510]

Against their will, to believe!

100. No soul can believe, except
 By the Will of God,
 And He will place Doubt
 (Or obscurity) on those
 Who will not understand.

101. Say: "Behold all that is
 In the heavens and on earth ";
 But neither Signs nor Warners
 Profit those who believe not.

102. Do they then expect
 (Any thing) but (what happened
 In) the days of the men
 Who passed away before them?
 Say: "Wait ye then:
 For I, too, will wait with you."

[p. 511]

103. In the end We deliver
 Our apostles and those who believe:
 Thus is it fitting on Our part
 That We should deliver
 Those who believe!

  

SECTION 11.

104. Say: "O ye men!
 If ye are in doubt
 As to my religion, (behold!)
 I worship not what ye
 Worship, other than God!
 But I worship God
 Who will take your souls
 (At death): I am commanded
 To be (in the ranks)
 Of the Believers,

105. "And further (thus), "set thy face
 Towards Religion with true piety,
 And never in any wise
 Be of the Unbelievers;

106. "Nor call on any,
 Other than God;--
 Such will neither profit thee
 Nor hurt thee: if thou dost,
 Behold! thou shalt certainly
 Be of those who do wrong."

107. If God do touch thee
 With hurt, there is none
 Can remove it but He:
 If He do design some benefit

[p. 512]

For thee, there is none
 Can keep back His favour:
 He causeth it to reach
 Whomsoever of His servants
 He pleaseth. And He is
 The Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

108. Say: "O ye men! Now
 Truth hath reached you
 From your Lord! Those who receive
 Guidance, do so for the good
 Of their own souls; those
 Who stray, do so to their own loss:
 And I am not (set) over you
 To arrange your affairs."

109. Follow thou the inspiration
 Sent unto thee, and be
 Patient and constant, till God
 Do decide: for He
 Is the Best to decide.

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 513] [p. 514]

  

Sura XI.

  

Hud (The Prophet Hud).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. R.
 (This is) a Book,
 With verses basic or fundamental
 (Of established meaning),
 Further explained in detail,--
 From One Who is Wise
 And Well-Acquainted (with al] things):

2. (It teacheth) that ye should
 Worship none but God.
 (Say:) "Verily I am
 (Sent) unto you from Him
 To warn and to bring
 Glad tidings:

3. "(And to preach thus), "Seek ye
 The forgiveness of your Lord,
 And turn to Him in repentance;
 That He may grant you
 Enjoyment, good (and true),
 For a term appointed,
 And bestow His abounding grace
 On all who abound in merit!
 But if ye turn away,
 Then I fear for you
 The Penalty of a Great Day:

4. "'To God is your return,
 And He hath power
 Over all things.'"

5. Behold! they fold up
 Their hearts, that they may lie
 Hid from Him! Ah! even
 When they cover themselves
 With their garments, He knoweth
 What they conceal, and what
 They reveal: for He knoweth
 Well the (inmost secrets)
 Of the hearts

[p. 515]

6. Where is no moving creature
 On earth but its sustenance
 Dependeth on God: He knoweth
 The time and place of its
 Definite abode and its
 Temporary deposit:
 All is in a clear Record.

7. He it is Who created
 The heavens and the earth
 In six Days--and His Throne
 Was over the Waters--
 That He might try you,
 Which of you is best
 In conduct. But if
 Thou wert to say to them,
 "Ye shall indeed be raised up
 After death", the Unbelievers
 Would be sure to say,
 "This is nothing but
 Obvious sorcery!"

8. If We delay the penalty
 For them for a definite term,
 They are sure to say,
 "What keeps it back?"

[p. 516]

Ah! On the day it (actually)
 Reaches them, nothing will.
 Turn it away from them,
 And they will be completely
 Encircled by that which
 They used to mock at!

  

SECTION 2.

9. If We give man a taste
 Of Mercy from Ourselves,
 And then withdraw it from him,
 Behold! he is in despair
 And (falls into) blasphemy.

10. But if We give hint a taste
 Of (Our) favours after
 Adversity hath touched him,
 He is sure to say,
 "All evil has departed from me:
 Behold! he falls into exultation
 And pride.

11. Not so do those who show
 Patience and constancy, and work
 Righteousness; for them
 Is forgiveness (of sins)
 And a great reward.

12. Perchance thou mayest (feel
 The inclination) to give up
 A part of what is revealed
 Unto thee, and thy heart

[p. 517]

Feeleth straitened lest they say,
 "Why is not a treasure sent down
 Unto him, or why does not
 An angel come down with him?"
 But thou art there only to warn!
 It is God that arrangeth
 All affairs!

13. Or they may say, "He forged it."
 Say, "Bring ye then ten Suras
 Forged, like unto it, and call
 (To your aid) whomsoever
 Ye can, other than God!--
 If ye speak the truth!

14. "If then they (your false gods)
 Answer not your (call),
 Know ye that this Revelation
 Is sent down (replete) with the knowledge
 Of God, and that there is
 No god but He! Will ye
 Even then submit (to Islam)?"

15. Those who desire
 The life of the Present
 And its glitter,--to them
 We shall pay (the price
 Of) their deeds therein,--
 Without diminution.

16. They are those for whom
 There is nothing in the Hereafter
 But the Fire: vain
 Are the designs they frame therein,
 And of no effect
 Are the deeds that they do!

17. Can they be (like) those
 Who accept a Clear (Sign)
 From their Lord, and whom
 A witness from Himself

[p. 518]

Doth teach, as did the Book
 Of Moses before it,--a guide
 And a mercy? They believe
 Therein; but those of the Sects
 That reject it,--the Fire
 Will be their promised
 Meeting-place. Be not then
 In doubt thereon: for it is
 The Truth from thy Lord:
 Yet many among men
 Do not believe!

18. Who doth more wrong
 Than those who invent a lie
 Against God? They will be
 Turned back to the presence
 Of their Lord, and the witnesses
 Will say, "These are the ones
 Who lied against their Lord!
 Behold! the Curse of God
 Is on those who do wrong!--

19. "Those who would hinder (men)
 From the path of God
 And would seek in it
 Something crooked: these were
 They who denied the Hereafter!"

20. They will in no wise
 Frustrate (His design) on earth,
 Nor have they protectors
 Besides God! Their penalty
 Will be doubled! They lost
 The power to hear,
 And they did not see!

21. They are the ones who
 Have lost their own souls:

[p. 519]

And the (fancies) they invented
 Have left them in the lurch!

22. Without a doubt, these
 Are the very ones who
 Will lose most in the Hereafter!

23. But those who believe
 And work righteousness,
 And humble themselves
 Before their Lord,--
 They will be Companions
 Of the Garden, to dwell
 Therein for aye!

24. These two kinds (of men)
 May be compared to
 The blind and deaf,
 And those who can see
 And hear well. Are they
 Equal when compared?
 Will ye not then take heed?

  

SECTION 3.

25. We sent Noah to his People
 (With a mission): "I have come
 To you with a Clear Warning:

26. "That ye serve none but God:
 Verily I do fear for you

[p. 520]

The Penalty of a Grievous Day."

27. But the Chiefs of the Unbelievers
 Among his People said:
 "We see (in) thee nothing
 But a man like ourselves:
 Nor do we see that any
 Follow thee but the meanest
 Among us, in judgment immature:
 Nor do we see in you (all)
 Any merit above us:
 In fact we think ye are liars!"

28. He said: "O my People!
 See ye if (it be that)
 I have a Clear Sign
 From my Lord, and that He
 Hath sent Mercy unto me
 From His own Presence, but
 That the Mercy hath been
 Obscured from your sight?
 Shall we compel you
 To accept it when ye
 Are averse to it?

29. "And O my People!
 I ask you for no wealth

[p. 521]

In return: my reward
 Is from none but God:
 But I will not drive away
 (In contempt) those who believe:
 For verily they are
 To meet their Lord, and ye
 I see are the ignorant ones!

30. "And O my People!
 Who would help me against God
 If I drove them away?
 Will ye not then take heed?

31. "I tell you not that
 With me are the Treasures
 Of God, nor do I know
 What is hidden,
 Nor claim I to be
 An angel. Nor yet
 Do I say, of those whom
 Your eyes do despise
 That God will not grant them
 (All) that is good:
 God knoweth best
 What is in their souls:
 I should, if I did,
 Indeed be a wrong-doer."

32. They said: "O Noah!
 Thou hast disputed with us,

[p. 522]

And (much) hast thou prolonged
 The dispute with us: now
 Bring upon us what thou
 Threatenest us with, if thou
 Speakest the truth!?"

33. He said: "Truly, God
 Will bring it on you
 If He wills,--and then,
 Ye will not be able
 To frustrate it!

34. "Of no profit will be
 My counsel to you,
 Much as I desire
 To give you (good) counsel,
 If it be that God
 Willeth to leave you astray:
 He is your Lord!
 And to Him will ye return!"

35. Or do they say,
 "He has forged it "? Say:
 "If I had forged it,
 On me were my sin!
 And I am free
 Of the sins of which
 Ye are guilty!

[p. 523]

  

SECTION 4.

36. It was revealed to Noah:
 "None of thy People will believe
 Except those who have believed
 Already! So grieve no longer
 Over their (evil) deeds.

37. "But construct an Ark
 Under Our eyes and Our
 Inspiration, and address Me
 No (further) on behalf
 Of those who are in sin:
 For they are about to be
 Overwhelmed (in the Flood)."

38. Forthwith he (starts)
 Constructing the Ark:
 Every time that the Chiefs
 Of his People passed by him,
 They threw ridicule on him.
 He said: "If ye ridicule
 Us now, we (in our turn)
 Can look down on you
 With ridicule likewise!

39. "But soon will ye know
 Who it is on whom
 Will descend a Penalty
 That will cover them

[p. 524]

With shame,--on whom will be
 Unloosed a Penalty lasting:"

40. At length, behold!
 There came Our Command,
 And the fountains of the earth
 Gushed forth! We said:
 "Embark therein, of each kind
 Two, male and female,
 And your family--except
 Those against whom the Word
 Has already gone forth,--
 And the Believers."
 But only a few
 Believed with him.

41. So he said: "Embark ye
 On the Ark,
 In the name of God,
 Whether it move
 Or be at rest!
 For my Lord is, be sure,
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful!"

42. So the Ark floated
 With them on the waves
 (Towering) like mountains,
 And Noah called out
 To his son, who had
 Separated himself (from the rest):
 "O my son! embark
 With us, and be not
 With the Unbelievers!"

[p. 525]

43. The son replied: "I will
 Betake myself to some mountain:
 It will save me from
 The water." Noah said:
 "This day nothing can save,
 From the Command of God,
 Any but those on whom
 He hath mercy!"--
 And the waves came
 Between them, and the son
 Was among those
 Overwhelmed in the Flood.

44. Then the word went forth:
 "O earth! swallow up
 Thy water, and O sky!
 Withhold (thy rain)!"
 And the water abated,
 And the matter was ended.
 The Ark rested on Mount
 Judi, and the word
 Went forth: "Away
 With those who do wrong!"

[p. 526]

45. And Noah called upon
 His Lord, and said:
 "O my Lord! surely
 My son is of my family!
 And Thy promise is true,
 And Thou art
 The Justest of Judges!"

46. He said: "O Noah!
 He is not of thy family:
 For his conduct is unrighteous.
 So ask not of Me
 That of which thou
 Hast no knowledge!
 I give thee counsel, lest
 Thou act like the ignorant!"

47. Noah said: "O my Lord!
 I do seek refuge with Thee,
 Lest I ask Thee for that
 Of which I have no knowledge.
 And unless Thou forgive me
 And have Mercy on me,
 I should indeed be lost!"

48. The word came: "O Noah!
 Come down (from the Ark)
 With Peace from Us,
 And Blessing on thee
 And on some of the Peoples
 (Who will spring) from those
 With thee: but (there will be
 Other) Peoples to whom We
 Shall grant their pleasures
 (For a time), but in the end
 Will a grievous Penalty
 Reach them from Us."

[p. 527]

49. Such are some of the stories
 Of the Unseen, which We
 Have revealed unto thee:
 Before this, neither thou
 Nor thy People knew them.
 So persevere patiently:
 For the End is for those
 Who are righteous.

  

SECTION 5.

50. To the 'Ad People
 (We sent) Hud, one
 Of their own brethren.
 He said: "O my people!
 Worship God! ye have
 No other god but Him.
 (Your other gods) ye do nothing
 But invent!

51. "O my people! I ask of you
 No reward for this (Message).
 My reward is from none
 But Him who created me:
 Will ye not then understand?

52. "And O my people! Ask
 Forgiveness of your Lord,

[p. 528]

And turn to Him (in repentance):
 He will send you the skies
 Pouring abundant rain,
 And add strength
 To your strength:
 So turn ye not back
 In sin!"

53. They said: "O Hud!
 No Clear (Sign) hast thou
 Brought us, and we are not
 The ones to desert our gods
 On thy word! Nor shall we
 Believe in thee!

54. "We say nothing but that
 (Perhaps) some of our gods
 May have seized thee
 With imbecility." He said:
 "I call God to witness,
 And do ye bear witness,
 That I am free from the sin
 Of ascribing, to Him,

[p. 529]

55. "Other gods as partners!
 So scheme (your worst) against me,
 All of you, and give me
 No respite.

56. "I put my trust in God,
 My Lord and your Lord!
 There is not a moving
 Creature, but He hath
 Grasp of its fore-lock.
 Verily, it is my Lord
 That is on a straight Path.

57. "If ye turn away,--
 I (at least) have conveyed
 The Message with which I
 Was sent to you. My Lord
 Will make another People
 To succeed you, and you
 Will not harm Him
 In the least. For my Lord
 Hath care and watch
 Over all things."

58. So when Our decree
 Issued, We saved Hud
 And those who believed
 With him, by (special) Grace
 From Ourselves: We saved them
 From a severe Penalty.

59. Such were the 'Ad People:
 They rejected the Signs

[p. 530]

Of their Lord and Cherisher;
 Disobeyed His Apostles;
 And followed the command
 Of every powerful, obstinate
 Transgressor.

60. And they were pursued
 By a Curse in this Life,
 And on the Day of Judgment.
 Ah! Behold! For the 'Ad
 Rejected their Lord and Cherisher
 Ah! Behold! Removed (from sight)
 Were 'Ad the People of Hud!

  

SECTION 6.

61. To the Thamud People
 (We sent) Salih, one
 Of their own brethren.
 He said: "O my People!
 Worship God: ye have
 No other God but Him.
 It is He Who hath produced you
 From the earth and settled you
 Therein: then ask forgiveness
 Of Him, and turn to Him
 (In repentance): for my Lord
 Is (always) near, ready
 To answer."

62. They said: "O Salib!
 Thou hast been of us!--

[p. 531]

A centre of our hopes
 Hitherto! Dost thou (now)
 Forbid us the worship
 Of what our fathers worshipped?
 But we are really
 In suspicious (disquieting)
 Doubt as to that to which
 Thou invitest us."

63. He said: "O my people!
 Do ye see?--If I have
 A Clear (Sign) from my Lord
 And He hath sent Mercy
 Unto me from Himself,--who
 Then can help me
 Against God if I were
 To disobey Him? What
 Then would ye add
 To my (portion) but perdition?

64. "And O my people!
 This she-camel of God is
 A symbol to you:
 Leave her to feed
 On God's (free) earth,
 And inflict no harm
 On her, or a swift Penalty
 Will seize you!"

65. But they did ham-string her.
 So he said: "Enjoy yourselves
 In your homes for three days:
 (Then will be your ruin):

[p. 532]

(Behold) there a promise
 Not to be belied!"

66. When Our Decree issued,
 We saved Salib and those
 Who believed with him,
 By (special) Grace from
 Ourselves--
 And from the Ignominy
 Of that Day. For thy Lord--
 He is the Strong One, and Able
 To enforce His Will.

67. The (mighty) Blast overtook
 The wrong-doers, and they
 Lay prostrate in their homes
 Before the morning,--

68. As if they had never
 Dwelt and flourished there.
 Ah! Behold! For the Thamud
 Rejected their Lord and Cherisher!
 Ah! Behold! Removed
 (From sight) were the Thamud!

  

SECTION 7.

69. There came Our Messengers
 To Abraham with glad tidings.

[p. 533]

They said, "Peace!" He answered,
 "Peace!" and hastened
 To entertain them
 With a roasted calf.

70. But when he saw
 Their hands went not
 Towards the (meal), he felt
 Some mistrust of them,
 And conceived a fear of them.
 They said: "Fear not:
 We have been sent
 Against the people of Lut."

71. And his wife was standing
 (There), and she laughed:
 But We gave her
 Glad tidings of Isaac,
 And after him, of Jacob.

[p. 534]

72. She said: "Alas for me!
 Shall I bear a ,
 Seeing I am an old woman,
 And my husband here
 Is an old man?
 That would indeed
 Be a wonderful thing!"

73. They said: "Dost thou
 Wonder at God's decree?
 The grace of God
 And His blessings on you,
 O ye people of the house!
 For He is indeed
 Worthy of all praise,
 Full of all glory!"

74. When fear had passed
 From (the mind of) Abraham
 And the glad tidings
 Had reached him, he
 Began to plead with Us
 For Lut's people.

75. For Abraham was,
 Without doubt, forbearing
 (Of faults), compassionate,
 And given to look to God.

76. O Abraham! Seek not this.
 The decree of thy Lord
 Hath gone forth: for them
 There cometh a Penalty

[p. 535]

That cannot be turned back!

77. When Our Messengers
 Came to Lut, he was
 Grieved on their account
 And felt himself powerless
 (To protect) them. He said:
 "This is a distressful day."

78. And his people came
 Rushing towards him,
 And they had been long
 In the habit of practising
 Abominations. He said:
 "O my people! Here are
 My daughters: they are purer
 For you (if ye marry)!
 Now fear God, and cover me not
 With shame about my guests!
 Is there not among you
 A single right-minded man?"

79. They said: "Well dost thou
 Know we have no need
 Of thy daughters: indeed
 Thou knowest quite well
 What we want!"

80. He said: "Would that I
 Had power to suppress you

[p. 536]

Or that I could betake
 Myself to some powerful support."

81. (The Messengers) said: "O Lut
 We are Messengers from thy Lord!
 By no means shall they
 Reach thee! Now travel
 With thy family while yet
 A part of the night remains,
 And let not any of you
 Look back: but thy wife
 (Will remain behind):
 To her will happen
 What happens to the people.
 Morning is their time appointed:
 Is not the morning nigh?"

82. When Our decree issued,
 We turned (the cities)
 Upside down, and rained down
 On them brimstones
 Hard as baked clay,
 Spread, layer on layer,--

83. Marked as from thy Lord:

[p. 537]

Nor are they ever far
 From those who do wrong!

  

SECTION 8.

84. To the Madyan people
 (We sent) Shu'aib, one
 Of their own brethren: he said:
 "O my people! worship God:
 Ye have no other god
 But Him. And give not
 Short measure or weight:
 I see you in prosperity,
 But I fear for you
 The Penalty of a Day
 That will compass (you) all round.

85. "And O my people! give
 Just measure and weight,
 Nor withhold from the people
 The things that are their due:
 Commit not evil in the land
 With intent to do mischief.

86. "That which is left you
 By God is best for you,

[p. 538]

If ye (but) believed!
 But I am not set
 Over you to keep watch!"

87. They said: "O Shu'aib!
 Does thy (religion of) prayer
 Command thee that we
 Leave off the worship which
 Our fathers practised, or
 That we leave off doing
 What we like with our property?
 Truly, thou art the one
 That forbeareth with faults
 And is right-minded!"

88. He said: "O my people!
 See ye whether I hate
 A Clear (Sign) from my Lord,
 And He hath given me
 Sustenance (pure and) good
 As from Himself? I wish not,
 In opposition to you, to do
 That which I forbid you to do.
 I only desire (your) betterment
 To the best of my power;
 And my success (in my task)
 Can only come from God.
 In Him I trust,
 And unto Him I look.

89. "And O my people!
 Let not my dissent (from you)

[p. 539]

Cause you to sin,
 Lest ye suffer
 A fate similar to that
 Of the people of Noah
 Or of Hud or of Salib,
 Nor are the people of Lut
 Far off from you!

90. "But ask forgiveness
 Of your Lord, and turn
 Unto Him (in repentance):
 For my Lord is indeed
 Full of mercy and loving-kindness."

91. They said: "O Shu'aib!
 Much of what thou sayest
 We do not understand!
 In fact among us we see
 That thou hast no strength!
 Were it not for thy family,
 We should certainly
 Have stoned thee!
 For thou hast among us
 No great position!"

92. He said: "O my people!
 Is then my family
 Of more consideration with you
 Than God? For ye cast Him
 Away behind your backs
 (With contempt). But verily
 My Lord encompasseth
 On all sides
 All that ye do!

93. "And O my people!
 Do whatever ye can:

[p. 540]

I will do (my part):
 Soon will ye know
 Who it is on whom
 Descends the Penalty
 Of ignominy, and who
 Is a liar!
 And watch ye!
 For I too am watching
 With you!"

94. When Our decree issued,
 We saved Shu'aib and those
 Who believed with him,
 By (special) Mercy from Ourselves
 But the (mighty) Blast did seize
 The wrong-doers, and they
 Lay prostrate in their homes
 By the morning,--

95. As if they had never
 Dwelt and flourished there!
 Ah! Behold! How the Madyan
 Were removed (from sight)
 As were removed the Thamud!

[p. 541]

  

SECTION 9.

96. And we sent Moses,
 With our Clear (signs)
 And an authority manifest,

97. Unto Pharaoh and his Chiefs:
 But they followed the command
 Of Pharaoh, and the command
 Of Pharaoh was no right (guide).

98. He will go before his people
 On the Day of Judgment,
 And lead them into the Fire
 (As cattle are led to water):
 But woeful indeed will be
 The place to which they are led!

99. And they are followed
 By a curse in this (life)
 And on the Day of Judgment:
 And woeful is the gift
 Which shall be given
 (Unto them)!

100. These are some of the stories
 Of communities which We
 Relate unto thee: of them
 Some are standing, and some

[p. 542]

Have been mown down
 (By the sickle of time.

101. It was not We that wronged them:
 They wronged their own souls:
 The deities, other than God,
 Whom they invoked, profited them
 No whit when there issued
 The decree of thy Lord:
 Nor did they add aught
 (To their lot) but perdition!

102. Such is the chastisement
 Of thy Lord when He chastises
 Communities in the midst of
 Their wrong: grievous, indeed,
 And severe is His chastisement.

103. In that is a Sign
 For those who fear
 The Penalty of the Hereafter:
 That is a Day for which mankind
 Will be gathered together:
 That will be a Day
 Of Testimony.

104. Nor shall We delay it
 But for a term appointed.

105. The day it arrives,
 No soul shall speak

[p. 543]

Except by His leave:
 Of those (gathered) some
 Will be wretched and some
 Will be blessed.

106. Those who are wretched
 Shall be in the Fire:
 There will be for them
 Therein (nothing but) the heaving
 Of sighs and sobs:

107. They will dwell therein
 For all the time that
 The heavens and the earth
 Endure, except as thy Lord
 Willeth: for thy Lord
 Is the (sure) Accomplisher
 Of what He planneth.

108. And those who are blessed
 Shall be in the Garden:
 They will dwell therein
 For all the time that
 The heavens and the earth
 Endure, except as thy Lord
 Willeth: a gift without break.

[p. 544]

109. Be not then in doubt
 As to what these men
 Worship. They worship nothing
 But what their fathers worshipped
 Before (them): but verily
 We shall pay them back
 (In full) their portion
 Without (the least) abatement.

  

SECTION 10.

110. We certainly gave the Book
 To Moses, but differences
 Arose therein: had it not been
 That a Word had gone forth
 Before from thy Lord, the matter
 Would have been decided
 Between them: but they
 Are in suspicious doubt
 Concerning it.

111. And, of a surety, to all
 Will your Lord pay back
 (In full the recompense)
 Of their deeds: for He
 Knoweth well all that they do.

112. Therefore stand firm (in the straight
 Path) as thou art commanded,--

[p. 545]

Thou and those who with thee
 Turn (unto God); and transgress not
 (From the Path): for He seeth
 Well all that ye do.

113. And incline not to those
 Who do wrong, or the Fire
 Will seize you; and ye have
 No protectors other than God,
 Nor shall ye be helped.

114. And establish regular prayers
 At the two ends of the day
 And at the approaches of the night:
 For those things that are good
 Remove those that are evil:
 Be that the word of remembrance
 To those who remember (their Lord):

115. And be steadfast in patience;
 For verily God will not suffer
 The reward of the righteous
 To perish.

116. Why were there not,
 Among the generations before you,
 Persons possessed of balanced
 Good sense, prohibiting (men)

[p. 546]

From mischief in the earth--
 Except a few among them
 Whom We saved (from harm)?
 But the wrong-doers pursued
 The enjoyment of the good things
 Of life which were given them,
 And persisted in sin.

117. Nor would thy Lord be
 The One to destroy
 Communities for a single wrong-doing,
 If its members were likely
 To mend.

118. If thy Lord had so willed,
 He could have made mankind
 One People: but they
 Will not cease to dispute,

119. Except those on whom thy Lord
 Hath bestowed His Mercy:
 And for this did He create
 Them: and the Word
 Of thy Lord shall be fulfilled:
 "I will fill Hell with jinns
 And men all together."

[p. 547]

120. All that we relate to thee
 Of the stories of the apostles,--
 With it We make firm
 Thy heart: in them there cometh
 To thee the Truth, as well as
 An exhortation and a message
 Of remembrance to those who believe.

121. Say to those who do not
 Believe: "Do whatever ye can:
 We shall do our part;

122. "And wait ye!
 We too shall wait."

123. To God do belong
 The unseen (secrets)
 Of the heavens and the earth,
 And to Him goeth back
 Every affair (for decision)
 Then worship Him,
 And put thy trust in Him .
 And thy Lord is not
 Unmindful of aught
 That ye do.

[p. 548] [p. 549]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 550]

  

Sura XII.

  

Yusuf, or Joseph.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. R. These are
 The Symbols (or Verses)
 Of the Perspicuous Book.

2. We have sent it down
 As an Arabic Qur-an,
 In order that ye may
 Learn wisdom.

3. We do relate unto thee
 The most beautiful of stories,
 In that We reveal to thee
 This (portion of the) Qur-an:
 Before this, thou too
 Was among those
 Who knew it not.

4. Behold, Joseph said
 To his father: "O my father!

[p. 551]

I did see eleven stars
 And the sun and the moon:
 I saw them prostrate themselves
 To me!"

5. Said (the father):
 "My (dear) little son!
 Relate not thy vision
 To thy brothers, lest they
 Concoct a plot against thee:
 For Satan is to man
 An avowed enemy!

6. "Thus will thy Lord
 Choose thee and teach thee
 The interpretation of stories (and events)
 And perfect His favour
 To thee and to the posterity
 Of Jacob--even as He
 Perfected it to thy fathers
 Abraham and Isaac aforetime!
 For God is full of knowledge
 And wisdom."

  

SECTION 2.

7. Verily in Joseph and his brethren
 Are Signs (or Symbols)

[p. 552]

For Seekers (after Truth).

8. They said: "Truly Joseph
 And his brother are loved
 More by our father than we:
 But we are a goodly body!
 Really our father is obviously
 Wandering (in his mind)!

9. "Slay ye Joseph or cast him out
 To some (unknown) land,
 That so the favour
 Of your father may be
 Given to you alone:
 (There will be time enough)
 For you to be righteous after that!"

10. Said one of them: "Slay not
 Joseph, but if ye must
 Do something, throw him down
 To the bottom of the well:
 He will be picked up
 By some caravan of travellers."

[p. 553]

11. They said: "O our father!
 Why dost thou not
 Trust us with Joseph,
 Seeing we are indeed
 His sincere well-wishers?

12. "Send him with us tomorrow
 To enjoy himself and play,
 And we shall take
 Every care of him."

13. (Jacob) said: "Really
 It saddens me that ye
 Should take him away:
 I fear lest the wolf
 Should devour him
 While ye attend not
 To him."

14. They said: "If the wolf
 Were to devour him
 While we are (so large) a party,
 Then should we indeed
 (First) have perished ourselves!"

15. So they did take him away,
 And they all agreed

[p. 554]

To throw him down
 To the bottom of the well:
 And We put into his heart
 (This Message): "Of a surety
 Thou shalt (one day)
 Tell them the truth
 Of this their affair
 While they know (thee) not"

16. Then they came
 To their father
 In the early part
 Of the night,
 Weeping.

17. They said: "O our father!
 We went racing with one another,
 And left Joseph with our things;
 And the wolf devoured him....
 But thou wilt never believe us
 Even though we tell the truth.

18. They stained his shirt
 With false blood. He said:

[p. 555]

"Nay, but your minds
 Have made up a tale
 (That may pass) with you.
 (For me) patience is most fitting:
 Against that which ye assert,
 It is God (alone)
 Whose help can be sought"...

19. Then there came a caravan
 Of travellers: they sent
 Their water-carrier (for water),
 And he let down his bucket
 (Into the well)... He said:
 "Ah there! Good news!
 Here is a (fine) young man!"
 So they concealed him
 As a treasure! But God
 Knoweth well all that they do!

20. The (Brethren) sold him
 For a miserable price,--

[p. 556]

For a few dirhams counted out:
 In such low estimation
 Did they hold him!

  

SECTION 3.

21. The man in Egypt
 Who bought him, said

[p. 557]

To his wife: "Make his stay
 (Among us) honourable:
 Maybe he will bring us
 Much good, or we shall
 Adopt him as a son."
 Thus did We establish
 Joseph in the land,
 That We might teach him
 The interpretation of stories
 (And events). And God
 Hath full power and control
 Over His affairs; but most
 Among mankind know it not.

22. When Joseph attained
 His full manhood, We gave him

[p. 558]

Power and knowledge: thus do We
 Reward those who do right.

23. But she in whose house
 He was, sought to seduce him
 From his (true) self: she fastened
 The doors, and said:
 "Now come, thou (dear one)!"
 He said: "God forbid!
 Truly (thy husband) is
 My lord! he made
 My sojourn agreeable!
 Truly to no good
 Come those who do wrong!"

24. And (with passion) did she
 Desire him, and he would
 Have desired her, but that
 He saw the evidence
 Of his Lord: thus
 (Did We order) that We
 Might turn away from him
 (All) evil and shameful deeds:

[p. 559]

For he was one of Our servants,
 Sincere and purified.

25. So they both raced each other
 To the door, and she
 Tore his shirt from the back:
 They both found her lord
 Near the door. She said:
 "What is the (fitting) punishment
 For one who formed
 An evil design against
 Thy wife, but prison
 Or a grievous chastisement?"

26. He said: "It was she
 That sought to seduce me--
 From my (true) self." And one
 Of her household saw (this)
 And bore witness, (thus):--
 "If it be that his shirt
 Is rent from the front, then
 Is her tale true,
 And he is a liar!

27. "But if it be that his shirt
 Is torn from the back,

[p. 560]

Then is she the liar,
 And he is telling the truth!"

28. So when he saw his shirt,--
 That it was torn at the back,
 (Her husband) said: "Behold!
 It is a snare of you women!
 Truly, mighty is your snare!

29. "O Joseph, pass this over!
 (O wife), ask forgiveness
 For thy sin, for truly
 Thou hast been at fault!"

  

SECTION 4.

30. Ladies said in the City:
 "The wife of the (great) 'Aziz
 Is seeking to seduce her slave
 From his (true) self:
 Truly hath he inspired her
 With violent love: we see
 She is evidently going astray."

[p. 561]

31. When she heard
 Of their malicious talk,
 She sent for them
 And prepared a banquet
 For them: she gave
 Each of them a knife:
 And she said (to Joseph),
 "Come out before them."
 When they saw him,
 Thy did extol him,
 And (in their amazement)
 Cut their hands: they said,
 "God preserve us! no mortal
 Is this! This is none other
 Than a noble angel!"

32. She said: "There before you
 Is the man about whom
 Ye did blame me!
 I did seek to seduce him from
 His (true) self but he did
 Firmly save himself guiltless!...
 And now, if he doth not
 My bidding, he shall certainly
 Be cast into prison,
 And (what is more)
 Be of the company of the vilest!"

[p. 562]

33. He said: "O my Lord!
 The prison is more
 To my liking than that
 To which they invite me:
 Unless Thou turn away
 Their snare from me,
 I should (in my youthful folly)
 Feel inclined towards them
 And join the ranks of the ignorant."

34. So his Lord hearkened to him
 (In his prayer), and turned
 Away from him their snare:
 Verily He heareth and knoweth
 (All things).

35. Then it occurred to the men,
 After they had seen the Signs,
 (That it was best)
 To Imprison him
 For a time.

[p. 563]

  

SECTION 5.

36. Now with him there came
 Into the prison two young men.
 Said one of them: "I see
 Myself (in a dream)
 Pressing wine." Said the other:
 "I see myself (in a dream)
 Carrying bread on my head,
 And birds are eating thereof."
 "Tell us" (they said) "the truth
 And meaning thereof: for we
 See thou art one
 That doth good (to all)."

37. He said: "Before any food
 Comes (in due course)
 To feed either of you,
 I will surely reveal
 To you the truth
 And meaning of this
 Ere it befall you
 That is part of the (Duty)
 Which my Lord hath taught me.
 I have (I assure you)

[p. 564]

Abandoned the ways
 Of a people that believe not
 In God and that (even)
 Deny the Hereafter.

38. "And I follow the ways
 Of my fathers,--Abraham,
 Isaac, and Jacob; and never
 Could we attribute any partners
 Whatever to God: that (comes)
 Of the grace of God to us
 And to mankind: yet
 Most men are not grateful

39. "O my two companions.
 Of the prison! (I ask you):
 Are many lords differing
 Among themselves better,
 Or the One God,
 Supreme and Irresistible?

40. "If not Him, ye worship nothing
 But names which ye have named,--
 Ye and your fathers,--
 For which God hath sent down
 No authority: the Command
 Is for none but God: He

[p. 565]

Hath commanded that ye worship
 None but Him: that is
 The right religion, but
 Most men understand not...

41. "O my two companions
 Of the prison! As to one
 Of you, he will pour out
 The wine for his lord to drink:
 As for the other, he will
 Hang from the cross, and the birds
 Will eat from off his head.
 (So) hath been decreed
 That matter whereof
 Ye twain do enquire"...

42. And of the two,
 To that one whom he considered
 About to be saved, he said:
 "Mention me to thy lord."

[p. 566]

But Satan made him forget
 To mention him to his lord:
 And (Joseph) lingered in prison
 A few (more) years.

  

SECTION 6.

43. The king (of Egypt) said:
 "I do see (in a vision)
 Seven fat kine, whom seven
 Lean ones devour,--and seven
 Green ears of corn, and seven (others)
 Withered. O ye chiefs!
 Expound to me my vision
 If it be that ye can
 Interpret visions."

[p. 567]

44. They said: "A confused medley
 Of dreams: and we are not
 Skilled in the interpretation
 Of dreams."

45. But the man who had been
 Released, one of the two
 (Who had been in prison)
 And who now bethought him
 After (so long) a space of time,
 Said: "I will tell you
 The truth of its interpretation:
 Send ye me (therefor)."

46."O Joseph!" (he said).
 "O man of truth! Expound
 To us (the dream)
 Of seven fat kine
 Whom seven lean ones
 Devour, and of seven
 Green ears of corn
 And (seven) others withered:
 That I may return
 To the people, and that
 They may understand."

47. (Joseph) said: "For seven years
 Shall ye diligently sow

[p. 568]

As is your wont:
 And the harvests that ye reap,
 Ye shall leave them in the ear,--
 Except a little, of which
 Ye shall eat.

48. "Then will come
 After that (period)
 Seven dreadful (years),
 Which will devour
 What ye shall have laid by
 In advance for them,--
 (All) except a little
 Which ye shall have
 (Specially) guarded.

49. "Then will come
 After that (period) a year
 In which the people will have
 Abundant water, and in which
 They will press (wine and oil)."

[p. 569]

  

SECTION 7.

50. So the king said:
 "Bring ye him unto me."
 But when the messenger
 Came to him, (Joseph) said:
 "Go thou back to thy lord,
 And ask him, "What is
 The state of mind
 Of the ladies
 Who cut their hands?"
 For my Lord is
 Certainly well aware
 Of their snare."

51. (The king) said (to the ladies):
 "What was your affair
 When ye did seek to seduce
 Joseph from his (true) self?"
 The ladies said: "God
 Preserve us! no evil

[p. 570]

Know we against him!"
 Said the 'Aziz's wife:
 "Now is the truth manifest
 (To all): it was I
 Who sought to seduce him
 From his (true) self:
 He is indeed of those
 Who are (ever) true (and virtuous).

52. "This (say I), in order that
 He may know that I
 Have never been false
 To him in his absence,
 And that God will never
 Guide the snare of the false ones.

[p. 571]

53. "Nor do I absolve my own self
 (Of blame): the (human) soul
 Is certainly prone to evil,
 Unless my Lord do bestow
 His Mercy: but surely
 My Lord is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful."

54. So the king said:
 "Bring him unto me;
 I will take him specially
 To serve about my own person."
 Therefore when he had spoken
 To him, he said:
 "Be assured this day,
 Thou art, before our own Presence,
 With rank firmly established,
 And fidelity fully proved!

55. (Joseph) said: "Set me
 Over the store-houses
 Of the land: I will
 Indeed guard them,

[p. 572]

As one that knows
 (Their importance)."

56. "Thus did we give
 Established power to Joseph
 In the land, to take possession
 Therein as, when, or where
 He pleased. We bestow
 Of Our mercy on whom
 We please, and We suffer not,
 To be lost, the reward
 Of those who do good.

57. But verily the reward
 Of the Hereafter
 Is the best, for those
 Who believe, and are constant
 In righteousness.

  

SECTION 8.

58. Then came Joseph's brethren:
 They entered his presence,
 And he knew them,
 But they knew him not.

[p. 573]

59. And when he had furnished
 Them forth with provisions
 (Suitable) for them, he said:
 "Bring unto me a brother
 Ye have, of the same father
 As yourselves, (but a different mother):
 See ye not that I pay out
 Full measure, and that I
 Do provide the best hospitality?

60. "Now if ye bring him not
 To me, ye shall have
 No measure (of corn) from me,
 Nor shall ye (even) come
 Near me."

61. They said: "We shall
 Certainly seek to get
 Our wish about him
 From his father:
 Indeed we shall do it."

62. And (Joseph) told his servants
 To put their stock-in-trade
 (With which they had bartered)
 Into their saddle-bags,
 So they should know it only
 When they returned to their people,

[p. 574]

In order that they
 Might come back.

63. Now when they returned
 To their father, they said:
 "O our father! No more
 Measure of grain shall we get
 (Unless we take our brother):
 So send our brother with us,
 That we may get our measure;
 And we will indeed
 Take every care of him."

64. He said: "Shall I trust you
 With him with any result
 Other than when I trusted you
 With his brother aforetime?
 But God is the best
 To take care (of him),
 And He is the Most Merciful
 Of those who show mercy!"

65. Then when they opened
 Their baggage, they found
 Their stock-in-trade had been
 Returned to them. They said:
 "O our father! What (more)
 Can we desire? This our
 Stock-in-trade has been returned
 To us: so we shall get

[p. 575]

(More) food for our family;
 We shall take care of our brother;
 And add (at the same time)
 A full camel's load (of grain
 To our provisions).
 This is but a small quantity.

66. (Jacob) said: "Never will I
 Send him with you until
 Ye swear a solemn oath to me,
 In God's name, that ye
 Will be sure to bring him back
 To me unless ye are yourselves
 Hemmed in (and made powerless)."
 And when they had sworn
 Their solemn oath,
 He said: "Over all
 That we say, be God
 The Witness and Guardian!"

67. Further he said:
 "O my sons! enter not
 All by one gate: enter ye
 By different gates. Not that

[p. 576]

I can profit you aught
 Against God (with my advice):
 None can command except God:
 On Him do I put my trust:
 And let all that trust
 Put their trust on Him."

68. And when they entered
 In the manner their father
 Had enjoined, it did not
 Profit them in the least
 Against (the Plan of) God:
 It was but a necessity
 Of Jacob's soul, which he
 Discharged. For he was,
 By Our instruction, full
 Of knowledge (and experience):
 But most men know not.

[p. 577]

  

SECTION 9.

69. Now when they came
 Into Joseph's presence,
 He received his (full) brother
 To stay with him. He said
 (To him): "Behold! I am thy (own)
 Brother; so grieve not
 At aught of their doings."

70. At length when he had furnished
 Them forth with provisions
 (Suitable) for them, he put
 The drinking cup into
 His brother's saddle-bag.
 Then shouted out a Crier:
 "O ye (in) the Caravan!
 Behold! ye are thieves,
 Without doubt!"

71. They said, turning towards them:
 "What is it that ye miss?"

72. They said: "We miss
 The great beaker of the king;

[p. 578]

For him who produces it,--
 Is (the reward of)
 A camel load; I
 Will be bound by it."

73. (The brothers) said: "By God!
 Well ye know that we
 Came not to make mischief
 In the land, and we are
 No thieves!"

74. (The Egyptians) said: "What then
 Shall be the penalty of this,
 If ye are (proved) to have lied?"

75. They said: "The penalty
 Should be that he
 In whose saddle-bag
 It is found, should be held
 (As bondman) to atone
 For the (crime). Thus it is
 We punish the wrong-doers!"

76. So he began (the search)
 With their baggage,

[p. 579]

Before (he came to) the baggage
 Of his brother: at length
 He brought it out of his
 Brother's baggage. Thus did We
 Plan for Joseph. He could not
 Take his brother by the law
 Of the king except that God
 Willed it (so). We raise
 To degrees (of wisdom) whom
 We please: but over all
 Endued with knowledge is One,
 The All-Knowing.

77. They said: "If he steals,
 There was a brother of his
 Who did steal before (him)."
 But these things did Joseph
 Keep locked in his heart,
 Revealing not the secrets to them.

[p. 580]

He (simply) said (to himself):
 "Ye are the worse situated;
 And God knoweth best
 The truth of what ye assert!"

78. They said: "O exalted one!
 Behold! he has a father,
 Aged and venerable, (who will
 Grieve for him); so take
 One of us in his place;
 For we see that thou art
 (Gracious) in doing good."

79. He said: "God forbid
 That we take other than him
 With whom we found
 Our property: indeed
 (If we did so), we should
 Be acting wrongfully.

  

SECTION 10.

80. Now when they saw
 No hope of his (yielding),
 They held a conference in private.
 The leader among them said:
 "Know ye not that your father
 Did take an oath from you
 In God's name, and how,
 Before this, ye did fail

[p. 581]

In your duty with Joseph?
 Therefore will I not leave
 This land until my father
 Permits me, or God
 Commands me; and He
 Is the best to command.

81. "Turn ye back to your father,
 And say, "O our father!
 Behold! thy son committed theft!
 We bear witness only to what
 We know, and we could not
 Well guard against the unseen!

82. "Ask at the town where
 We have been and the caravan
 In which we returned,
 And (you will find) we are
 Indeed telling the truth."

83. Jacob said: "Nay, but ye
 Have yourselves contrived
 A story (good enough) for you.
 So patience is most fitting
 (For me). Maybe God will
 Bring them (back) all
 To me (in the end).
 For He is indeed full
 Of knowledge and wisdom.

[p. 582]

84. And he turned away from them,
 And said: "How great
 Is my grief for Joseph!"
 And his eyes became white
 With sorrow, and he fell
 Into silent melancholy.

85. They said: "By God!
 (Never) wilt thou cease
 To remember Joseph
 Until thou reach the last
 Extremity of illness,
 Or until thou die!"

86. He said: "I only complain
 Of my distraction and anguish
 To God, and I know from God
 That which ye know not...

87. "O my sons! go ye
 And enquire about Joseph
 And his brother, and never
 Give up hope of God's
 Soothing Mercy: truly
 No one despairs of God's

[p. 583]

Soothing Mercy, except
 Those who have no faith."

88. Then, when they came
 (Back) into (Joseph's) presence
 They said: "O exalted one!
 Distress has seized us
 And our family: we have
 (Now) brought but scanty capital:
 So pay us full measure,
 (We pray thee), and treat it
 As charity to us: for God
 Doth reward the charitable."

89. He said: "Know ye
 How ye dealt with Joseph
 And his brother, not knowing
 (What ye were doing)?"

90. They said: "Art thou indeed
 Joseph?" He said . "I am
 Joseph, and this is my brother:
 God has indeed been gracious

[p. 584]

To us (all): behold, he that is
 Righteous and patient,--never
 Will God suffer the reward
 To be lost, of those
 Who do right."

91. They said: "By God! Indeed
 Has God preferred thee
 Above us, and we certainly
 Have been guilty of sin!"

92. He said: "This day
 Let no reproach be (cast)
 On you; God will forgive you,
 And He is the Most Merciful
 Of those who show mercy!

93. "Go with this my shirt,
 And cast it over the face
 Of my father: he will
 Come to see (clearly). Then come
 Ye (here) to me together
 With all your family."

[p. 585]

  

SECTION 11.

94. When the Caravan left (Egypt),
 Their father said: "I do indeed
 Scent the presence of Joseph:
 Nay, think me not a dotard."

95. They said: "By God!
 Truly thou art in
 Thine old wandering mind."

96. Then when the bearer
 Of the good news came,
 He cast (the shirt)
 Over his face, and he
 Forthwith regained clear sight.
 He said: "Did I not say
 To you, "I know from God
 That which ye know not?"

[p. 586]

97. They said: "O our father!
 Ask for us forgiveness
 For our sins, for we
 Were truly at fault."

98. He said: "Soon will I
 Ask my Lord for forgiveness
 For you: for He is indeed
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

99. Then when they entered
 The presence of Joseph,
 He provided a home
 For his parents with himself,
 And said: "Enter ye
 Egypt (all) in safety
 If it please God."

100. And he raised his parents
 High on the throne (of dignity),
 And they fell down in prostration,
 (All) before him. He said:
 "O my father! this is
 The fulfilment of my vision
 Of old! God hath made it
 Come true! He was indeed
 Good to me when He
 Took me out of prison

[p. 587]

And brought you (all here)
 Out of the desert,
 (Even) after Satan had sown
 Enmity between me and my brothers.
 Verily my Lord understandeth
 Best the mysteries of all
 that He planneth to do.
 For verily He is full
 Of knowledge and wisdom.

101."O my Lord! Thou hast
 Indeed bestowed on me
 Some power, and taught me
 Something of the interpretation
 Of dreams and events,--O Thou
 Creator of the heavens
 And the earth! Thou art
 My Protector in this world
 And in the Hereafter.
 Take Thou my soul (at death)
 As one submitting to Thy Will
 (As a Muslim), and unite me
 With the righteous."

[p. 588]

102. Such is one of the stories
 Of what happened unseen,
 Which We reveal by inspiration
 Unto thee: nor wast thou
 (Present) with them when they
 Concerted their plans together
 In the process of weaving their plots.

103. Yet no faith will
 The greater part of mankind
 Have, however ardently
 Thou dost desire it.

104. And no reward dost thou ask
 Of them for this: it is
 No less than a Message
 For all creatures.

  

SECTION 12.

105. And how many Signs
 In the heavens and the earth

[p. 589]

Do they pass by? Yet they
 Turn (their faces) away from them!

106. And most of them
 Believe not in God
 Without associating (others
 As partners) with Him!

107. Do they then feel secure
 From the coming against them
 Of the covering veil
 Of the wrath of God,
 Or of the coming against them
 Of the (final) Hour
 All of a sudden
 While they perceive not?

108. Say thou: "This is my Way:
 I do invite unto God,
 On evidence clear as
 The seeing with one's eyes,--

[p. 590]

I and whoever follows me.
 Glory to God! and never
 Will I join gods with God!"

109. Nor did We send before thee
 (As apostles) any but men,
 Whom We did inspire,--
 (Men) living in human habitations.
 Do they not travel
 Through the earth, and see
 What was the end
 Of those before them?
 But the home of the Hereafter
 Is best, for those who do right.
 Will ye not then understand?

110. (Respite will be granted)
 Until, when the apostles
 Give up hope (of their people)
 And (come to) think that they
 Were treated as liars,
 There reaches them Our help,
 And those whom We will
 Are delivered into safety.
 But never will be warded off
 Our punishment from those
 Who are in sin.

111. There is, in their stories,
 Instruction for men endued

[p. 591]

With understanding. It is not
 A tale invented, but a confirmation
 Of what went before it,--
 A detailed exposition
 Of all things, and a Guide
 And a Mercy to any such
 As believe.

[p. 592] [p. 593] [p. 594] [p. 595] [p. 596] [p. 597] [p. 598] [p. 599] [p. 600] [p. 601]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 602]

  

Sura XIII.

  

Ra'd, or Thunder.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. M. R. These are
 The Signs (or Verses)
 Of the Book: that which
 Hath been revealed unto thee
 From thy Lord is the Truth;
 But most men believe not.

2. God is He Who raised
 The heavens without any pillars
 That ye can see; is firmly
 Established on the Throne (of Authority);
 He has subjected the sun
 And the moon (to his Law)!
 Each one runs (its course)
 For a term appointed.
 He doth regulate all affairs,
 Explaining the Signs in detail,

[p. 603]

That ye may believe with certainty
 In the meeting with your Lord.

3. And it is He Who spread out
 The earth, and set thereon
 Mountains standing firm,
 And (flowing) rivers: and fruit
 Of every kind He made
 In pairs, two and two:
 He draweth the Night as a veil
 O'er the Day. Behold, verily
 In these things there are Signs
 For those who consider!

4. And in the earth are tracts
 (Diverse though) neighbouring,
 And gardens of vines
 And fields sown with corn,
 And palm trees--growing
 Out of single roots or otherwise:
 Watered with the same water,
 Yet some of them We make
 More excellent than others to eat.
 Behold, verily in these things

[p. 604]

There are Signs for those
 Who understand!

5. If thou dost marvel
 (At their want of faith),
 Strange is their saying:
 "When we are (actually) dust,
 Shall we indeed then be
 In a creation renewed?" They are
 Those who deny their Lord! They
 Are those round whose necks
 Will be yokes (of servitude):
 They will be Companions
 Of the Fire, to dwell therein
 (For aye)!

6. They ask thee to hasten on
 The evil in preference to the good:
 Yet have come to pass,
 Before them, (many) exemplary
 Punishments! But verily
 Thy Lord is full of forgiveness
 For mankind for their wrong-doing,
 And verily thy Lord
 Is (also) strict in punishment.

7. And the Unbelievers say:
 "Why is not a Sign sent down
 To him from his Lord?
 But thou art truly

[p. 605]

A warner, and to every people
 A guide.

  

SECTION 2.

8. God doth know what
 Every female (womb) doth bear,
 By how much the wombs
 Fall short (of their time
 Or number) or do exceed.
 Every single thing is before
 His sight, in (due) proportion.

9. He knoweth the Unseen
 And that which is open:
 He is the Great,
 The most High.

10. It is the same (to Him)
 Whether any of you
 Conceal his speech or
 Declare it openly;
 Whether he lie hid by night
 Or walk forth freely by day.

11. For each (such person)
 There are (angels) in succession,
 Before and behind him:
 They guard him by command

[p. 606]

Of God. Verily never
 Will God change the condition
 Of a people until they
 Change it themselves
 (With their own souls).
 But when (once) God willeth
 A people's punishment,
 There can be no
 Turning it back, nor
 Will they find, besides Him,
 Any to protect

12. It is He Who doth show you
 The lightning, by way
 Both of fear and of hope:
 It is He Who doth raise up
 The clouds, heavy
 With (fertilising) rain!

13. Nay, thunder repeateth His praises,
 And so do the angels, with awe:
 He flingeth the loud-voiced
 Thunder-bolts, and therewith
 He striketh whomsoever He will...
 Yet these (are the men)
 Who (dare to) dispute
 About God, with the strength
 Of His power (supreme)!

[p. 607]

14. For Him (alone) is prayer
 In Truth: any others that they
 Call upon besides Him hear them
 No more than if they were
 To stretch forth their hands
 For water to reach their mouths
 But it reaches them not:
 For the prayer of those
 Without Faith is nothing
 But (futile) wandering (in the mind).

15. Whatever beings there are
 In the heavens and the earth
 Do prostrate themselves to God
 (Acknowledging subjection),--with good-will
 Or in spite of themselves:
 So do their shadows
 In the mornings and evenings.

[p. 608]

16. Say: "Who is the Lord and Sustainer
 Of the heavens and the earth?"
 Say: "(It is) God."
 Say: "Do ye then take
 (For worship) protectors other
 Than Him, such as have
 No power either for good
 Or for harm to themselves?"
 Say: "Are the blind equal
 With those who see?
 Or the depths of darkness
 Equal with Light?"
 Or do they assign to God
 Partners who have created
 (Anything) as He has created,
 So that the creation seemed
 To them similar?
 Say: "God is the Creator
 Of all things: He is
 The One, the Supreme and
 Irresistible."

17. He sends down water
 From the sides, and the channels
 Flow, each according to its measure:
 But the torrent bears away
 The foam that mounts up
 To the surface. Even so,

[p. 609]

Form that (ore) which they heat
 In the fire, to make ornaments
 Or utensils therewith,
 There is a scum likewise.
 Thus doth God (by parables)
 Show forth Truth and Vanity.
 For the scum disappears
 Like froth cast out;
 While that which is for the good
 Of mankind remains
 On the earth. Thus doth God
 Set forth parables.

18. For those who respond
 To their Lord, are (all)
 Good things. But those
 Who respond not to Him,
 Even if they had all
 That is in the heavens
 And on earth, and as much more,
 (In vain) would they offer it
 For ransom. For them
 Will the reckoning be terrible:
 Their abode will be Hell,----
 What a bed of misery!

  

SECTION 3.

19. Is then one who doth know
 That that which hath been

[p. 610]

Revealed unto thee
 From thy Lord is the Truth,
 Like one who is blind?
 It is those who are
 Endued with understanding
 That receive admonition;--

20. Those who fulfil the Covenant
 Of God and fail not
 In their plighted word;

21. Those who join together
 Those things which God
 Hath commanded to be joined,
 Hold their Lord in awe,
 And fear the terrible reckoning;

22. Those who patiently persevere,
 Seeking the countenance of their Lord;
 Establish regular prayers; spend,
 Out of (the gifts) We have bestowed
 For their sustenance, secretly
 And openly; and turn off Evil
 With good: for such there is
 The final attainment
 Of the (Eternal) Home,--

23. Gardens of perpetual bliss:
 They shall enter there,
 As well as the righteous
 Among their fathers, their spouses,

[p. 611]

And their offspring:
 And angels shall enter unto them
 From every gate (with the salutation):

24. "Peace unto you for that ye
 Persevered in patience! Now
 How excellent is the final Home!"

25. But those who break
 The Covenant of God, after
 Having plighted their word thereto,
 And cut asunder those things
 Which God has commanded
 To be joined, and work mischief
 In the land;--on them
 Is the Curse; for them
 Is the terrible Home!

26. God doth enlarge, or grant
 By (strict) measure, the Sustenance
 (Which He giveth) to whomso
 He pleaseth. (The worldly) rejoice
 In the life of this world:
 But the life of this world
 Is but little comfort
 In the Hereafter.

[p. 612]

  

SECTION 4.

27. The Unbelievers say: "Why
 Is not a Sign sent down
 To him from his Lord?"
 Say: "Truly God leaveth,
 To stray, whom He will;
 But He guideth to Himself
 Those who turn to Him
 In penitence,--

28. "Those who believe, and whose hearts
 Find satisfaction in the remembrance
 Of God: for without doubt
 In the remembrance of God
 Do hearts find satisfaction.

29. "For those who believe
 And work righteousness,
 Is (every) blessedness,
 And a beautiful place
 Of (final) return."

30. Thus have We sent thee
 Amongst a People before whom
 (Long since) have (other) Peoples
 (Gone and) passed away;
 In order that thou mightest
 Rehearse unto them what We
 Send down unto thee by inspiration;

[p. 613]

Yet do they reject (Him),
 The Most Gracious!
 Say: "He is my Lord!
 There is no god but He!
 On Him is my trust,
 And to Him do I turn!"

31. If there were a Qur-an
 With which mountains were moved,
 Or the earth were cloven asunder,
 Or the dead were made to speak,
 (This would be the one!)
 But, truly, the Command is
 With God in all things!'
 Do not the Believers know,
 That, had God (so) willed,
 He could have guided
 All mankind (to the Right)?

But the Unbelievers,--never
 Will disaster cease to seize
 Them for their (ill) deeds,
 Or to settle close to their homes,
 Until the promise of God
 Come to pass, for, verily,
 God will not fail
 In His promise.

[p. 614]

  

SECTION 5.

32. Mocked were (many) apostles
 Before thee: but I granted
 Respite to the Unbelievers,
 And finally I punished them:
 Then how (terrible) was My requital!

33. Is then He Who standeth
 Over every soul (and knoweth)
 All that it doth,
 (Like any others)? And yet
 They ascribe partners to God.
 Say: "But name them!
 Is it that ye will
 Inform Him of something
 He knoweth not on earth,
 Or is it (just) a show
 Of words?" Nay! to those
 Who believe not, their pretence
 seems pleasing, but they are
 Kept back (thereby) from the Path.
 And those whom God leaves
 To stray, no one can guide.

34. For them is a Penalty
 In the life of this world,
 But harder, truly, is the Penalty
 Of the Hereafter: and defender
 Have they none against God.

35. The parable of the Garden
 Which the righteous are promised!--

[p. 615]

Beneath it flow rivers:
 Perpetual is the enjoyment thereof
 And the shade therein:
 Such is the End
 Of the Righteous; and the End
 Of Unbelievers is the Fire.

36. Those to whom We have
 Given the Book rejoice
 At what hath been revealed
 Unto thee: but there are
 Among the clans those who reject
 A part thereof. Say:
 "I am commanded to worship
 God, and not to join partners
 With Him. Unto him
 Do I call, and
 Unto Him is my return."

37. Thus have We revealed it
 To be a judgment of authority

[p. 616]

In Arabic. Wert thou to follow
 Their (vain) desires after the knowledge
 Which hath reached thee,
 Then wouldst thou find
 Neither protector nor defender
 Against God.

  

SECTION 6.

38. We did send apostles
 Before thee, and appointed
 For them wives and children:
 And it was never the part
 Of an apostle to bring a Sign
 Except as God permitted
 (Or commanded). For each period
 Is a Book (revealed).

39. God doth blot out
 Or confirm what He pleaseth:
 With Him is
 The Mother of the Book.

40. Whether We shall show thee
 (Within thy life-time)
 Part of what We promised them
 Or take to ourselves thy soul

[p. 617]

(Before it is all accomplished),--
 Thy duty is to make
 (The Message) reach them:
 It is Our part
 To call them to account.

41. See they not that We
 Gradually reduce the land
 (In their control) from its
 Outlying borders ? (Where) God
 Commands, there is none
 To put back His command:
 And He is Swift
 In calling to account.

42. Those before them did (also)
 Devise plots; but in all things
 The master-planning is God's.
 He knoweth the doings
 Of every soul: and soon
 Will the Unbelievers know
 Who gets home in the End.

43. The Unbelievers say: "No apostle
 Art thou." Say: "Enough
 For a witness between me
 And you is God, and such
 As have knowledge of the Book."

[p. 618]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 619]

  

Sura XIV.

  

Ibrahim, or Abraham.

In the name of God, Most Gracious
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. R. A Book
 Which We have revealed
 Unto thee, in order that
 Thou mightest lead mankind
 Out of the depths of darkness
 Into light--by the leave
 Of their Lord--to the Way
 Of (Him) the Exalted in Power,
 Worthy of all Praise!--

2. Of God, to Whom do belong
 All things in the heavens
 And on earth!
 But alas for the Unbelievers
 For a terrible Penalty
 (Their Unfaith will bring them)!--

3. Those who love the life
 Of this world more than
 The Hereafter, who hinder (men)
 From the Path of God
 And seek therein something crooked:
 They are astray
 By a long distance.

[p. 620]

4. We sent not an apostle
 Except (to teach) in the language
 Of his (own) people, in order
 To make (things) clear to them.
 Now God leaves straying
 Those whom He pleases
 And guides whom He pleases:
 And He is Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

5. We sent Moses with Our Signs
 (And the command). "Bring out
 Thy people from the depths
 Of darkness into light,
 And teach them to remember
 The Days of God." Verily
 In this there are Signs
 For such as are firmly patient
 And constant,--grateful and appreciative.

6. Remember! Moses said
 To his people: "Call to mind
 The favour of God to you
 When He delivered you

[p. 621]

From the people of Pharaoh:
 They set you hard tasks
 And punishments, slaughtered
 Your sons, and let your women-folk
 Live: therein was
 A tremendous trial from your Lord."

  

SECTION 2.

7. And remember! your Lord
 Caused to be declared (publicly):
 "If ye are grateful, I will
 Add more (favours) unto you;
 But if ye show ingratitude,
 Truly my punishment
 Is terrible indeed."

8. And Moses said: "If ye
 Show ingratitude, ye and all
 On earth together,--yet
 Is God Free of all wants,
 Worthy of all praise.

9. Has not the story
 Reached you, (O people!), of those
 Who (went) before you?--
 Of the People of Noah,
 And 'Ad, and Thamud?--
 And of those who (came)
 After them? None knows them
 But God. To them came

[p. 622]

Apostles with Clear (Signs);
 But they put their hands
 Up to their mouths, and said:
 "We do deny (the mission)
 On which ye have been sent,
 And we are really
 In suspicious (disquieting) doubt
 As to that to which
 Ye invite us."

10. Their apostles said: "Is there
 A doubt about God,
 The Creator of the heavens
 And the earth? It is He
 Who invites you, in order
 That He may forgive you
 Your sins and give you
 Respite for a term appointed!"
 They said: "Ah! ye are
 No more than human,
 Like ourselves! Ye wish
 To turn us away from
 The (gods) our fathers
 Used to worship: then
 Bring us some clear authority."

11. Their apostles said to them:
 "True, we are human
 Like yourselves, but God
 Doth grant His grace

[p. 623]

To such of His servants
 As He pleases. It is not
 For us to bring you
 An authority except as God
 Permits. And on God
 Let all men of faith
 Put their trust.

12. "No reason have we why
 We should not put our trust
 On God. Indeed He
 Has guided us to the Ways
 We (follow). We shall certainly
 Bear with patience all
 The hurt you may cause us.
 For those who put their trust
 Should put their trust on God."

  

SECTION 3.

13. And the Unbelievers said
 To their apostles: "Be sure
 We shall drive you out
 Of our land, or ye shall
 Return to our religion."
 But their Lord inspired
 (This Message) to them:
 "Verily We shall cause
 The wrong-doers to perish!

14. "And verily We shall
 Cause you to abide
 In the land, and succeed them.
 This for such as fear
 The Time when they shall stand
 Before My tribunal,--such
 As fear the Punishment denounced."

[p. 624]

15. But they sought victory and decision
 (There and then), and frustration
 Was the lot of every
 Powerful obstinate transgressor.

16. In front of such a one
 Is Hell, and he is given,
 For drink, boiling fetid water.

17. In gulps will he sip it,
 But never will he be near
 Swallowing it down his throat:
 Death will come to him
 From every quarter, yet
 Will he not die: and
 In front of him will be
 A chastisement unrelenting.

18. The parable of those who
 Reject their Lord is that
 Their works are as ashes,
 On which the wind blows
 Furiously on a tempestuous day:
 No power have they over
 Aught that they have earned:
 That is the straying
 Far, far (from the goal).

[p. 625]

19. Seest thou not that God
 Created the heavens and the earth
 In Truth? If He so will,
 He can remove you
 And put (in your place)
 A new Creation?

20. Nor is that for God
 Any great matter.

21. They will all be marshalled
 Before God together: then
 Will the weak say to those
 Who were arrogant, "For us,
 We but followed you; can ye
 Then avail us at all
 Against the Wrath of God?"
 They will reply, "If we
 Had received the guidance
 Of God, we should have
 Given it to you: to us
 It makes no difference (now)
 Whether we rage, or bear
 (These torments) with patience:
 For ourselves there is no way
 Of escape."

  

SECTION 4.

22. And Satan will say
 When the matter is decided:
 "It was God Who gave you
 A promise of Truth: I too
 Promised, but I failed
 In my promise to you.

[p. 626]

I had no authority over you
 Except to call you, but ye
 Listened to me: then
 Reproach not me, but reproach
 Your own souls. I cannot listen
 To your cries, nor can ye
 Listen to mine. I reject
 Your former act in associating
 Me with God.
 For wrong-doers there must be
 A grievous Penalty."

23. But those who believe
 And work righteousness
 Will be admitted to Gardens
 Beneath which rivers flow,--
 To dwell therein for aye
 With the leave of their Lord.
 Their greeting therein
 Will be: "Peace!"

24. Seest thou not how
 God sets forth a parable?--
 A goodly Word
 Like a goodly tree,
 Whose root is firmly fixed,
 And its branches (reach)
 To the heavens,--

25. It brings forth its fruit
 At all times, by the leave

[p. 627]

Of its Lord.
 So God sets forth parables
 For men, in order that
 They may receive admonition.

26. And the parable
 Of an evil Word
 Is that of an evil tree:
 It is torn up by the root
 From the surface of the earth:
 It has no stability.

27. God will establish in strength
 Those who believe, with the Word
 That stands firm, in this world
 And in the Hereafter; but God
 Will leave, to stray, those
 Who do wrong: God doeth
 What He willeth.

[p. 628]

  

SECTION 5.

28, Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to those who
 Have changed the favour of God.
 Into blasphemy and caused
 Their people to descend
 To the House of Perdition?--

29. Into Hell? They will burn
 Therein,--an evil place
 To stay in!

30. And they set up (idols)
 As equal to God, to mislead
 (Men) from the Path! Say:
 "Enjoy (your brief power)!
 But verily ye are making
 Straightway for Hell!"

31. Speak to my servants
 Who have believed,
 That they may establish
 Regular prayers, and spend
 (In charity) out of the Sustenance

[p. 629]

We have given them,
 Secretly and openly, before
 The coming of a Day
 In which there will be
 Neither mutual bargaining
 Nor befriending.

32. It is God Who hath created
 The heavens and the earth
 And sendeth down rain
 From the skies, and with it
 Bringeth out fruits wherewith
 To feed you; it is He
 Who hath made the ships subject
 To you, that they may sail
 Through the sea by His Command;
 And the rivers (also)
 Hath He made subject to you.

33. And He hath made subject
 To you the sun and the moon,
 Both diligently pursuing
 Their courses; and the Night
 And the Day hath He (also)
 Made subject to you.

[p. 630]

34. And He giveth you
 Of all that ye ask for.
 But if ye count the favours
 Of God, never will ye
 Be able to number them.
 Verily, man is given up
 To injustice and ingratitude.

  

SECTION 6.

35. Remember Abraham said:
 "O my Lord! make this city
 One of peace and security:
 And preserve me and my sons
 From worshipping idols.

36. "O my Lord! they have indeed
 Led astray many among mankind;
 He then who follows my (ways)
 Is of me, and he that
 Disobeys me,--but Thou
 Art indeed Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

37. "O our Lord! I have made
 Some of my offspring to dwell
 In a valley without cultivation,
 By Thy Sacred House;

[p. 631]

In order, O our Lord, that they
 May establish regular Prayer:
 So till the hearts of some
 Among men with love towards them,
 And feed them with Fruits:
 So that they may give thanks.

38. "O our Lord! truly Thou
 Dost know what we conceal
 And what we reveal:
 For nothing whatever is hidden
 From God, whether on earth
 Or in heaven.

39. "Praise be to God, Who hath
 Granted unto me in old age
 Isma'il and Isaac: for truly
 My Lord is He, the Hearer
 Of Prayer!

40. "O my Lord! make me
 One who establishes regular Prayer,
 And also (raise such)
 Among my offspring
 O our Lord!
 And accept Thou my Prayer.

41. "O our Lord! cover (us)
 With Thy Forgiveness--me,

[p. 632]

My parents, and (all) Believers,
 On the Day that the Reckoning
 Will be established!

  

SECTION 7.

42. Think not that God
 Doth not heed the deeds
 Of those who do wrong.
 He but giveth them respite
 Against a Day when
 The eyes will fixedly stare
 In horror,--

43. They running forward
 With necks outstretched,
 Their heads uplifted, their gaze
 Returning not towards them,
 And their hearts a (gaping) void!

44. So warn mankind
 Of the Day when the Wrath
 Will reach them: then will
 The wrong-doers say: "Our Lord!
 Respite us (if only)
 For a short Term: we will
 Answer Thy Call, and follow
 The apostles!"
 "What! were ye not wont
 To swear aforetime that ye
 Should suffer no decline?

[p. 633]

45. "And ye dwelt in the dwellings
 Of men who wronged their own
 Souls; ye were clearly shown
 How We dealt with them;
 And We put forth (many) Parables
 In your behoof!"

46. Mighty indeed were the plots
 Which they made, but their plots
 Were (well) within the sight
 Of God, even though they were
 Such as to shake the hills!

47. Never think that God would fail
 His apostles in His promise:
 For God is Exalted in Power,--
 The Lord of Retribution.

48. One day the Earth will be
 Changed to a different Earth,
 And so will be the Heavens,
 And (men) will be marshalled
 Forth, before God, the One,
 The Irresistible;

49. And thou wilt see
 The Sinners that day
 Bound together in fetters;--

50. Their garments of liquid pitch,
 And their faces covered with Fire;

[p. 634]

51. That God may requite
 Each soul according
 To its deserts;
 And verily God is Swift
 In calling to account.

52. Here is a Message for mankind:
 Let them take warning therefrom,
 And let them know that He
 Is (no other than) One God
 Let men of understanding
 Take heed.

[p. 635]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 636]

  

Sura XV.

  

Al-Hijr, or The Rocky Tract.

In the name of God, Most Gracious;
 Most Merciful

1. A. L. R. These are
 The Ayats of Revelation,--
 Of a Qur-an
 That makes things clear.

[p. 637]

2. Again and again will those
 Who disbelieve, wish that they
 Had bowed (to God's Will)
 In Islam.

3. Leave them alone, to enjoy
 (The good things of this life)
 And to please themselves:
 Let (false) Hope amuse them: soon
 Will knowledge (undeceive them).

4. Never did We destroy
 A population that had not
 A term decreed and assigned
 Beforehand.

5. Neither can a people anticipate
 Its Term, nor delay it.

6. They say: "O thou to whom
 The Message is being revealed!
 Truly thou art mad (or possessed)!

[p. 638]

7. "Why bringest thou not
 Angels to us if it be
 That thou hast the Truth?"

8. We send not the angels
 Down except for just cause:
 If they came (to the ungodly),
 Behold! no respite would they have!

9. We have, without doubt,
 Sent down the Message;
 And We will assuredly
 Guard it (from corruption).

10. We did send apostles before thee
 Amongst the religious sects
 Of old:

11. But never came an apostle
 To them but they mocked him.

12. Even so do we let it creep
 Into the hearts of the sinners--

13. That they should not believe
 In the (Message); but the ways

[p. 639]

Of the ancients have passed away.

14. Even if We opened out to them
 A gate from heaven,
 And they were to continue
 (All day) ascending therein,

15. They would only say:
 "Our eyes have been intoxicated:
 Nay, we have been bewitched
 By sorcery."

  

SECTION 2.

16. It is We Who have set out
 The Zodiacal Signs in the heavens,
 And made them fair-seeming
 To (all) beholders;

17. And (moreover) We have guarded them

[p. 640]

From every evil spirit accursed:

18. But any that gains a hearing
 By stealth, is pursued
 By a flaming fire, bright (to see).

19. And the earth We have spread out
 (Like a carpet); set thereon
 Mountains firm and immovable;
 And produced therein all kinds
 Of things in due balance.

20. And We have provided therein
 Means of subsistence,--for you
 And for those for whose sustenance
 Ye are not responsible.

21. And there is not a thing
 But its (sources and) treasures

[p. 641]

(Inexhaustible) are with Us;
 But We only send down
 Thereof in due and ascertainable measures.

22. And We send the fecundating winds,
 Then cause the rain to descend
 From the sky, therewith providing
 You with water (in abundance),
 Though ye are not the guardians
 Of its stores.

23. And verily, it is We
 Who give life, and Who give
 Death: it is We Who remain Inheritors
 (After all else passes away).

[p. 642]

24. To Us are known those of you
 Who hasten forward, and those
 Who lag behind.

25. Assuredly it is thy Lord
 Who will gather them together:
 For He is Perfect in Wisdom
 And Knowledge.

  

SECTION 3.

26. We created man from sounding clay,
 From mud moulded into shape;

27. And the Jinn race, We had
 Created before, from the fire
 Of a scorching wind.

28. Behold! thy Lord said
 To the angels: "I am about
 To create man, from sounding clay
 From mud moulded into shape;

[p. 643]

29. "When I have fashioned him
 (In due proportion) and breathed
 Into him of My spirit,
 Fall ye down in obeisance
 Unto him.

30. So the angels prostrated themselves,
 All of them together:

31. Not so Iblis: he refused to be
 Among those who prostrated themselves.

32. (God) said: "O Iblis!
 What is your reason
 For not being among those
 Who prostrated themselves?"

33. (Iblis) said: "I am not one
 To prostrate myself to man,
 Whom Thou didst create
 From sounding clay, from mud
 Moulded into shape."

34. (God) said: "Then get thee out
 From here; for thou art
 Rejected, accursed.

35. "And the Curse shall be
 On thee till the Day of Judgment."

[p. 644]

36. (Iblis) said: "O my Lord!
 Give me then respite
 Till the Day
 The (dead) are raised."

37. (God) said: "Respite
 Is granted thee--

38. "Till the Day
 Of the Time Appointed."

39. (Iblis) said: "O my Lord!
 Because Thou hast put me
 In the wrong, I will
 Make (wrong) fair-seeming
 To them on the earth,
 And I will put them
 All in the wrong,--

40. "Except Thy servants among them,
 Sincere and purified
 (By Thy grace)."

41. (God) said: "This (Way
 Of My sincere servants) is
 Indeed a Way that leads
 Straight to Me.

[p. 645]

42. "For over My servants
 No authority shalt thou
 Have, except such as
 Put themselves in the wrong
 And follow thee."

43. And verily, Hell
 Is the promised abode
 For them all!

44. To it are seven Gates:
 For each of those Gates
 Is a (special) class
 (Of sinners) assigned.

  

SECTION 4.

45. The righteous (will be)
 Amid Gardens
 And fountains
 (Of clear-flowing water).

46. (Their greeting will be):
 "Enter ye here
 In Peace and Security."

47. And We shall remove
 From their hearts any
 Lurking sense of injury:
 (They will be) brothers
 (Joyfully) facing each other
 On thrones (of dignity).

48. There no sense of fatigue
 Shall touch them,
 Nor shall they (ever)
 Be asked to leave.

[p. 646]

49. Tell My servants
 That I am indeed
 The Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful;

50. And that My Penalty
 Will be indeed
 The most grievous Penalty.

51. Tell them about
 The guests of Abraham.

52. When they entered his presence
 And said, "Peace!"
 He said, "We feel
 Afraid of you!"

53. They said: "Fear not!
 We give thee glad tidings

[p. 647]

Of a son endowed
 With wisdom."

54. He said: "Do ye give me
 Glad tidings that old age
 Has seized me? Of what,
 Then, is your good news?"

55. They said: "We give thee
 Glad tidings in truth:
 Be not then in despair!"

56. He said: "And who
 Despairs of the mercy
 Of his Lord, but such
 As go astray?"

57. Abraham said: "What then
 Is the business on which
 Ye (have come), O ye
 Messengers (of God)?"

58. They said: "We have been
 Sent to a people
 (Deep) in sin,

59. "Excepting the adherents
 Of Lut: them we are certainly

[p. 648]

(Charged) to save (from harm),--
 All--

60. "Except his wife, who,
 We have ascertained,
 Will be among those
 Who will lag behind."

  

SECTION 5.

61. At length when the messengers
 Arrived among the adherents
 Of Lut,

62. He said: "Ye appear
 To be uncommon folk."

63. They said: "Yea,
 We have come to thee
 To accomplish that
 Of which they doubt.

64. "We have brought to thee
 That which is inevitably
 Due, and assuredly
 We tell the truth.

65. "Then travel by night
 With thy household,
 When a portion of the night
 (Yet remains), and do thou

[p. 649]

Bring up the rear:
 Let no one amongst you
 Look back, but pass on
 Whither ye are ordered."

66. And We made known
 This decree to him,
 That the last remnants
 Of those (sinners) should be
 Cut off by the morning.

67. The inhabitants of the City
 Came in (mad) joy
 (At news of the young men).

68. Lut said: "These are
 My guests: disgrace me not:

69. "But fear God,
 And shame me not."

70. They said: "Did we not
 Forbid thee (to speak)
 For all and sundry?"

71. He said: "There are
 My daughters (to marry),
 If ye must act (so)."

72. Verily, by thy life (O Prophet),
 In their wild intoxication,

[p. 650]

They wander in distraction,
 To and fro.

73. But the (mighty) Blast
 Overtook them before morning;

74. And We turned (the Cities)
 Upside down, and rained down
 On them brimstones
 Hard as baked clay.

75. Behold! in this are Signs
 For those who by tokens
 Do understand.

76. And the (Cities were)
 Right on the high-road.

77. Behold! in this
 Is a Sign
 For those who believe!

78. And the Companions of the Wood
 Were also wrong-doers;

[p. 651]

79. So We exacted retribution
 From them. They were both
 On an open highway,
 Plain to see.

  

SECTION 6.

80. The Companions of the Rocky Tract
 Also rejected the apostles:

81. We sent them Our Signs,
 But they persisted
 In turning away from them.

82. Out of the mountains
 Did they hew (their) edifices,
 (Feeling themselves) secure.

83. But the (mighty) Blast
 Seized them of a morning,

84. And of no avail to them
 Was all that they did
 (With such art and care)!

85. We created not the heavens,
 The earth, and all between them,

[p. 652]

But for just ends.
 And the Hour is surely
 Coming (when this will be manifest).
 So overlook (any human faults)
 With gracious forgiveness.

86. For verily it is thy Lord
 Who is the Master-Creator,
 Knowing all things.

87. And We have bestowed
 Upon thee the Seven
 Oft-repeated (Verses)
 And the Grand Qur-an.

88. Strain not thine eyes.
 (Wistfully) at what We
 Have bestowed on certain classes
 Of them, nor grieve over them:

[p. 653]

But lower thy wing
 (in gentleness)
 To the Believers.

89. And say: "I am indeed he
 That warneth openly
 And without ambiguity,"--

90. (Of just such wrath)
 As We sent down
 On those who divided
 (Scripture into arbitrary parts),--

91. (So also on such)
 As have made Qur-an
 Into shreds (as they please).

92. Therefore, by the Lord,
 We will, of a surety,
 Call them to account,

93. For all their deeds.

94. Therefore expound openly
 What thou art commanded,
 And turn away from those
 Who join false gods with God.

95. For sufficient are We
 Unto thee against those

[p. 654]

Who scoff,--

96. Those who adopt, with God,
 Another god: but soon
 Will they come to know.

97. We do indeed know
 How thy heart is distressed
 At what they say.

98. But celebrate the praises
 Of thy Lord, and be of those
 Who prostrate themselves
 In adoration.

99. And serve thy Lord
 Until there come unto thee
 The Hour that is Certain.

[p. 655]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 656]

  

Sura XVI.

  

Nahl or The Bee.

In the name of God Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. (Inevitable) cometh (to pass)
 The Command of God:
 Seek ye not then
 To hasten it: glory to Him,
 And far is He above
 Having the partners
 They ascribe unto Him!

2. He doth send down His angels
 With inspiration of His Command,
 To such of His servants
 As He pleaseth, (saying):
 "Warn (Man) that there is
 No god but I: so do
 Your duty unto Me."

3. He has created the heavens
 And the earth for just ends:
 Far is He above having
 The partners they ascribe to Him!

4. He has created man
 From a sperm-drop;
 And behold this same (man)
 Becomes an open disputer!

[p. 657]

5. And cattle He has created
 For you (men): from them
 Ye derive warmth,
 And numerous benefits,
 And of their (meat) ye eat.

6. And ye have a sense
 Of pride and beauty in them
 As ye drive them home
 In the evening, and as ye
 Lead them forth to pasture
 In the morning.

7. And they carry your heavy loads
 To lands that ye could not
 (Otherwise) reach except with
 Souls distressed: for your Lord
 Is indeed Most Kind, Most Merciful

8. And (He has created) horses,
 Mules, and donkeys, for you
 To ride and use for show;
 And He has created (other) things
 Of which ye have no knowledge.

[p. 658]

9. and unto God leads straight
 The Way, but there are ways
 That turn aside: if God
 Had willed, He could have
 Guided all of you.

  

SECTION 2.

10. It is He Who sends down
 Rain from the sky:
 From it ye drink,
 And out of it (grows)
 The vegetation on which
 Ye feed your cattle.

11. With it He produces
 For you corn, olives,
 Date-palms, grapes,
 And every kind of fruit:
 Verily in this is a Sign
 For those who give thought.

12. He has made subject to you
 The Night and the Day;
 The Sun and the Moon;
 And the Stars are in subjection
 By His Command: verily
 In this are Signs
 For men who are wise.

[p. 659]

13. And the things on this earth
 Which He has multiplied
 In varying colours
 (and qualities):
 Verily in this is a Sign
 For men who celebrate
 The praises of God
 (in gratitude).

14. It is He Who has made
 The sea subject, that ye
 May eat thereof flesh
 That is fresh and tender,
 And that ye may extract
 Therefrom ornaments to wear;
 And thou seest the ships
 Therein that plough the waves,
 That ye may seek (thus)
 Of the bounty of God
 And that ye may be grateful.

[p. 660]

15. And He has set up
 On the earth mountains
 Standing firm, lest it should
 Shake with you; and rivers
 And roads; that ye
 May guide yourselves;

16. And marks and sign-posts;
 And by the stars
 (Men) guide themselves.

17. Is then He Who creates
 Like one that creates not?
 Will ye not receive admonition?

18. If ye would count up
 The favours of God,
 Never would ye be able
 To number them: for God
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

[p. 661]

19. And God doth know
 What ye conceal,
 And what ye reveal.

20. Those whom they invoke
 Besides God create nothing
 And are themselves created.

21. (They are things) dead,
 Lifeless: nor do they know
 When they will be raised up.

  

SECTION 3.

22. Your God is One God:
 As to those who believe not
 In the Hereafter, their hearts
 Refuse to know, and they
 Are arrogant.

23. Undoubtedly God doth know
 What they conceal,
 And what they reveal:
 Verily He loveth not the arrogant.

24. When it is said to them,
 "What is it that your Lord

[p. 662]

Has revealed?" they say,
 "Tales of the ancients!"

25. Let them bear, on the Day
 Of Judgment, their own burdens
 In full, and also (something)
 Of the burdens of those
 Without knowledge, whom they
 Misled. Alas, how grievous
 The burdens they will bear!

  

SECTION 4.

26. Those before them did also
 Plot (against God's Way):
 But God took their structures
 From their foundations, and the roof
 Fell down on them from above;
 And the Wrath seized them
 From directions they did not perceive.

27. Then, on the Day of Judgment,
 He will cover them

[p. 663]

With shame, and say:
 "Where are My "partners"
 Concerning whom ye used
 To dispute (with the godly)?"
 Those endued with knowledge
 Will say: "This Day, indeed,
 Are the Unbelievers covered
 With Shame and Misery,--

28. "(Namely) those whose lives the angels
 Take in a state of wrong-doing
 To their own souls."
 Then would they offer submission
 (With the pretence), "We did
 No evil (knowingly)." (The angels
 Will reply), "Nay, but verily
 God knoweth all that ye did;

29. "So enter the gates of Hell,
 To dwell therein.
 Thus evil indeed
 Is the abode of the arrogant."

30. To the righteous
 (When) it is said, "What
 Is it that your Lord
 Has revealed?" they say,
 "All that is good." To those
 Who do good, there is good
 In this world, and-the Home
 Of the Hereafter is even better

[p. 664]

And excellent indeed is the Home
 Of the righteous,--

31. Gardens of Eternity which they
 Will enter: beneath them
 Flow (pleasant) rivers: they
 Will have therein all
 That they wish: thus doth
 God reward the righteous,--

32. (Namely) those whose lives
 The angels take in a state
 Of purity, saying (to them),
 "Peace be on you; enter ye
 The Garden, because of (the good)
 Which ye did (in the world)."

33. Do the (ungodly) wait until
 The angels come to them,
 Or there comes the Command
 Of thy Lord (for their doom)?
 So did those who went
 Before them. But God
 Wronged them not: nay,
 They wronged their own souls.

34. But the evil results
 Of their deeds overtook them,
 And that very (Wrath)
 At which they had scoffed
 Hemmed them in.

  

SECTION 5.

35. The worshippers of false gods
 Say: "If God had so willed,
 We should not have worshipped
 Aught but Him--neither we

[p. 665]

Nor our fathers,--nor should
 We have prescribed prohibitions
 Other than His." So did those
 Who went before them.
 But what is the mission
 Of apostles but to preach
 The Clear Message?

36. For We assuredly sent
 Amongst every People an apostle,
 (With the Command), "Serve
 God, and eschew Evil":
 Of the people were some whom
 God guided, and some
 On whom Error became
 Inevitably (established). So travel
 Through the earth, and see
 What was the end of those
 Who denied (the Truth).

37. If thou art anxious
 For their guidance, yet
 God guideth not such
 As He leaves to stray,
 And there is none
 To help them.

38. They swear their strongest oaths
 By God, that God will not

[p. 666]

Raise up those who die
 Nay, but it is a promise
 (Binding) on Him in truth:
 But most among mankind
 Realise it not.

39. (They must be raised up),
 In order that He may manifest
 To them the truth of that
 Wherein they differ, and that
 The rejecters of Truth
 May realise that they had
 Indeed (surrendered to)
 Falsehood.

40. For to anything which We
 Have willed, We but say
 The Word, "Be ", and it is.

  

SECTION 6.

41. To those who leave
 Their homes in the cause
 Of God, after suffering
 oppression,--
 We will assuredly give
 A goodly home in this world;
 But truly the reward
 Of the Hereafter will be greater.
 If they only realised (this)!

42. (They are) those who persevere
 In patience, and put
 Their trust on their Lord.

[p. 667]

43. And before thee also
 The apostles We sent
 Were but men, to whom
 We granted inspiration: if ye
 Realise this not, ask of those
 Who possess the Message.

44. (We sent them) with Clear Signs
 And Books of dark prophecies;
 And We have sent down
 Unto thee (also) the Message;
 That thou mayest explain clearly
 To men what is sent
 For them, and that they
 May give thought.

45. Do then those who devise
 Evil (plots) feel secure
 That God will not cause
 the earth to swallow them up,
 Or that the Wrath will not
 Seize them from directions
 They little perceive?--

46. Or that He may not
 Call them to account

[p. 668]

In the midst of their goings
 To and fro, without a chance
 Of their frustrating Him?--

47. Or that He may not
 Call them to account
 By a process of slow wastage--
 For thy Lord is indeed
 Full of kindness and mercy.

48. Do they not look
 At God's creation, (even)
 Among (inanimate) things,--
 How their (very) shadows
 Turn round, from the right
 And the left, prostrating
 Themselves to God, and that
 In the humblest manner?

49. And to God doth obeisance
 All that is in the heavens
 And on earth, whether
 Moving (living) creatures
 Or the angels: for none
 Are arrogant (before their Lord).

[p. 669]

50. They all revere their Lord,
 High above them, and they do
 All that they are commanded.

  

SECTION 7.

51. God has said: "Take not
 (For worship) two gods:
 For He is just One God:
 Then fear Me (and Me alone)."

52. To Him belongs whatever
 Is in the heavens and on earth,
 And to Him is duty due always:
 Then will ye fear other
 Than God?

53. And ye have no good thing
 But is from God: and moreover,
 When ye are touched by distress,
 Unto Him ye cry with groans;

[p. 670]

54. Yet, when He removes
 The distress from you, behold!
 Some of you turn to other gods
 To join with their Lord--

55. (As if) to show their ingratitude
 For the favours We have
 Bestowed on them! Then enjoy
 (Your brief day); but soon
 Will ye know (your folly)!

56. And they (even) assign,
 To things they do not know,
 A portion out of that
 Which We have bestowed
 For their sustenance!
 By God, ye shall certainly
 Be called to account
 For your false inventions.

57. And they assign daughters
 For God!--Glory be to Him!--
 And for themselves (sons,
 The issue) they desire!

58. When news is brought
 To one of them, of (the birth
 Of) a female (child), his face
 Darkens, and he is filled
 With inward grief!

59. With shame does he hide
 Himself from his people,

[p. 671]

Because of the bad news
 He has had!
 Shall he retain it
 On (sufferance and) contempt,
 Or bury it in the dust?
 Ah! what an evil (choice)
 They decide on?

60. To those who believe not
 In the Hereafter, applies
 The similitude of evil:
 To God applies the highest
 Similitude: for He is
 The Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

  

SECTION 8.

61. If God were to punish
 Men for their wrong-doing,
 He would not leave, on the (earth);
 A single living creature:
 But He gives them respite
 For a stated Term:
 When their Term expires,
 They would not be able
 To delay (the punishment)
 For a single hour, just as
 They would not be able
 To anticipate it (for a single hour).

[p. 672]

62. They attribute to God
 What they hate (for themselves),
 And their tongues assert
 The falsehood that all good things
 Are for themselves: without doubt
 For them is the Fire, and they
 Will be the first to be
 Hastened on into it!

63. By God, We (also) sent
 (Our apostles) to Peoples
 Before thee; but Satan
 Made, (to the wicked),
 Their own acts seem alluring:
 He is also their patron to-day,
 But they shall have
 A most grievous penalty.

64. And We sent down the Book
 To thee for the express purpose,
 That thou shouldst make clear
 To them those things in which
 They differ, and that it should he
 A guide and a mercy
 To those who believe.

65. And God sends down rain
 From the skies, and gives therewith
 Life to the earth after its death:
 Verily in this is a Sign

[p. 673]

For those who listen.

  

SECTION 9.

66. And verily in cattle (too)
 Will ye find an instructive Sign.
 From what is within their bodies,
 Between excretions and blood,
 We produce, for your drink,
 Milk, pure and agreeable
 To those who drink it.

67. And from the fruit
 Of the date-palm and the vine,
 Ye get out wholesome drink
 And food: behold, in this
 Also is a Sign
 For those who are wise.

[p. 674]

68. And thy Lord taught the Bee
 To build its cells in hills,
 On trees, and in (men's) habitations;

69. Then to eat of all
 The produce (of the earth),
 And find with skill the spacious
 Paths of its Lord: there issues
 From within their bodies
 A drink of varying colours,
 Wherein is healing for men:
 Verily in this is a Sign
 For those who give thought.

70. It is God Who creates you
 And takes your souls at death;
 And of you there are
 Some who are sent back
 To a feeble age, so that
 They know nothing after
 Having known (much):
 For God is All-Knowing,
 All-Powerful.

[p. 675]

  

SECTION 10.

71. God has bestowed His gifts
 Of sustenance more freely on some
 Of you than on others: those
 More favoured are not going
 To throw back their gifts
 To those whom their right hands
 Possess, so as to be equal
 In that respect. Will they then
 Deny the favours of God?

72. And God has made for you
 Mates (and Companions) of your own nature,
 And made for you, out of them,
 Sons and daughters and grandchildren,
 And provided for you sustenance
 Of the best: will they
 Then believe in vain things,
 And be ungrateful for God's favours?--

73. And worship others than God,--
 Such as have no power
 Of providing them, for sustenance,

[p. 676]

With anything in heavens or earth,
 And cannot possibly have
 Such power?

74. Invent not similitudes
 For God: for God knoweth,
 And ye know not.

75. God sets forth the Parable
 (Of two men: one) a slave
 Under the dominion of another;
 He has no power of any sort;
 And (the other) a man
 On whom We have bestowed
 Goodly favours from Ourselves,
 And he spends thereof (freely),
 Privately and publicly:
 Are the two equal?
 (By no means;)
 Praise be to God. But
 Most of them understand not.

76. God sets forth (another) Parable
 Of two men: one of them
 Dumb, with no power
 Of any sort; a wearisome burden
 Is he to his master;
 Whichever way he directs him,
 He brings no good:
 Is such a man equal
 With one who commands

[p. 677]

Justice, and is on
 A Straight Way?

  

SECTION 11.

77. To God belongeth the Mystery
 Of the heavens and the earth.
 And the Decision of the Hour
 (Of Judgment) is as
 The twinkling of an eye,
 Or even quicker:
 For God hath power
 Over all things.

78. It is He Who brought you
 Forth from the wombs
 Of your mothers when
 Ye knew nothing; and He
 Gave you hearing and sight
 And intelligence and affections:
 That ye may give thanks
 (To God).

79. Do they not look at
 The birds, held poised
 In the midst of (the air
 And) the sky? Nothing
 Holds them up but (the power
 Of) God. Verily in this
 Are Signs for those who believe.

[p. 678]

80. It is God Who made your habitations
 Homes of rest and quiet
 For you; and made for you,
 Out of the skins of animals,
 (Tents for) dwellings, which
 Ye find so light (and handy)
 When ye travel and when
 Ye stop (in your travels);
 And out of their wool,
 And their soft fibres
 (Between wool and hair),
 And their hair, rich stuff
 And articles of convenience
 (To serve you) for a time.

81. It is God Who made.
 Out of the things He created,
 Some things to give you shade;
 Of the hills He made some
 For your shelter; He made you
 Garments to protect you
 From heat, and coats of mail
 To protect you from
 Your (mutual) violence.
 Thus does He complete
 His favours on you, that
 Ye may bow to His Will
 (In Islam).

[p. 679]

82. But if they turn away,
 Thy duty is only to preach
 The Clear Message.

83. They recognise the favours
 Of God; then they deny them;
 And most of them
 Are (creatures) ungrateful.

  

SECTION 12.

84. One Day We shall raise
 From all Peoples a Witness:
 Then will no excuse be accepted
 From Unbelievers, nor will they
 Receive any favours.

85. When the wrong-doers
 (Actually) see the Penalty,
 Then will it in no way
 Be mitigated, nor will they
 Then receive respite.

86. When those who gave partners
 To God will see their "partners",

[p. 680]

They will say: "Our Lord!
 These are our "partners," those
 Whom we used to invoke
 Besides Thee." But they will
 Throw back their word at them
 (And say): "Indeed ye are liars!"

87. That day shall they (openly) show
 (Their) submission to God; and all
 Their inventions shall leave
 Them in the lurch.

88. Those who reject God
 And hinder (men) from the Path
 Of God--for them
 Will We add Penalty
 To Penalty; for that they
 Used to spread mischief.

89. One day We shall raise
 From all Peoples a witness
 Against them, from amongst themselves:
 And We shall bring thee
 As a witness against these
 (Thy people): and We have sent down
 To thee the Book explaining
 All things, a Guide, a Mercy,
 And Glad Tidings to Muslims.

  

SECTION 13.

90. God commands justice, the doing
 Of good, and liberality to kith

[p. 681]

And kin, and He forbids
 All shameful deeds, and injustice
 And rebellion: He instructs you,
 That ye may receive admonition.

91. Fulfil the Covenant of God
 When ye have entered into it,
 And break not your oaths
 After ye have confirmed them;
 Indeed ye have made
 God your surety; for God
 Knoweth all that ye do.

92. And be not like a woman
 Who breaks into untwisted strands
 The yarn which she has spun,
 After it has become strong
 Nor take your oaths to practise
 Deception between yourselves,
 Lest one party should be
 More numerous than another:
 For God will test you by this;
 And on the Day of Judgment

[p. 682]

He will certainly make clear
 To you (the truth of) that
 Wherein ye disagree.

93. If God so willed, He
 Could make you all one People:
 But He leaves straying
 Whom He pleases, and He guides
 Whom He pleases: but ye
 Shall certainly be called to account
 For all your actions.

94. And take not your oaths,
 To practise deception between
 yourselves,
 With the result that someone's foot
 May slip after it was
 Firmly planted, and ye may
 Have to taste the evil
 (consequences)
 Of having hindered (men)
 From the Path of God,
 And a mighty Wrath
 Descend on you.

95. Nor sell the Covenant of God
 For a miserable price:
 For with God is (a prize)
 Far better for you,
 If ye only knew.

[p. 683]

96. What is with you must vanish:
 What is with God will endure.
 And We will certainly bestow,
 On those who patiently persevere,
 Their reward according to
 The best of their actions.

97. Whoever works righteousness,
 Man or woman, and has Faith,
 Verily, to him will We give
 A new Life, a life
 That is good and pure, and We
 Will bestow on such their reward
 According to the best
 Of their actions.

98. When thou dost read
 The Qur-an, seek God's protection
 From Satan the Rejected One.

99. No authority has he over those
 Who believe and put their trust
 In their Lord.

100. His authority is over those
 Only, who take him as patron
 And who join partners with God.

[p. 684]

  

SECTION 14.

101. When We substitute one revelation
 For another,--and God knows best
 What He reveals (in stages),--
 They say, "Thou art but a forger":
 But most of them understand not.

102. Say, the Holy Spirit has brought
 The revelation from thy Lord
 In Truth, in order to strengthen
 Those who believe, and as a Guide
 And Glad Tidings to Muslims.

103. We know indeed that they
 Say, "It is a man that.
 Teaches him." The tongue
 Of him they wickedly point to
 Is notably foreign, while this
 Is Arabic, pure and clear.

[p. 685]

104. Those who believe not
 In the Signs of God,--
 God will not guide them,
 And theirs will be
 A grievous Penalty.

105. It is those who believe not
 In the Signs of God,
 That forge falsehood:
 It is they who lie!

106. Any one who, after accepting
 Faith in God, utters Unbelief,--
 Except under compulsion,
 His heart remaining firm
 In Faith--but such as
 Open their breast to Unbelief,--
 On them is Wrath from God,
 And theirs will be
 A dreadful Penalty.

107. This because they love
 The life of this world
 Better than the Hereafter:
 And God will not guide
 Those who reject Faith.

108. Those are they whose hearts,
 Ears, and eyes God has sealed up
 And they take no heed.

109. Without doubt, in the Hereafter
 They will perish.

[p. 686]

110. But verily thy Lord,--
 To those who leave their homes
 After trials and persecutions,--
 And who thereafter strive
 And fight for the Faith
 And patiently persevere,
 Thy Lord, after all this
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 15.

111. One Day every soul
 Will come up struggling
 For itself, and every soul
 Will be recompensed (fully)
 For all its actions, and none
 Will be unjustly dealt with.

112. God sets forth a Parable:
 A city enjoying security
 And quiet, abundantly supplied
 With sustenance from every place:
 Yet was it ungrateful
 For the favours of God:
 So God made it taste
 Of hunger and terror (in extremes)
 (Closing in on it) like a garment
 (From every side), because

[p. 687]

Of the (evil) which
 (Its people) wrought.

113. And there came to them
 An Apostle from among themselves,
 But they falsely rejected him;
 So the Wrath seized them
 Even in the midst
 Of their iniquities.

114. So eat of the sustenance
 Which God has provided
 For you, lawful and good;
 And be grateful for the favours
 Of God, if it is He
 Whom ye serve.

115. He has only forbidden you
 Dead meat, and blood,
 And the flesh of swine,
 And any (food) over which
 The name of other than God
 Has been invoked.
 But if one is forced by necessity,
 Without wilful disobedience,
 Nor transgressing due limits,--
 Then God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

116. But say not--for any false thing
 That your tongues may put forth,--
 "This is lawful, and this
 Is forbidden," so as to ascribe
 False things to God. For those
 Who ascribe false things
 To God, will never prosper.

[p. 688]

117. (In such falsehood)
 Is but a paltry profit;
 But they will have
 A most grievous Penalty.

118. To the Jews We prohibited
 Such things as We have
 Mentioned to thee before:
 We did them no wrong,
 But they were used to
 Doing wrong to themselves.

119. But verily thy Lord,--
 To those who do wrong
 In ignorance, but who
 Thereafter repent and make amends,--
 Thy Lord, after all this,
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most
 Merciful.

  

SECTION 16.

120. Abraham was indeed a model,
 Devoutly obedient to God,
 (And) true in faith, and he
 Joined not gods with God:

121. He showed his gratitude
 For the favours of God,
 Who chose him, and guided him
 To a Straight Way.

122. And We gave him Good
 In this world, and he will be,

[p. 689]

In the Hereafter, in the ranks
 Of the Righteous,''

123. So We have taught thee
 The inspired (message),
 "Follow the ways of Abraham
 The True in Faith, and he
 Joined not gods with God."

124. The Sabbath was only made
 (Strict) for those who disagreed
 (As to its observance);
 But God will judge between them
 On the Day of Judgment,
 As to their differences,

125. Invite (all) to the Way
 Of thy Lord with wisdom
 And beautiful preaching;
 And argue with them
 In ways that are best
 And most gracious:
 For thy Lord knoweth best,
 Who have strayed from His Path,

[p. 690]

And who receive guidance.

126. And if ye do catch them out,
 Catch them out no worse
 Than they catch you out:
 But if ye show patience,
 That is indeed the best (course)
 For those who are patient.

127. And do thou be patient,
 For thy patience is but
 From God; nor grieve over them:
 And distress not thyself
 Because of their plots.

128. For God is with those
 Who restrain themselves,
 And those who do good.

[p. 691] [p. 692]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 693]

  

Sura XVII.

  

Bani Isra-il, or the Children of Israel,

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Glory to (God)
 Who did take His Servant
 For a Journey by night
 From the Sacred Mosque
 To the Farthest Mosque,
 Whose precincts We did
 Bless,--in order that We
 Might show him some
 Of Our Signs: for He
 Is the One Who heareth
 And seeth (all things).

2. We gave Moses the Book,
 And made it a Guide

[p. 694]

To the Children of Israel,
 (Commanding): "Take not
 Other than Me
 As Disposer of (your) affairs."

3. O ye that are sprung
 From those whom We carried
 (In the Ark) with Noah!
 Verily he was a devotee
 Most grateful.

4. And We gave (clear) warning
 To the Children of Israel
 In the Book, that twice
 Would they do mischief
 On the earth and be elated
 With mighty arrogance
 (And twice would they be punished)!

5. When the first of the warnings
 Came to pass, We sent
 Against you Our servants
 Given to terrible warfare:
 They entered the very inmost
 Parts of your homes;
 And it was a warning
 (Completely) fulfilled.

[p. 695]

6. Then did We grant you
 The Return as against them:
 We gave you increase
 In resources and sons,
 And made you
 The more numerous
 In man-power.

7. If ye did well,
 Ye did well for yourselves;
 If ye did evil,
 (Ye did it) against yourselves?
 So when the second
 Of the warnings came to pass,
 (We permitted your enemies)
 To disfigure your faces,
 And to enter your Temple
 As they had entered it before,
 And to visit with destruction
 All that fell into their power.

8. It may be that your Lord
 May (yet) show Mercy

[p. 696]

Unto you; but if ye
 Revert (to your sins),
 We shall revert
 (To Our punishments):
 And We have made Hell
 A prison for those who
 Reject (all Faith),

9. Verily this Qur-an
 Doth guide to that
 Which is most right (or stable),
 And giveth the glad tidings
 To the Believers who work
 Deeds of righteousness,
 That they shall have
 A magnificent reward;

10. And to those who believe not
 In the Hereafter, (it announceth)
 That We have prepared
 For them a Penalty
 Grievous (indeed).

  

SECTION 2.

11. The prayer that man
 Should make for good,
 He maketh for evil;
 For man is given to
 Hasty (deeds).

12. We have made the Night
 And the Day as two

[p. 697]

(Of Our) Signs: the Sign
 Of the Night have We obscured,
 While the Sign of the Day
 We have made to enlighten
 You; that ye may seek
 Bounty from your Lord,
 And that ye may know
 The number and count
 Of the years: all things
 Have We explained in detail.

13. Every man's fate
 We have fastened
 On his own neck:
 On the Day of Judgment
 We shall bring out
 For him a scroll,
 Which he will see
 Spread open.

14. (It will be said to him:)
 "Read thine (own) record:
 Sufficient is thy soul
 This day to make out
 An account against thee."

[p. 698]

15. Who receiveth guidance,
 Receiveth it for his own
 Benefit: who goeth astray
 Doth so to his own loss:
 No bearer of burdens
 Can bear the burden
 Of another: nor would We
 Visit with Our Wrath
 Until We had sent
 An apostle (to give warning).

16. When We decide to destroy
 A population, We (first) send
 A definite order to those
 Among them who are given
 The good things of this life
 And yet transgress; so that
 The word is proved true
 Against them: then (it is)
 We destroy them utterly.

17. How many generations
 Have We destroyed. after Noah?
 And enough is thy Lord
 To note and see
 The sins of His servants

[p. 699]

18. If any do wish
 For the transitory things
 (Of this life), We readily
 Grant them--such things
 As We will, to such persons
 As We will: in the end
 Have We provided Hell
 For them: they will burn
 Therein, disgraced and rejected.

19. Those who do wish
 For the (things of) the
 Hereafter,
 And strive therefor
 With all due striving,
 And have Faith,--
 They are the ones
 Whose striving is acceptable
 (To God).

20. Of the bounties of thy Lord
 We bestow freely on all--
 These as well as those:
 The bounties of thy Lord
 Are not closed (to anyone).

21. See how We have bestowed
 More on some than on others;
 But verily the Hereafter
 Is more in rank and gradation

[p. 700]

And more in excellence.

22. Take not with God
 Another object of worship;
 Or thou (O man!) wilt sit
 In disgrace and destitution.'

  

SECTION 3.

23. Why Lord hath decreed
 That ye worship hone but Him,
 And that ye be kind
 To parents. Whether one
 Or both of them attain
 Old age in thy life,
 Say not to them a word
 Of contempt, nor repel them,
 But address them
 In terms of honour.

[p. 701]

24. And, out of kindness,
 Lower to them the wing
 Of humility, and say:
 "My Lord! bestow on them
 Thy Mercy even as they
 Cherished me in childhood.

25. Your Lord knoweth best
 What is in your hearts:
 If ye do deeds of righteousness,
 Verily He is Most Forgiving
 To those who turn to Him
 Again and again
 (in true penitence).

26. And render to the kindred
 Their due rights, as (also)
 To those in want,
 And to the wayfarer:
 But squander not (your wealth)
 In the manner of a spendthrift.

[p. 702]

27. Verily spendthrifts are brothers
 Of the Evil Ones;
 And the Evil One
 Is to his Lord (Himself)
 Ungrateful.

28. And even if thou hast
 To turn away from them
 In pursuit of the Mercy
 From thy Lord which thou
 Dost expect, yet speak
 To them a word
 Of easy kindness.

29. Make not thy hand tied
 (Like a niggard's) to thy neck,
 Nor stretch it forth
 To its utmost reach,
 So that thou become
 Blameworthy and destitute.

30. Verily thy Lord doth provide
 Sustenance in abundance
 For whom He pleaseth, and He
 Provideth in a just measure.
 For He doth know
 And regard all His servants.

[p. 703]

  

SECTION 4.

31. Kill not your children
 For fear of want: We shall
 Provide sustenance for them
 As well as for you.
 Verily the killing of them
 Is a great sin.

32. Nor come nigh to adultery:
 For it is a shameful (deed)
 And an evil, opening the road
 (To other evils).

33. Nor take life--which God
 Has made sacred--except
 For just cause. And if
 Anyone is slain wrongfully,
 We have given his heir
 Authority (to demand Qisas
 Or to forgive): but let him
 Not exceed bounds in the matter
 Of taking life; for he
 Is helped (by the Law).

34. Come not nigh
 To the orphan's property
 Except to improve it,

[p. 704]

Until he attains the age
 Of full strength; and fulfil
 (Every) engagement,
 For (every) engagement
 Will be enquired into
 (On the Day of Reckoning).

35. Give full measure when ye
 Measure, and weigh
 With a balance that is straight:
 That is the most fitting
 And the most advantageous
 In the final determination:

36. And pursue not that
 Of which thou hast
 No knowledge; for
 Every act of hearing,
 Or of seeing
 Or of (feeling in) the heart
 Will be enquired into
 (On the Day of Reckoning).

37. Nor walk on the earth
 With insolence: for thou

[p. 705]

Canst not rend the earth
 Asunder, nor reach
 The mountains in height.

38. Of all such things
 The evil is hateful
 In the sight of thy Lord.

39. These are among the (precepts
 Of) wisdom, which thy Lord
 Has revealed to thee.
 Take not, with God,
 Another object of worship,
 Lest thou shouldst be thrown
 Into Hell, blameworthy and rejected.

40. Has then your Lord,
 (O Pagans!) preferred for you
 Sons, and taken for Himself
 Daughters among the angels?
 Truly ye utter
 A most dreadful saying!

[p. 706]

  

SECTION 5.

41. We have explained (things)
 In various (ways) in this Qur-an,
 In order that they may receive
 Admonition, but it only increases
 Their flight (from the Truth)!

42. Say: if there had been
 (Other) gods with Him,--
 As they say,--behold,
 They would certainly have
 Sought out a way
 To the Lord of the Throne!

43. Glory to Him! He is high
 Above all that they say!--
 Exalted and Great (beyond measure)!

44. The seven heavens and the earth,
 And all beings therein,
 Declare His glory:
 There is not a thing
 But celebrates His praise;
 And yet ye understand not
 How they declare His glory!
 Verily He is Oft-Forbearing,
 Most Forgiving!

45. When thou dost recite
 The Qur-an, We put,

[p. 707]

Between thee and those who
 Believe not to the Hereafter,
 A veil invisible:

46. And We put coverings
 Over their hearts (and minds)
 Lest they should understand
 The Our-an, and deafness
 Into their ears: when thou
 Dost commemorate thy Lord--
 And Him alone--in the Qur-an,
 They turn on their backs,
 Fleeing (from the Truth).

47. We know best why it is
 They listen, when they listen
 To thee; and when they
 Meet in private conference,
 Behold, the wicked say,
 "Ye follow none other than
 A man bewitched!"

48. See what similes they strike
 For thee: but they have gone
 Astray, and never can they
 Find a way.

49. They say: "What!
 When we are reduced

[p. 708]

To bones and dust,
 Should we really be raised up
 (To be) a new creation?

50. Say: "(Nay!) be ye
 Stones or iron,

51. "Or created matter
 Which, in your minds,
 Is hardest (to be raised up),
 (Yet shall ye be raised up)!"
 Then will they say:
 "Who will cause us
 To return?" Say: "He
 Who created you first!"
 Then will they wag
 Their heads towards thee,
 And say, "When will
 That be?" Say, "May be
 It will be quite soon!

52. "It will be on a Day
 When He will call you,
 And ye will answer
 (His call) with (words
 Of) His praise, and ye
 Will think that ye tarried
 But a little while!

[p. 709]

  

SECTION 6.

53. Say to My servants
 That they should (only) say
 Those things that are best:
 For Satan doth sow
 Dissensions among them:
 For Satan is to man
 An avowed enemy.

54. It is your Lord
 That knoweth you best:
 If He please, He granteth
 You mercy, or if He please,
 Punishment: We have not sent
 Thee to be a disposer
 Of their affairs for them.

55. And it is your Lord
 That knoweth best all beings
 That are in the heavens
 And on earth: We
 Did bestow on some Prophets
 More (and other) gifts
 Than on others: and We gave
 To David (the gift
 Of) the Psalms.

[p. 710]

56. Say: "Call on those--
 Besides Him--whom ye fancy:
 They have neither the power
 To remove your troubles
 From you nor to change them."

57. Those whom they call upon
 Do desire (for themselves) means
 Of access to their Lord,--
 Even those who are nearest:
 They hope for His Mercy
 And fear His Wrath:
 For the Wrath of thy Lord
 Is something to take heed of

58. There is not a population
 But We shall destroy it
 Before the Day of Judgment
 Or punish it with
 A dreadful Penalty:
 That is written
 In the (eternal) Record.

59. And We refrain from sending
 The Signs, only because
 The men of former generations
 Treated them as false:

[p. 711]

We sent the She-camel
 To the Thamud to open
 Their eyes, but they
 Treated her wrongfully:
 We only send the Signs
 By way of terror
 (And warning from evil).

60. Behold! We told thee
 That thy Lord doth encompass
 Mankind round about:
 We granted the Vision
 Which We showed thee,
 But as a trial for men,--
 As also the Cursed Tree
 (Mentioned) in the Qur-an:
 We put terror (and warning)
 Into them, but it only
 Increases their inordinate
 transgression!

[p. 712]

  

SECTION 7.

61. Behold! We said to the angels:
 "Bow down unto Adam":
 They bowed down except Iblis
 He said, "Shall I bow down
 To one whom Thou didst create
 From clay?"

62. He said, "Seest Thou? This is
 The one whom Thou hast honoured
 Above me! If Thou wilt but
 Respite me to the Day
 Of Judgment, I will surely
 Bring his descendants
 Under my sway
 All but a few!"

63. (God) said: "Go thy way;
 If any of them follow thee,
 Verily Hell will be
 The recompense of you (all)--
 An ample recompense.

[p. 713]

64. "Lead to destruction those
 Whom thou canst among them,
 With thy (seductive) voice;
 Make assaults on them
 With thy cavalry and thy
 Infantry; mutually share
 With them wealth and children;
 And make promises to them."
 But Satan promises them
 Nothing but deceit.

65. "As for My servants,
 No authority shalt thou
 Have over them:"
 Enough is thy Lord
 For a Disposer of affairs.

66. Your Lord is He
 That maketh the Ship
 Go smoothly for you
 Through the sea, in order that
 Ye may seek of His Bounty.
 For He is unto you
 Most Merciful.

67. When distress seizes you
 At sea, those that ye
 Call upon--besides Himself--
 Leave you in the lurch!
 But when He brings you back
 Safe to land, ye turn

[p. 714]

Away (from Him). Most ungrateful
 Is man!

68. Do ye then feel secure
 That He will not cause you
 To be swallowed up
 Beneath the earth
 When ye are on land,
 Or that He will not send
 Against you a violent tornado
 (With showers of stones)
 So that ye shall find
 No one to carry out
 Your affairs for you?

69. Or do ye feel secure
 That He will not send you
 Back a second time
 To sea and send against you
 A heavy gale to drown you
 Because of your ingratitude,
 So that ye find no helper
 Therein against Us?

70. We have honoured the sons
 Of Adam; provided them
 With transport on land and sea;
 Given them for sustenance things
 Good and pure; and conferred
 On them special favours,
 Above a great part
 Of Our Creation.

[p. 715]

  

SECTION 8.

71. One day We shall call
 Together all human beings
 With their (respective) Imams:
 Those who are given their record
 In their right hand
 Will read it (with pleasure),
 And they will not be
 Dealt with unjustly
 In the least.

72. But those who were blind
 In this world, will he
 Blind in the Hereafter,
 And most astray
 From the Path.

73. And their purpose was
 To tempt thee away
 From that which We
 Had revealed unto thee,
 To substitute in Our name
 Something quite different:
 (In that case), behold!
 They would certainly have
 Made thee (their) friend!

74. And had We not
 Given thee strength,

[p. 716]

Thou wouldst nearly
 Have inclined to them
 A little.

75. In that case We should
 Have made thee taste
 An equal portion (of punishment)
 In this life, and an equal portion
 In death: and moreover
 Thou wouldst have found
 None to help thee against Us!

76. Their purpose was to scare
 Thee off the land,
 In order to expel thee;
 But in that case they
 Would not have stayed
 (Therein) after thee,
 Except for a little while.

77. (This was Our) way
 With the apostles We sent
 Before thee: thou wilt find
 No change in Our ways.

  

SECTION 9.

78. Establish regular prayers--
 At the sun's decline

[p. 717]

Till the darkness of the night,
 And the morning prayer
 And reading: for the prayer
 And reading in the morning
 Carry their testimony.

79. And pray in the small watches
 Of the morning: (it would be)
 An additional prayer
 (Or spiritual profit)
 For thee: soon will thy Lord
 Raise thee to a Station
 Of Praise and Glory!

80. Say: "O my Lord!
 Let my entry be
 By the Gate of Truth
 And Honour, and likewise
 My exit by the Gate
 Of Truth and Honour;
 And grant me
 From Thy Presence
 An authority to aid (me).

[p. 718]

81. And say: "Truth has (now)
 Arrived, and Falsehood perished:
 For Falsehood is (by its nature)
 Bound to perish."

82. We send down (stage by stage)
 In the Qur-an that which
 Is a healing and a mercy
 To those who believe:
 To the unjust it causes
 Nothing but loss after loss.

83. Yet when We bestow
 Our favours on man,
 He turns away and becomes
 Remote on his side (instead
 Of coming to Us), and when
 Evil seizes him he
 Gives himself up to despair!

84. Say: "Everyone acts
 According to his own disposition:
 But your Lord knows best
 Who it is that is
 Best guided on the Way."

[p. 719]

  

SECTION 10.

85. They ask thee concerning
 The Spirit (of inspiration).
 Say: "The Spirit (cometh)
 By command of my Lord:
 Of knowledge it is only
 A little that is communicated
 To you, (O men!)"

86. If it were Our Will,
 We could take away
 That which We have
 Sent thee by inspiration
 Then wouldst thou find
 None to plead thy affair
 In that matter as against Us,--

87. Except for Mercy from thy Lord:
 For His Bounty is
 To thee (indeed) great.

88. Say: "If the whole
 Of mankind and Jinns
 Were to gather together
 To produce the like
 Of this Qur-an, they
 Could not produce
 The like thereof, even if
 They backed up each other

[p. 720]

With help and support.

89. And We have explained
 To man, in this Qur-an,
 Every kind of similitude:
 Yet the greater part of men
 Refuse (to receive it)
 Except with ingratitude!

90. They say: "We shall not
 Believe in thee, until thou
 Cause a spring to gush
 Forth for us from the earth,

91. "Or (until) thou have
 A garden of date trees
 And vines, and cause rivers
 To gush forth in their midst,
 Carrying abundant water;

92. "Or thou cause the sky
 To fall in pieces, as thou
 Sayest (will happen), against us;

[p. 721]

Or thou bring God
 And the angels before (us)
 Face to face;

93. "Or thou have a house
 Adorned with gold,
 Or thou mount a ladder
 Right into the skies.
 No, we shall not even believe
 In thy mounting until thou
 Send down to us a book
 That we could read."
 Say: "Glory to my Lord!
 Am I aught but a man,--
 An apostle?"

  

SECTION 11.

94. What kept men back
 From Belief when Guidance
 Came to them, was nothing
 But this: they said,
 "Has God sent a man
 (Like us) to be (His) Apostle?"

95. Say, "If there were settled,
 On earth, angels walking about

[p. 722]

In peace and quiet, We should
 Certainly have sent them
 Down from the heavens
 An angel for an apostle."

96. Say: "Enough is God
 For a witness between me
 And you: for He is
 Well acquainted with His servants,
 And He sees (all things).

97. It is he whom God guides,
 That is on true guidance;
 But he whom He leaves
 Astray--for such wilt thou
 Find no protector besides Him.
 On the Day of Judgment
 We shall gather them together,
 Prone on their faces,
 Blind, dumb, and deaf:
 Their abode will be Hell:
 Every time it shows abatement,
 We shall increase for them
 The fierceness of the Fire.

98. That is their recompense,
 Because they rejected Our Signs,
 And said, "When we are reduced
 To bones and broken dust,
 Should we really be raised up
 (To be) a new Creation?"

[p. 723]

99. See they not that God,
 Who created the heavens
 And the earth, has power
 To create the like of them
 (Anew)? Only He has
 Decreed a term appointed,
 Of which there is no doubt.
 But the unjust refuse
 (To receive it) except
 With ingratitude.

100. Say: "If ye had
 Control of the Treasures
 Of the Mercy of my Lord,
 Behold, ye would keep them
 Back, for fear of spending
 Them: for man
 Is (ever) niggardly!"

  

SECTION 12

101. To Moses We did give
 Nine Clear Signs:
 Ask the Children of Israel:
 When he came to them,
 Pharaoh said to him:
 "O Moses! I consider thee,

[p. 724]

Indeed, to have been
 Worked upon by sorcery!

102. Moses said, "Thou knowest
 Well that these things
 Have been sent down by none
 But the Lord of the heavens
 And the earth as eye-opening
 Evidence: and I consider thee
 Indeed, O Pharaoh, to be
 One doomed to destruction!"

103. So he resolved to remove them
 From the face of the earth:
 But We did drown him
 And all who were with him.

104. And We said thereafter
 To the Children of Israel,
 "Dwell securely in the land
 (Of promise)": but when
 The second of the warnings came
 To pass, We gathered you
 Together in a mingled crowd

[p. 725]

105. We sent down the (Qur-an)
 In Truth, and in Truth
 Has it descended: and We sent
 Thee but to give Glad
 Tidings and to warn (sinners).

106. (It is) a Qur-an
 Which We have divided
 (Into parts from time to time),
 In order that thou mightest
 Recite it to men
 At intervals: We have
 Revealed it by stages.

107. Say: "Whether ye believe
 In it or not, it is true
 That those who were given
 Knowledge beforehand, when
 It it recited to them,
 Fall down on their faces
 In humble prostration,

108. "And they say, "Glory
 To our Lord! Truly
 Has the promise of our Lord
 Been fulfilled!"

[p. 726]

109. They fall down on their faces
 In tears, and it increases
 Their (earnest) humility!

110. Say: "Call upon God, or
 Call upon Rahman:
 By whatever name ye call
 Upon Him, (it is well):
 For to Him belong
 The Most Beautiful Names.
 Neither speak thy Prayer aloud,
 Nor speak it in a low tone,
 But seek a middle course
 Between."

111. Say: "Praise be to God,
 Who begets no son,
 And has no partner
 In (His) dominion:
 Nor (needs) He any
 To protect Him from
 humiliation:
 Yea, magnify Him
 For His greatness and glory!"

[p. 727]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 728]

  

Sura XVIII.

  

Kahf, or the Cave.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Praise be to God,
 Who hath sent to His Servant
 The Book, and hath allowed
 Therein no Crookedness:

2. (He hath made it) Straight
 (And Clear) in order that
 He may warn (the godless)
 Of a terrible Punishment
 From Him, and that He
 May give Glad Tidings
 To the Believers who work
 Righteous deeds, that they
 Shall have a goodly Reward,

3. Wherein they shall
 Remain for ever:

4. Further; that He may warn
 Those (also) who say,

[p. 729]

"God hath begotten a son"

5. No knowledge have they
 Of such a thing, nor
 Had their fathers. It is
 A grievous thing that issues
 From their mouths as a saying.
 What they say is nothing
 But falsehood!

6. Thou wouldst only, perchance,
 Fret thyself to death,
 Following after them, in grief,
 If they believe not
 In this Message.

7. That which is on earth
 We have made but as
 A glittering show for the earth,
 In order that We may test
 Them--as to which of them
 Are best in conduct.

8. Verily what is on earth
 We shall make but as

[p. 730]

Dust and dry soil
 (Without growth or herbage).

9. Or dost thou reflect
 That the Companions of the Cave
 And of the Inscription
 Were wonders among Our Signs?

10. Behold, the youths betook themselves

[p. 731]

To the Cave: they said,
 "Our Lord! bestow on us
 Mercy from Thyself,
 And dispose of our affair
 For us in the right way!"

11. Then We draw (a veil)
 Over their ears, for a number
 Of years, in the Cave,
 (So that they heard not):

12. Then We roused them,
 In order to test which
 Of the two parties was best
 At calculating the term
 Of years they had tarried!

  

SECTION 2.

13. We relate to thee their story
 In truth: they were youths
 Who believed in their Lord,
 And We advanced them In guidance:

14. We gave strength to their hearts:

[p. 732]

Behold, they stood up
 And said: "Our Lord is
 The Lord of the heavens
 And of the earth: never
 Shall we call upon any god
 Other than Him: if we
 Did, we should indeed
 Have uttered an enormity!

15. "These our people have taken
 For worship gods other
 Than Him: why do they
 Not bring forward an authority
 Clear (and convincing)
 For what they do?
 Who doth more wrong
 Than such as invent
 A falsehood against God?

16. "When ye turn away
 From them and the things
 They worship other than God,
 Betake yourselves to the Cave:
 Your Lord will shower
 His mercies on you
 And dispose of your affair
 Towards comfort and ease."

17. Thou wouldst have seen
 The sun, when it rose,
 Declining to the right
 From their Cave, and when

[p. 733]

It set, turning away
 From them to the left,
 While they lay in the open
 Space in the midst
 Of the Cave. Such are
 Among the Signs of God:
 He whom God guides
 Is rightly guided; but he
 Whom God leaves to stray,--
 For him wilt thou find
 No protector to lead him
 To the Right Way.

  

SECTION 3.

18. Thou wouldst have deemed them
 Awake, whilst they were asleep,
 And We turned them
 On their right and on
 Their left sides: their dog
 Stretching forth his two fore-legs
 On the threshold: if thou
 Hadst come up on to them,
 Thou wouldst have certainly
 Turned back from them in flight,
 And wouldst certainly have been
 Filled with terror of them.

19. Such (being their state),
 We raised them up (from sleep),
 That they might question
 Each other. Said one of them,

[p. 734]

"How long have ye stayed (here)?"
 They said, "We have stayed
 (Perhaps) a day, or part
 Of a day." (At length)
 They (all) said, "God (alone)
 Knows best how long
 Ye have stayed here...
 Now send ye then one of you
 With this money of yours
 To the town: let him
 Find out which is the best
 Food (to be had) and bring some
 To you, that (ye may)
 Satisfy your hunger therewith:
 And let him behave
 With care and courtesy,
 And let him not inform
 Any one about you.

20. "For if they should
 Come upon you, they would
 Stone you or force you
 To return to their cult,
 And in that case ye would
 Never attain prosperity."

21. Thus did We make
 Their case known to the people,

[p. 735]

That they might know
 That the promise of God
 Is true, and that there can
 Be no doubt about the Hour
 Of Judgment. Behold,
 They dispute among themselves
 As to their affair. (Some) said,
 "Construct a building over them":
 Their Lord knows best
 About them: those who prevailed
 Over their affair said,
 "Let us surely build a place
 Of worship over them."

22. (Some) say they were three,
 The dog being the fourth
 Among them; (others) say
 They were five, the dog
 Being the sixth,--doubtfully
 Guessing at the unknown;
 (Yet others) say they were
 Seven, the dog being the eighth.
 Say thou: "My Lord
 Knoweth best their number;
 It is but few that know
 Their (real case)." Enter not,
 Therefore, into controversies
 Concerning them, except
 On a matter that is clear,
 Nor consult any of them
 About (the affair of) the Sleepers.

[p. 736]

  

SECTION 4.

23. Nor say of anything,
 "I shall be sure to do
 So and so to-morrow"--

24. Without adding, "So please God!"
 And call thy Lord to mind
 When thou forgettest, and say,
 "I hope that my Lord
 Will guide me ever closer
 (Even) than this
 To the right road."

25. So they stayed in their Cave
 Three hundred years, and (some)
 Add nine (more)

[p. 737]

26. Say: "God knows best
 How long they stayed:
 With Him is (the knowledge
 Of) the secrets of the heavens
 And the earth: how clearly
 He sees, how finely He hears
 (Everything)! They have no protector
 Other than Him; nor does
 He share His Command
 With any person whatsoever.

27. And recite (and teach)
 What has been revealed
 To thee of the Book
 Of thy Lord: none
 Can change His Words,
 And none wilt thou find
 As a refuge other than Him.

28. And keep thy soul content
 With those who call
 On their Lord morning
 And evening, seeking
 His Face; and let not
 Thine eyes pass beyond them,
 Seeking the pomp and glitter
 Of this Life; nor obey
 Any whose heart We
 Have permitted to neglect
 The remembrance of Us,
 One who follows his own

[p. 738]

Desires, whose case has
 Gone beyond all bounds.

29. Say, "The Truth is
 From your Lord":
 Let him who will,
 Believe, and let him
 Who will, reject (it):
 For the wrong-doers We
 Have prepared a Fire
 Whose (smoke and flames),
 Like the walls and roof
 Of a tent, will hem
 Them in: if they implore
 Relief they will be granted
 Water like melted brass,
 That will scald their faces.
 How dreadful the drink!
 How uncomfortable a couch
 To recline on!

30. As to those who believe
 And work righteousness,
 Verily We shall not suffer
 To perish the reward
 Of any who do
 A (single) righteous deed.

31. For them will be Gardens
 Of Eternity; beneath them
 Rivers will flow: they will
 Be adorned therein
 With bracelets of gold,
 And they will wear

[p. 739]

Green garments of fine silk
 And heavy brocade;
 They will recline therein
 On raised thrones.
 How good the recompense!
 How beautiful a couch
 To recline on!

  

SECTION 5.

32. Set forth to them
 The parable of two men:
 For one of them We provided
 Two gardens of grape-vines
 And surrounded them
 With date palms;
 In between the two
 We placed corn-fields.

33. Each of those gardens
 Brought forth its produce,
 And failed not in the least
 Therein: in the midst
 Of them We caused
 A river to flow.

34. (Abundant) was the produce
 This man had: he said
 To his companion, in the course
 Of a mutual argument:
 "More wealth have I
 Than you, and more honour
 And power in (my following
 Of) men."

[p. 740]

35. He went into his garden
 In a state (of mind)
 Unjust to his soul:
 He said, "I deem not
 That this will ever perish,

36. "Nor do I deem
 That the Hour (of Judgment)
 Will (ever) come:
 Even if I am brought back
 To my Lord, I shall
 Surely find (there)
 Something better in exchange."

37. His companion said to him,
 In the course of the argument
 With him: "Dost thou deny
 Him Who created thee
 Out of dust, then out of
 A sperm-drop, then fashioned
 Thee into a man?

38. "But (I think) for my part
 That He is God,
 My Lord, and none shall I
 Associate with my Lord.

39. "Why didst thou not,
 As thou wentest into
 Thy garden, say, "God's Will
 (Be done)! There is no power
 But with God!" If thou

[p. 741]

Dost see me less than
 Thee in wealth and sons,

40. "It may be that my Lord
 Will give me something
 Better than thy garden,
 And that He will send
 On thy garden thunderbolts
 (By way of reckoning)
 From heaven, making it
 (But) slippery sand!--

41. "Or the water of the garden
 Will run off underground
 So that thou wilt never
 Be able to find it."

42. So his fruits (and enjoyment)
 Were encompassed (with ruin),
 And he remained twisting
 And turning his hands
 Over what he had spent
 On his property, which had
 (Now) tumbled to pieces
 To its very foundations,
 And he could only say,
 "Woe is me! Would I had
 Never ascribed partners
 To my Lord and Cherisher!"

43. Nor had he numbers
 To help him against God,
 Nor was he able
 To deliver himself.

[p. 742]

44. There, the (only) protection comes
 From God, the True One.
 He is the Best to reward,
 And the Best to give success.

  

SECTION 6.

45. Set forth to them
 The similitude of the life
 Of this world: it is like
 The rain which We send
 Down from the skies:
 The earth's vegetation absorbs it,
 But soon it becomes
 Dry stubble, which the winds
 Do scatter: it is (only) God
 Who prevails over all things.

46. Wealth and sons are allurements
 Of the life of this world:
 But the things that endure,
 Good Deeds, are best
 In the sight of thy Lord,
 As rewards, and best
 As (the foundation for) hopes.

[p. 743]

47. One Day We shall
 Remove the mountains, and thou
 Wilt see the earth
 As a level stretch,
 And We shall gather them,
 All together, nor shall We
 Leave out any one of them.

48. And they will be marshalled
 Before thy Lord in ranks,
 (With the announcement),
 "Now have ye come to Us
 (Bare) as We created you
 First: aye, ye thought
 We shall not fulfil
 The appointment made to you
 To meet (Us)!":

49. And the Book (of Deeds)
 Will be placed (before you);
 And thou wilt see
 The sinful in great terror
 Because of what is (recorded)
 Therein; they will say,
 "Ah! woe to us!
 What a book is this!
 It leaves out nothing
 Small or great, but
 Takes account thereof!"
 They will find all that they
 Did, placed before them:
 And not one will thy Lord
 Treat with injustice.

[p. 744]

  

SECTION 7.

50. Behold! We said
 To the angels, "Bow down
 To Adam": they bowed down
 Except Iblis. He was
 One of the Jinns, and he
 Broke the Command
 Of his Lord.
 Will ye then take him
 And his progeny as protectors
 Rather than Me? And they
 Are enemies to you!
 Evil would be the exchange
 For the wrong-doers!

51. I called them not
 To witness the creation
 Of the heavens and the earth,
 Nor (even) their own creation:
 Nor is it for Me
 To take as helpers
 Such as lead (men) astray!

52. One Day He will say,
 "Call on those whom ye
 Thought to be My partners,"
 And they will call on them,
 But they will not listen
 To them; and We shall
 Make for them a place
 Of common perdition

[p. 745]

53. And the Sinful shall see
 The Fire and apprehend
 That they have to fall
 Therein no means will they
 Find to turn away therefrom.

  

SECTION 8.

54. We have explained
 In detail in this Qur-an,
 For the benefit of mankind,
 Every kind of similitude:
 But man is, in most things,
 Contentious.

55. And what is there
 To keep back men
 From believing, now that
 Guidance has come to them,
 Nor from praying for forgiveness
 From their Lord, but that
 (They ask that) the ways
 Of the ancients be repeated
 With them, or the Wrath
 Be brought to them
 Face to face?

56. We only send the apostles
 To give glad tidings
 And to give warnings
 But the Unbelievers dispute
 With vain argument, in order
 Therewith to weaken the truth,
 And they treat My Signs
 As a jest, as also the fact
 That they are warned!

[p. 746]

57. And who doth more wrong
 Than one who is reminded
 Of the Signs of his Lord,
 But turns away from them,
 Forgetting the (deeds) which his hands
 Have sent forth? Verily We
 Have set veils over their hearts
 Lest they should understand this,
 and over their ears, deafness.
 If thou callest them
 To guidance, even then
 Will they never accept guidance.

58. But your Lord is most forgiving,
 Full of Mercy. If he were
 To call them (at once) to account
 For what they have earned,
 then surely He would
 Have hastened their Punishment:
 But they have their appointed
 Time, beyond which they
 Will find no refuge.

59. Such were the populations
 We destroyed when they
 Committed iniquities; but
 We fixed an appointed time
 For their destruction.

[p. 747]

  

Section 9.

60. Behold, Moses said
 To his attendant, "I will not
 Give up until I reach
 The junction of the two
 Seas or (until) I spend
 Years and years in travel."

61. But when they reached
 The Junction, they forgot
 (About) their Fish, which took
 Its course through the sea
 (Straight) as in a tunnel.

[p. 748]

62. When they had passed on
 (Some distance), Moses said
 To his attendant: "Bring us
 Our early meal; truly
 We have suffered much fatigue
 At this (stage of) our journey."

63. He replied: "Sawest thou
 (What happened) when we
 Betook ourselves to the rock?
 I did indeed forget
 (About) the Fish: none but
 Satan made me forget
 To tell (you) about it:
 It took its course through
 The sea in a marvellous way!"

64. Moses said: "That was what
 We were seeking after:"
 So they went back
 On their footsteps, following
 (The path they had come).

65. So they found one
 Of Our servants,

[p. 749]

On whom We had bestowed
 Mercy from Ourselves
 And whom We had taught
 Knowledge from Our own
 Presence.

66. Moses said to him:
 "May I follow thee,
 On the footing that
 Thou teach me something
 Of the (Higher) Truth
 Which thou hast been taught?"

67. (The other) said: "Verily
 Thou wilt not be able
 To have patience with me!

68. "And how canst thou
 Have patience about things
 About which thy understanding
 Is not complete?"

69. Moses said: "Thou wilt
 Find me, if God so will,
 (Truly) patient: nor shall I
 Disobey thee in aught."

[p. 750]

70. The other said: "If then
 Thou wouldst follow me,
 Ask me no questions
 About anything until I
 Myself speak to thee
 Concerning it."

  

SECTION 10.

71. So they both proceeded:
 Until, when they were
 In the boat, he scuttled it.
 Said Moses: "Hast thou
 Scuttled it in order
 To drown those in it?
 Truly a strange thing
 Hast thou done!"

72. He answered: "Did I not
 Tell thee that thou canst
 Have no patience with me?"

73. Moses said: "Rebuke me not
 For forgetting, nor grieve me
 By raising difficulties
 In my case."

74. Then they proceeded:
 Until, when they met
 A young man, he slew him.
 Moses said: "Hast thou
 Slain an innocent person
 Who had slain none?
 Truly a foul (unheard-of) thing
 Hast thou done!"

[p. 751]

75. He answered, "Did I not
 Tell thee that thou canst
 Have no patience with me?"

76. (Moses) said: "If ever I
 Ask thee about anything
 After this, keep me not
 In thy company: then wouldst
 Thou have received (full) excuse
 From my side.

77. Then they proceeded:
 Until, when they came
 To the inhabitants of a town,
 They asked them for food,
 But they refused them
 Hospitality. They found there
 A wall on the point of
 Falling down, but he
 Set it up straight.
 (Moses) said: "If thou
 Hadst wished, surely thou
 Couldst have exacted some
 Recompense for it!"

78. He answered: "This is
 The parting between me
 And thee: now will I
 Tell thee the interpretation
 Of (those things) over which
 Thou wast unable
 To hold patience.

79. "As for the boat,
 It belonged to certain
 Men in dire want:
 They plied on the water:

[p. 752]

I but wished to render it
 Unserviceable, for there was
 After them a certain king
 Who seized on every boat
 By force.

80. "As for the youth,
 His parents were people
 Of Faith, and we feared
 That he would grieve them
 By obstinate rebellion
 And ingratitude (to God and man).

81. "So we desired that
 Their Lord would give them
 In exchange (a son)
 Better in purity (of conduct)
 And closer in affection.

82. "As for the wall,
 It belonged to two youths,
 Orphans, in the Town;
 There was, beneath it,
 A buried treasure, to which
 They were entitled; their father

[p. 753]

Had been a righteous man:
 So thy Lord desired that
 They should attain their age
 Of full strength and get out
 Their treasure--a mercy
 (And favour) from thy Lord.
 I did it not of my own
 Accord. Such is the interpretation
 Of (those things) over which
 Thou wast unable
 To hold patience."

  

SECTION 11.

83. They ask thee concerning
 Zul-qarnain. Say,

[p. 754]

"I will rehearse to you
 Something of his story."

84. Verily We established his power
 On earth, and We gave him
 The ways and the means
 To all ends.

85. One (such) way he followed,

86. Until, when he reached
 The setting of the sun,
 He found it set
 In a spring of murky water:
 Near it he found a People:
 We said: "O Zul-qarnain!
 (Thou hast authority,) either
 To punish them, or
 To treat them with kindness."

87. He said: "Whoever doth wrong,
 Him shall we punish; then
 Shall he be sent back
 To his Lord; and He will
 Punish him with a punishment
 Unheard-of (before).

88. "But whoever believes,
 And works righteousness,--

[p. 755]

He shall have a goodly
 Reward, and easy will be
 His task as we order it
 By our command."

89. Then followed he (another) way,

90. Until, when he came
 To the rising of the sun,
 He found it rising
 On a people for whom
 We had provided
 No covering protection
 Against the sun.

91. (He left them) as they were:
 We completely understood
 What was before him.

92. Then followed he (another) way,

93. Until, when he reached
 (A tract) between two mountains,
 He found, beneath them, a people
 Who scarcely understood a word.

[p. 756]

94. They said: "O Zul-qarnain!
 The Gog and Magog (people)
 Do great mischief on earth:
 Shall we then render thee
 Tribute in order that
 Thou mightest erect a barrier
 Between us and them?

95. He said: "(The power) in which
 My Lord has established me
 Is better (than tribute):
 Help me therefore with strength
 (And labour): I will
 Erect a strong barrier
 Between you and them:

96. "Bring me blocks of iron."
 At length, when he had
 Filled up the space between
 The two steep mountain-sides,
 He said, "Blow (with your bellows)"
 Then, when he had made
 It (red) as fire, he said:
 "Bring me, that I may
 Pour over it, molten lead."

[p. 757]

97. Thus were they made
 Powerless to scale it
 Or to dig through it.

98. He said: "This is
 A mercy from my Lord:
 But when the promise
 Of my Lord comes to pass,
 He will make it into dust;
 And the promise of
 My Lord is true."

99. On that day We shall
 Leave them to surge
 Like waves on one another
 The trumpet will be blown,
 And We shall collect them
 All together.

100. And We shall present
 Hell that day for Unbelievers
 To see, all spread out,--

101. (Unbelievers) whose eyes
 Had been under a veil
 From Remembrance of Me,
 And who had been unable
 Even to hear.

[p. 758]

  

SECTION 12.

102. Do the Unbelievers think
 That they can take
 My servants as protectors
 Besides Me? Verily We
 Have prepared Hell
 For the Unbelievers
 For (their) entertainment.

103. Say: "Shall we tell you
 Of those who lose most
 In respect of their deeds?--

104. "Those whose efforts have
 Been wasted in this life,
 While they thought that
 They were acquiring good
 By their works?"

105. They are those who deny
 The Signs of their Lord
 And the fact of their
 Having to meet Him
 (In the Hereafter): vain
 Will be their works,
 Nor shall We, on the Day
 Of Judgment, give them
 Any weight.

106. That is their reward,
 Hell; because they rejected
 Faith, and took My Signs
 And My Messengers
 By way of jest.

[p. 759]

107. As to those who believe
 And work righteous deeds,
 They have, for their entertainment,
 The Gardens of Paradise,

108. Wherein they shall dwell
 (For aye): no change
 Will they wish for from them.

109. Say: "If the ocean were
 Ink (wherewith to write out)
 The words of my Lord,
 Sooner would the ocean be
 Exhausted than would the words
 Of my Lord, even if we
 Added another ocean
 Like it, for its aid."

110. Say: "I am but a man
 Like yourselves, (but)
 The inspiration has come
 To me, that your God is
 One God: whoever expects
 To meet his Lord, let him
 Work righteousness, and,
 In the worship of his Lord,
 Admit no one as partner.

[p. 760] [p. 761] [p. 762] [p. 763] [p. 764] [p. 765] [p. 766]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 767]

  

Sura XIX.

  

Maryam, or Mary.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Kaf. Ha. Ya. 'Ain Sad.

2. (This is) a recital
 Of the Mercy of thy Lord
 To His servant Zakariya.

3. Behold! he cried
 To his Lord in secret,

4. Praying: "O my Lord!
 Infirm indeed are my bones,
 And the hair of my head
 Doth glisten with grey:
 But never am I unblest,
 O my Lord, in my prayer
 To Thee!

[p. 768]

5. "Now I fear (what)
 My relatives (and colleagues)
 (Will do) after me:
 But my wife is barren:
 So give me an heir
 As from Thyself,--

6. "(One that) will (truly)
 "Represent me, and represent
 The posterity of Jacob;
 And make him, O my Lord!
 One with whom Thou art
 Well-pleased!"

7. (His prayer was answered):

"O Zakariya! We give thee
 Good news of a son:
 His name shall be Yahya:
 On none by that name
 Have We conferred distinction before."

8. He said: "O my Lord!
 How shall I have a son,
 When my wife is barren
 And I have grown quite decrepit
 From old age?"

[p. 769]

9. He said: "So (it will be):
 Thy Lord saith, "That is
 Easy for Me: I did
 Indeed create thee before,
 When thou hadst been nothing!"

10. (Zakariya) said: "O my Lord!
 Give me a Sign."
 "Thy Sign," was the answer,
 "Shall be that thou
 Shalt speak to no man
 For three nights,
 Although thou art not dumb."

11. So Zakariya came out
 To his people
 From his chamber:
 He told them by signs
 To celebrate God's praises
 In the morning
 And in the evening.

12. (To his son came the command):
 "O Yahya! take hold

[p. 770]

Of the Book with might":
 And We gave him Wisdom
 Even as a youth,

13. And pity (for all creatures)
 As from us, and purity:
 He was devout,

14. And kind to his parents,
 And he was not overbearing
 Or rebellious.

15. So Peace on him
 The day he was born,
 The day that he dies,
 And the day that he
 Will be raised up
 To life (again)

[p. 771]

  

SECTION 2.

16. Relate in the Book
 (The story of) Mary,
 When she withdrew
 From her family
 To a place in the East.

17. She placed a screen
 (To screen herself) from them;
 Then We sent to her
 Our angel, and he appeared
 Before her as a man
 In all respects.

18. She said: "I seek refuge
 From thee to (God)
 Most Gracious: (come not near)
 If thou dost fear God."

19. He said: "Nay, I am only
 A messenger from thy Lord,
 (To announce) to thee
 The gift of a holy son."

20. She said: "How shall I
 Have a son, seeing that
 No man has touched me,
 And I am not unchaste?"

21. He said: "So (it will be):
 Thy Lord saith, "That is
 Easy for Me: and (We
 Wish) to appoint him
 As a Sign unto men
 And a Mercy from Us":

[p. 772]

It is a matter
 (So) decreed."

22. So she conceived him,
 And she retired with him
 To a remote place.

23. And the pains of childbirth
 Drove her to the trunk
 Of a palm-tree:
 She cried (in her anguish):
 "Ah! would that I had
 Died before this! would that
 I had been a thing
 Forgotten and out of sight!"

24. But (a voice) cried to her
 From beneath the (palm-tree):
 "Grieve not! for thy Lord
 Hath provided a rivulet
 Beneath thee;

25. "And shake towards thyself
 The trunk of the palm-tree:
 It will let fall
 Fresh ripe dates upon thee

26. "So eat and drink
 And cool (thine) eye.
 And if thou dost see
 Any man, say, 'I have

[p. 773]

Vowed a fast to (God)
 Most Gracious, and this day
 Will I enter into no talk
 With any human being'"

27. At length she brought
 The (babe) to her people,
 Carrying him (in her arms).
 They said: "O Mary!
 Truly an amazing thing
 Hast thou brought!

28. "O sister of Aaron!
 Thy father was not
 A man of evil, nor thy
 Mother a woman unchaste!"

29. But she pointed to the babe.
 They said: "How can we
 Talk to one who is
 A child in the cradle?"

30. He said: "I am indeed
 A servant of God:
 He hath given me
 Revelation and made me
 A prophet;

31. "And He hath made me
 Blessed wheresoever I be,

[p. 774]

And hath enjoined on me
 Prayer and Charity as long
 As I live;

32. "(He) hath made me kind
 To my mother, and not
 Overbearing or miserable;

33. "So Peace is on me
 The day I was born,
 The day that I die,
 And the day that I
 Shall be raised up
 To life (again)"!

34. Such (was) Jesus the son
 Of Mary: (it is) a statement
 Of truth, about which
 They (vainly) dispute.

35. It is not befitting
 To (the majesty of) God
 That He should beget
 A son. Glory be to Him!
 When He determines
 A matter, He only says
 To it, "Be", and it is.

36. Verily God is my Lord
 And your Lord: Him

[p. 775]

Therefore serve ye: this is
 A Way that is straight.

37. But the sects differ
 Among themselves: and woe
 To the Unbelievers because
 Of the (coming) Judgment
 Of a momentous Day!

38. How plainly will they see
 And hear, the Day that
 They will appear before Us!
 But the unjust to-day
 Are in error manifest!

39. But warn them of the Day
 Of Distress, when
 The matter will be determined:
 For (behold,) they are negligent
 And they do not believe!

40. It is We Who will inherit
 The earth, and all beings
 Thereon: to Us will they
 All be returned.

[p. 776]

  

SECTION 3.

41. (Also) mention in the Book
 (The story of) Abraham:
 He was a man of Truth,
 A prophet.

42. Behold, he said to his father:
 "O my father! why
 Worship that which heareth not
 And seeth not, and can
 Profit thee nothing?

43. "O my father! to me
 Hath come knowledge which
 Hath not reached thee:
 So follow me: I will guide
 Thee to a Way that
 Is even and straight.

44. "O my father! serve not
 Satan: for Satan is
 A rebel against (God)
 Most Gracious

45. "O my father! I fear
 Lest a Penalty afflict thee
 From (God) Most Gracious,
 So that thou become
 To Satan a friend."

[p. 777]

46. (The father) replied: "Dost thou
 Hate my gods, O Abraham?
 If thou forbear not, I will
 Indeed stone thee:
 Now get away from me
 For a good long while!"

47. Abraham said: "Peace be
 On thee: I will pray
 To my Lord for thy
 forgiveness:
 For He is to me
 Most Gracious.

48. "And I will turn away
 From you (all) and from those
 Whom ye invoke besides God:
 I will call on my Lord:
 Perhaps, by my prayer to my Lord,
 I shall be not unblest."

49. When he had turned away
 From them and from those
 Whom they worshipped besides
 God, We bestowed on him
 Isaac and Jacob, and each one
 Of them We made a prophet.

[p. 778]

50. And We bestowed
 Of Our Mercy on them,
 And We granted them
 Lofty honour on the tongue
 Of truth.

  

SECTION 4.

51. Also mention in the Book
 (The story of) Moses:
 For he was specially chosen,
 And he was an apostle
 (And) a prophet.

52. And We called him
 From the right side
 Of Mount (Sinai), and made
 Him draw near to Us,
 For mystic (converse).

53. And, out of Our Mercy,
 We gave him his brother
 Aaron, (also.) a prophet.

[p. 779]

54. Also mention in the Book
 (The story of) Isma'il
 He was (strictly) true
 To what he promised,
 And he was an apostle
 (And) a prophet.

55. He used to enjoin
 On his people Prayer
 And Charity, and he was
 Most acceptable in the sight
 Of his Lord.

56. Also mention in the Book
 The case of Idris
 He was a man of truth
 (And sincerity), (and) a prophet:

57. And We raised him
 To a lofty station.

58. Those were some
 Of the prophets on whom
 God did bestow His Grace,--
 Of the posterity of Adam,
 And of those whom We
 Carried (in the Ark)
 With Noah, and of
 The posterity of Abraham
 And Israel--of those
 Whom We guided and chose.

[p. 780]

Whenever the Signs
 Of (God) Most Gracious
 Were rehearsed to them,
 They would fall down
 In prostrate adoration
 And in tears.

59. But after them there followed
 A posterity who missed
 Prayers and followed after lusts
 Soon, then, will they
 Face Destruction,--

60. Except those who repent
 And believe, and work
 Righteousness: for these
 Will enter the Garden
 And will not be wronged
 In the least,--

61. Gardens of Eternity, those
 Which (God) Most Gracious
 Has promised to His servants
 In the Unseen: for His promise
 Must (necessarily) come to pass.

62. They will not there hear
 Any vain discourse, but
 Only salutations of Peace:
 And they will have therein
 Their sustenance, morning
 And evening.

[p. 781]

63. Such is the Garden which
 We give as an inheritance
 To those of Our servants
 Who guard against evil.

64. (The angels say:)
 "We descend not but
 By command of thy Lord:
 To Him belongeth what is
 Before us and what is
 Behind us, and what is
 Between: and thy Lord
 Never doth forget,--

65. "Lord of the heavens
 And of the earth,
 And of all that is
 Between them: so worship Him,
 And be constant and patient
 In His worship: knowest thou
 Of any who is worthy
 Of the same Name as He?"

  

SECTION 5.

66. Man says: "What!
 When I am dead, shall I
 Then be raised up alive?"

[p. 782]

67. But does not man
 Call to mind that We
 Created him before
 Out of nothing?

68. So, by thy Lord,
 Without doubt, We shall gather
 Them together, and (also)
 The Evil Ones (with them);
 Then shall We bring them
 Forth on their knees
 Round about Hell;

69. Then shall We certainly
 Drag out from every sect
 All those who were worst
 In obstinate rebellion
 Against (God) Most Gracious.

70. And certainly We know best
 Those who are most worthy
 Of being burned therein.

71. Not one of you but will
 Pass over it: this is,
 With thy Lord, a Decree
 Which must be accomplished.

72. But We shall save those
 Who guarded against evil,
 And We shall leave
 The wrong-doers therein,
 (Humbled) to their knees.

[p. 783]

73. When Our Clear Signs
 Are rehearsed to them,
 The Unbelievers say to those
 Who believe, "Which of the two
 Sides is best in point of
 Position? which makes the best
 Show in Council?"

74. But how many (countless)
 Generations before them
 Have We destroyed,
 Who were even better
 In equipment and in glitter
 To the eye?

75. Say: "If any men go
 Astray, (God) Most Gracious
 Extends (the rope) to them,
 Until, when they see
 The warning of God (being
 Fulfilled)--either in punishment
 Or in (the approach of)
 The Hour,--they will
 At length realise who is
 Worst in position, and (who)
 Weakest in forces!

76. "And God doth advance
 In guidance those who seek
 Guidance: and the things
 That endure, Good Deeds,
 Are best in the sight
 Of thy Lord, as rewards,
 And best in respect of
 (Their) eventual returns."

[p. 784]

77. Hast thou then seen
 The (sort of) man who
 Rejects Our Signs, yet
 Says: "I shall certainly
 Be given wealth and children?"

78. Has he penetrated to
 The Unseen, or has he
 Taken a contract with
 (God) Most Gracious?

79. Nay! We shall record
 What he says, and We
 Shall add and add
 To his punishment.

80. To Us shall return
 All that he talks of,
 And he shall appear
 Before Us bare and alone.

81. And they have taken
 (For worship) gods other than
 God, to give them
 Power and glory!

82. Instead, they shall reject
 Their worship, and become
 Adversaries against them.

[p. 785]

  

SECTION 6.

83. Seest thou not that We
 Have set the Evil Ones on
 Against the Unbelievers,
 To incite them with fury?

84. So make no haste
 Against them, for We
 But count out to them
 A (limited) number (of days).

85. The day We shall gather
 The righteous to (God)
 Most Gracious, like a hand
 Presented before a king for honours,

86. And We shall drive
 The sinners to hell,
 Like thirsty cattle
 Driven down to water,--

87. None shall have the power
 Of intercession, but such a one
 As has received permission (or promise)
 From (God) Most Gracious.

88. They say: "(God) Most Gracious
 Has begotten a son!"

89. Indeed ye have put forth
 A thing most monstrous!

[p. 786]

90. At it the skies are ready
 To burst, the earth
 To split asunder, and
 The mountains to fall down
 In utter ruin,

91. That they should invoke
 A son for (God) Most Gracious.

92. For it is not consonant
 With the majesty of (God)
 Most Gracious that He
 Should beget a son.

93. Not one of the beings
 In the heavens and the earth
 But must come to (God)
 Most Gracious as a servant.

94. He does take an account
 Of them (all), and hath
 Numbered them (all) exactly.

95. And everyone of them
 Will come to Him singly
 On the Day of Judgment.

96. On those who believe
 And work deeds of righteousness,
 Will (God) Most Gracious
 Bestow Love.

97. So have We made
 The (Qur-an) easy
 In thine own tongue,
 That with it thou mayest give

[p. 787]

Glad tidings to the righteous,
 And warnings to people
 Given to contention.

98. But how many (countless)
 Generations before them
 Have We destroyed? Canst thou
 Find a single one of them
 (Now) or hear. (so much
 As) a whisper of them?

[p. 788] [p. 789]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 790]

  

Sura XX.

  

Ta-Ha. (Mystic Letters, T. H.)

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ta-Ha.

2. We have not sent down
 The Qur-an to thee to be
 (An occasion) for thy distress,

3. But only as an admonition
 To those who fear (God),--

4. A revelation from Him
 Who created the earth
 And the heavens on high.

5. (God) Most Gracious
 Is firmly established
 On the throne (of authority).

6. To Him belongs what is
 In the heavens and on earth,
 And all between them,
 And all beneath the soil.

7. If thou pronounce the word
 Aloud, (it is no matter):

[p. 791]

For verily He knoweth
 What is secret and what
 Is yet more hidden.

8. God! there is no god
 But He! To Him belong
 The Most Beautiful Names.

9. Has the story of Moses
 Reached thee?

10. Behold, he saw a fire:
 So he said to his family,

[p. 792]

"Tarry ye; I perceive
 A fire; perhaps I can
 Bring you some burning brand
 Therefrom, or find some guidance
 At the fire."

11. But when he came
 To the fire, a voice
 Was heard: "O Moses!

12. "Verily I am thy Lord!
 Therefore (in My presence)
 Put off thy shoes: thou art
 In the sacred valley Tuwa

13. "I have chosen thee:
 Listen, then, to the inspiration
 (Sent to thee).

14. "Verily, I am God:
 There is no god but I:
 So serve thou Me (only),
 And establish regular prayer
 For celebrating My praise.

15. "Verily the Hour is coming--
 My design is to keep it

[p. 793]

Hidden--for every soul
 To receive its reward
 By the measure of
 Its Endeavour.

16. "Therefore let not such as
 Believe not therein
 But follow their own
 Lusts, divert thee therefrom,
 Lest thou perish!"...

17. "And what is that
 In thy right hand,
 O Moses?"

18. He said, "It is
 My rod: on it
 I lean; with it
 I beat down fodder
 For my flocks; and
 In it I find
 Other uses."

19. (God) said, "Throw it,
 O Moses!"

20. He threw it, and behold!
 It was a snake,
 Active in motion.

[p. 794]

21. (God) said, "Seize it,
 And fear not: We
 Shall return it at once
 To its former condition"...

22. "Now draw thy hand
 Close to thy side:
 It shall come forth white
 (And shining), without harm
 (Or stain),--as another Sign,--

23. "In order that We
 May show thee
 (Two) of our Greater Signs.

24. "Go thou to Pharaoh,
 For he has indeed
 Transgressed all bounds."

  

SECTION 2.

25. (Moses) said: "O my Lord!
 Expand me my breast;

26. "Ease my task for me;

27. "And remove the impediment
 From my speech,

28. "So they may understand
 What I say:

[p. 795]

29. "And give me a Minister
 From my family,

30. "Aaron, my brother;

31. "Add to my strength
 Through him,

32. "And make him share
 My task:

33. "That we may celebrate
 Thy praise without stint,

34. "And remember Thee
 Without stint:

35. "For Thou art He
 That (ever) regardeth us."

36. (God) said: "Granted
 Is thy prayer, O Moses!"

[p. 796]

37. "And indeed We conferred
 A favour on thee
 Another time (before).

38. "Behold! We sent
 To thy mother, by inspiration,
 The message:

39. "Throw (the child)
 Into the chest, and throw
 (The chest) into the river:
 The river will cast him
 Up on the bank, and he
 Will be taken up by one
 Who is an enemy to Me
 And an enemy to him
 But I cast (the garment
 Of) love over thee from Me
 And (this) in order that
 Thou mayest be reared
 Under Mine eye.

40. "Behold! thy sister goeth forth
 And saith, "Shall I show you

[p. 797]

One who will nurse
 And rear the (child)?
 So We brought thee back
 To thy mother, that her eye
 Might be cooled and she
 Should not grieve.
 Then thou didst slay
 A man, but We saved thee
 From trouble, and We tried
 Thee in various ways.
 Then didst thou tarry
 A number of years
 With the people of Midian.
 Then didst thou come hither
 As ordained, O Moses!

41. "And I have prepared thee
 For Myself (for service)"...

42. "Go, thou and thy brother,
 With My Signs,

[p. 798]

And slacken not,
 Either of you, in keeping
 Me in remembrance.

43. "Go, both of you, to Pharaoh,
 For he has indeed
 Transgressed all bounds;

44. "But speak to him mildly;
 Perchance he may take
 Warning or fear (God)."

45. They (Moses and Aaron) said:
 "Our Lord! We fear lest
 He hasten with insolence
 Against us, or lest he
 Transgress all bounds."

46. He said: "Fear not:
 For I am with you:
 I hear and see (everything).

47. "So go ye both to him,
 And say, "Verily we are
 Apostles sent by thy Lord:
 Send forth, therefore, the Children
 Of Israel with us, and
 Afflict them not:
 With a Sign, indeed,
 Have we come from thy Lord!

[p. 799]

And Peace to all
 Who follow guidance!

48. "Verily it has been revealed
 To us that the Penalty
 (Awaits) those who reject
 And turn away."

49. (When this message was delivered),
 (Pharaoh) said: "Who, then,
 O Moses, is the Lord
 Of you two?"

50. He said: "Our Lord is
 He Who gave to each
 (Created) thing its form
 And nature, and further,
 Gave (it) guidance."

51. (Pharaoh) said: "What then
 Is the condition
 Of previous generations?"

[p. 800]

52. He replied: "The knowledge
 Of that is with my Lord,
 Duly recorded: my Lord
 Never errs, nor forgets,--

53. "He Who has made for you
 The earth like a carpet
 Spread out; has enabled you
 To go about therein by roads
 (And channels); and has sent
 Down water from the sky."
 With it have We produced
 Divers pairs of plants
 Each separate front the others.

54. Eat (for yourselves) and pasture
 Your cattle: verily, in this
 Are Signs for men
 Endued with understanding.

  

SECTION 3.

55. From the (earth) did We
 Create you, and into it
 Shall We return you,
 And from it shall We
 Bring you out once again"

56. And We showed Pharaoh
 All Our Signs, but he
 Did reject and refuse.

[p. 80l]

57. He said: "Hast thou come
 To drive us out
 Of our land with thy magic,
 O Moses?

58. "But we can surely produce
 Magic to match thine!
 So make a tryst
 Between us and thee,
 Which we shall not fail
 To keep--neither we nor thou--
 In a place where both
 Shall have even chances."

59. Moses said: "Your tryst
 Is the Day of the Festival,
 And let the people be assembled
 When the sun is well up."

60. So Pharaoh withdrew:
 He concerted his plan,
 And then came (back).

61. Moses said to him:
 Woe to you! Forge not
 Ye a lie against God,
 Lest He destroy you (at once)

[p. 802]

Utterly by chastisement:
 The forger must suffer
 Frustration!"

62. So they disputed, one with
 Another, over their affair,
 But they kept their talk secret.

63. They said: "These two
 Are certainly (expert) magicians:
 Their object is to drive you
 Out from your land
 With their magic, and
 To do away with your
 Most cherished institutions.

64. "Therefore concert your plan,
 And then assemble
 In (serried) ranks:
 He wins (all along) to-day
 Who gains the upper hand"

65. They said: "O Moses!
 Whether wilt thou
 That thou throw (first)
 Or that we be the first
 To throw?"

66. He said, "Nay, throw ye
 First!" Then behold

[p. 803]

Their ropes and their rods--
 So it seemed to him
 On account of their magic--
 Began to be in lively motion!

67. So Moses conceived
 In his mind
 A (sort of) fear.

68. We said: "Fear not!
 For thou hast indeed
 The upper hand:

69. "Throw that which is
 In thy right hand:
 Quickly will it swallow up
 That which they have faked
 What they have faked
 Is but a magician's trick:
 And the magician thrives not,
 (No matter) where he goes."

70. So the magicians were
 Thrown down to prostration:
 They said, "We believe
 In the Lord of Aaron and Moses".

71. (Pharaoh) said: "Believe ye
 In Him before I give
 You permission? Surely
 This must be your leader,
 Who has taught you magic!
 Be sure I will cut off

[p. 804]

Your hands and feet
 On opposite sides, and I
 Will have you crucified
 On trunks of palm-trees:
 So shall ye know for certain,
 Which of us can give
 The more severe and the more
 Lasting Punishment!"

72. They said: "Never shall we
 Regard thee as more than
 The Clear Signs that have
 Come to us; or than
 Him Who created us!
 So decree whatever thou
 Desirest to decree: for thou
 Canst only decree (touching)
 The life of this world.

73. "For us, we have believed
 In our Lord: may He
 Forgive us our faults,
 And the magic to which
 Thou didst compel us:
 For God is Best
 And Most Abiding."

74. Verily he who comes
 To his Lord as a sinner
 (At Judgment),--for him
 Is Hell: therein shall he
 Neither die nor live.

[p. 805]

75. But such as come
 To Him as Believers
 Who have worked righteous deeds,--
 For them are ranks exalted,--

76. Gardens of Eternity,
 Beneath which flow rivers:
 They will dwell therein
 For aye: such is the reward
 Of those who purify
 Themselves (from evil).

  

SECTION 4.

77. We sent an inspiration
 To Moses: "Travel by night
 With My servants, and strike
 A dry path for them
 Through the sea, without fear
 Of being overtaken (by Pharaoh)
 And without (any other) fear."

78. Then Pharaoh pursued them
 With his forces, but
 The waters completely overwhelmed
 Them and covered them up.

79. Pharaoh led his people astray
 Instead of leading them aright.

[p. 806]

80. O ye Children of Israel!
 We delivered you from
 Your enemy, and We
 Made a Covenant with you
 On the right side of
 Mount (Sinai), and We sent
 Down to you Manna
 And quails:

81. (Saying): "Eat of the good
 Things We have provided
 For your sustenance, but
 Commit no excess therein,
 Lest My Wrath should justly
 Descend on you: and those
 On whom descends My Wrath
 Do perish indeed!

82. "But, without doubt, I am
 (Also) He that forgives
 Again and again, to those
 Who repent, believe,
 And do right,--who,
 In fine, are ready to receive
 True guidance."

83. (When Moses was up on the Mount,
 God said:) "What made thee
 Hasten in advance of thy people,
 O Moses?"

84. He replied: "Behold, they are
 Close on my footsteps:

[p. 807]

I hastened to Thee.
 O my Lord,
 To please Thee."

85. (God) said: "We have tested
 Thy people in thy absence:
 The Samiri has led them
 Astray."

86. So Moses returned to his people
 In a state of indignation
 And sorrow. He said:
 "O my people! did not
 Your Lord make a handsome
 Promise to you? Did then
 The promise seem to you
 Long (in coming)? Or did ye
 Desire that Wrath should
 Descend from your Lord on you,
 And so ye broke your promise
 To me?"

87. They said: "We broke not
 The promise to thee, as far
 As lay in our power:
 But we were made to carry
 The weight of the ornaments
 Of the (whole) people, and we

[p. 808]

Threw them (into the fire),
 And that was what
 The Samiri suggested.

88. "Then he brought out
 (Of the fire) before the (people)
 The image of a calf:
 It seemed to low:
 So they said, "This is
 Your god, and the god
 Of Moses, but (Moses)
 Has forgotten!"

89. Could they not see that
 It could not return them
 A word (for answer), and that
 It had no power either
 To harm them or
 To do them good?

  

SECTION 5.

90. Aaron had already, before this
 Said to them: ."O my people!
 Ye are being tested in this:
 For verily your Lord is (God)
 Most Gracious: so follow me
 And obey my command."

[p. 809]

91. They had said: "We will not
 Abandon this cult, but we
 Will devote ourselves to it
 Until Moses returns to us.

92. (Moses) said: "O Aaron!
 What kept thee back, when
 Thou sawest them going wrong,

93. "From following me? Didst thou
 Then disobey my order?"

94. (Aaron) replied: "O son
 Of my mother! Seize (me) not
 By my beard nor by
 (The hair of) my head!
 Truly I feared lest thou
 Shouldst say, "Thou hast caused
 A division among the Children
 Of Israel, and thou didst not
 Respect my word!"

95. (Moses) said: "What then
 Is thy case, O Samari?"

96. He replied: "I saw what
 They saw not: so I took

[p. 810]

A handful (of dust) from
 The footprint of the Apostle,
 And threw it (into the calf):
 Thus did my soul suggest
 To me."

97. (Moses) said: "Get thee gone!
 But thy (punishment) in this life
 Will be that thou wilt say,
 'Touch me not'; and moreover
 (For a future penalty) thou hast
 A promise that will not fail:
 Now look at thy god,
 Of whom thou hast become
 A devoted worshipper:
 We will certainly (melt) it
 In a blazing fire and scatter
 It broadcast in the sea!"

[p. 811]

98. But the God of you all
 Is the One God: there is
 No god but He: all things
 He comprehends in His knowledge.

99. Thus do We relate to thee
 Some stories of what happened
 Before: for We have sent
 Thee a Message from
 Our own Presence,

100. If any do turn away
 Therefrom, verily they will
 Bear a burden
 On the Day of Judgment;

101. They will abide in this (state):
 And grievous will the burden
 Be to them on that Day,--

102. The Day when the Trumpet
 Will be sounded: that Day,
 We shall gather the sinful,
 Blear-eyed (with terror).

103. In whispers will they consult
 Each other: "Ye tarried not
 Longer than ten (Days);"

104. We know best what they
 Will say, when their leader

[p. 812]

Most eminent in Conduct
 Will say: "Ye tarried not
 Longer than a day!"

  

SECTION 6.

105. They ask thee concerning
 The Mountains: say, "My Lord
 Will uproot them and scatter
 Them as dust;

106. "He will leave them as plains
 Smooth and level;

107. "Nothing crooked or curved
 Wilt thou see in their place."

108. On that Day will they follow
 The Caller (straight): no crookedness

[p. 813]

(Can they show) him: all sounds
 Shall humble themselves in
 The Presence of (God) Most Gracious:
 Nothing shalt thou hear
 But the tramp of their feet
 (As they march).

109. On that Day shall no
 Intercession avail
 Except for those for whom
 Permission has been granted
 By (God) Most Gracious
 And whose word is
 Acceptable to Him.

110. He knows what (appears
 To His creatures as) before
 Or after or behind them:
 But they shall not compass it
 With their knowledge.

111. (All) faces shall be humbled
 Before (Him)--the Living,
 The Self-Subsisting, Eternal:
 Hopeless indeed will be
 The man that carries
 Iniquity (on his back).

[p. 814]

112. But he who works deeds
 Of righteousness, and has faith,
 Will have no fear of harm
 Nor of any curtailment
 (Of what is his due).

113. Thus have We sent this
 Down--an Arabic Qur-an--
 And explained therein in detail
 Some of the warnings,
 In order that they may
 Fear God, or that it may
 Cause their remembrance (of Him).

114. High above all is God,
 The King, the Truth!
 Be not in haste
 With the Qur-an before
 Its revelation to thee
 Is completed, but say,
 "O my Lord! advance me
 In knowledge."

115. We had already, beforehand,
 Taken the covenant of Adam,

[p. 815]

But he forgot: and We found
 On his part no firm resolve.

  

SECTION 7.

116. When We said to the angels,
 "Prostrate yourselves to Adam",
 They prostrated themselves, but not
 Iblis: he refused.

117. Then We said: "O Adam!
 Verily, this is an enemy
 To thee and thy wife:
 So let him not get you
 Both out of the Garden,
 So that thou art landed
 In misery.''

118. "There is therein (enough provision)
 For thee not to go hungry
 Nor to go naked,

119. "Nor to suffer from thirst,
 Nor from the sun's heat."

120. But Satan whispered evil
 To him: he said, "O Adam!
 Shall I lead thee to
 The Tree of Eternity
 And to a kingdom
 That never decays?"

[p. 816]

121. In the result, they both
 Ate of the tree, and so
 Their nakedness appeared
 To them: they began to sew
 Together, for their covering,
 Leaves from the Garden:
 Thus did Adam disobey
 His Lord, and allow himself
 To be seduced.

122. But his Lord chose him
 (For His Grace): He turned
 To him, and gave him guidance.

123. He said: "Get ye down,
 Both of you,--all together,
 From the Garden, with enmity
 One to another: but if,
 As is sure, there comes to you
 Guidance from Me, whosoever
 Follows My guidance, will not
 Lose his way, nor fall
 Into misery.

124. "But whosoever turns away
 From My Message, verily
 For him is a life narrowed
 Down, and We shall raise

[p. 817]

Him up blind on the Day
 Of Judgment."

125. He will say: "O my Lord!
 Why hast thou raised me
 Up blind, while I had
 Sight (before)?"

126. (God) will say: "Thus
 Didst thou, when Our Signs
 Came unto thee, disregard
 Them: so wilt thou,
 This day, be disregarded."

127. And thus do We recompense
 Him who transgresses beyond bounds
 And believes not in the Signs
 Of his Lord: and the Penalty
 Of the Hereafter is far more
 Grievous and more enduring.

128. Is it not a warning to such
 Men (to call to mind)
 How many generations before them
 We destroyed, in whose haunts
 They (now) move? Verily,
 In this are Signs for men
 Endued with understanding.

[p. 818]

  

SECTION 8.

129. Had it not been
 For a Word that went forth
 Before from thy Lord,
 (Their punishment) must necessarily
 Have come; but there is
 A term appointed (for respite).

130. Therefore be patient with what
 They say, and celebrate (constantly)
 The praises of thy Lord,
 Before the rising of the sun,
 And before its setting;
 Yea, celebrate them
 For part of the hours
 Of the night, and at the sides
 Of the day: that thou
 Mayest have (spiritual) joy.

131. Nor strain thine eyes in longing
 For the things We have given
 For enjoyment to parties ,
 Of them, the splendour

[p. 819]

Of the life of this world,
 Through which We test them:
 But the provision of thy Lord
 Is better and more enduring.

132. Enjoin prayer on thy people,
 And be constant therein.
 We ask thee not to provide
 Sustenance: We provide it
 For thee. But the (fruit of)
 The Hereafter is for Righteousness.

133. ''They say: "Why does he not
 Bring us a Sign from
 His Lord?" Has not
 A Clear Sign come to them
 Of all that was
 In the former Books
 Of revelation?

134. And if We had inflicted
 On them a penalty before this,
 They would have said:
 "Our Lord! If only Thou
 Hadst sent us an apostle,
 We should certainly have followed

[p. 820]

Thy Signs before we were
 Humbled and put to shame."

135. Say: "Each one (of us)
 Is waiting: wait ye, therefore,
 And soon shall ye know
 Who it is that is
 On the straight and even
 Way, and who it is
 That has received guidance."

[p. 821]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 822]

  

Sura XXI.

  

Anbiyaa, or The Prophets

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Closer and closer to mankind
 Comes their Reckoning: yet they
 Heed not and they turn away.

2. Never comes (aught) to them
 Of a renewed Message
 From their Lord, but they
 Listen to it as in jest,--

3. Their hearts toying as with
 Trifles. The wrong-doers conceal
 Their private counsels, (saying),
 "Is this (one) more than
 A man like yourselves?
 Will ye go to witchcraft
 With your eyes open?"

4. Say: "My Lord
 Knoweth (every) word (spoken)
 In the heavens and on earth:
 He is the One that heareth
 And knoweth (all things)."

[p. 823]

5. "Nay," they say, "(these are)
 Medleys of dreams!--Nay,
 He forged it!--Nay,
 He is (but) a poet!
 Let him then bring us
 A Sign like the ones
 That were sent to
 (Prophets) of old!"

6. (As to those) before them,
 Not one of the populations
 Which We destroyed believed:
 Will these believe?

7. Before thee, also, the apostles
 We sent were but men,
 To whom We granted inspiration:
 If ye realise this not, ask
 Of those who possess the Message.

8. Nor did We give them
 Bodies that ate no food,
 Nor were they exempt from death.

9. In the end We fulfilled
 To them Our promise,
 And We saved them
 And those whom We pleased,

[p. 824]

But We destroyed those
 Who transgressed beyond bounds.

10. We have revealed for you
 (O men!) a book in which
 Is a Message for you:
 Will ye not then understand?

  

SECTION 2.

11. How many were the populations
 We utterly destroyed because
 Of their iniquities, setting up
 In their places other peoples?

12. Yet, when they felt
 Our Punishment (coming),
 Behold, they (tried to) flee
 From it.

13. Flee not, but return to
 The good things of this life
 Which were given you,
 And to your homes,
 In order that ye may
 Be called to account

14. They said: "Ah! woe to us!
 We were indeed wrong-doers!"

15. And that cry of theirs
 Ceased not, till we made

[p. 825]

Them as a field
 That is mown, as ashes
 Silent and quenched.

16. Not for (idle) sport did We
 Create the heavens and the earth
 And all that is between!

17. If it had been Our wish
 To take (just) a pastime,
 We should surely have taken
 It from the things nearest
 To Us, if We would
 Do (such a thing)!

18. Nay, We hurl the Truth
 Against falsehood, and it knocks
 Out its brain, and behold,
 Falsehood doth perish!
 Ah! woe be to you
 For the (false) things
 Ye ascribe (to Us).

19. To Him belong all (creatures)
 In the heavens and on earth:
 Even those who are in His
 (Very) Presence are not 
 Too proud to serve Him,
 Nor are they (ever) weary
 (Of His service):

20. They celebrate His praises
 Night and day, nor do they
 Ever flag or intermit.

[p. 826]

21. Or have they taken
 (For worship) gods from the earth
 Who can raise (the dead)?

22. If there were, in the heavens
 And the earth, other gods
 Besides God, there would
 Have been confusion in both!
 But glory to God,
 The Lord of the Throne:
 (High is He) above
 What they attribute to Him!

23. He cannot be questioned
 For His acts, but they
 Will be questioned (for theirs).

24. Or have they taken
 For worship (other) gods
 Besides him? Say, "Bring
 Your convincing proof: this
 Is the Message of those
 With me and the Message
 Of those before me."
 But most of them know not
 The Truth, and so turn away.

[p. 827]

25. Not an apostle did We
 Send before thee without
 This inspiration sent by Us
 To him: that there is
 No god but I; therefore
 Worship and serve Me.

26. And they say: "(God)
 Most Gracious has begotten
 Offspring." Glory to Him!
 They are (but) servants raised
 To honour.

27. They speak not before
 He speaks, and they act
 (In all things) by His command.

28. He knows what is before them,
 And what is behind them,
 And they offer no intercession
 Except for those who are
 Acceptable, and they stand
 In awe and reverence
 Of His (glory).

29. If any of them should say,
 "I am a god besides Him",
 Such a one We should
 Reward with Hell: thus
 Do We reward those
 Who do wrong.

[p. 828]

  

SECTION 3.

30. Do not the Unbelievers see
 That the heavens and the earth
 Were joined together (as one
 Unit of Creation), before
 We clove them asunder?
 We made from water
 Every living thing. Will they
 Not then believe?

31. And We have set on the earth
 Mountains standing firm,

[p. 829]

Lest it should shake with them,
 And We have made therein
 Broad highways
 (between mountains)
 For them to pass through:
 That they may receive guidance.

32. And We have made
 The heavens as a canopy
 Well guarded: yet do they
 Turn away from the Signs
 Which these things (point to)!

33. It is He Who created
 The Night and the Day,
 And the sun and the moon:
 All (the celestial bodies)
 Swim along, each in its
 Rounded course.

34. We granted not to any man
 Before thee permanent life
 (Here): If then thou shouldst die,
 Would they live permanently?

35. Every soul shall have
 A taste of death:
 And We test you
 By evil and by good

[p. 830]

By way of trial.
 To Us must ye return.

36. When the Unbelievers see thee,
 They treat thee not except
 With ridicule. "Is this,"
 (They say), "the one who talks
 Of your gods?" And they
 Blaspheme at the mention
 Of (God) Most Gracious!

37. Man is a creature of haste:
 Soon (enough) will I show
 You My Signs; then
 Ye will not ask Me
 To hasten them!

38. They say: "When will this
 Promise come to pass,
 If ye are telling the truth?"

39. If only the Unbelievers
 Knew (the time) when they
 Will not be able
 To ward off the Fire
 From their faces, nor yet
 From their backs, and (when)
 No help can reach them!

40. Nay, it may come to them
 All of a sudden and confound
 Them: no power will they
 Have then to avert it,
 Nor will they (then)
 Get respite.

[p. 831]

41. Mocked were (many)
 Apostles before thee;
 But their scoffers
 Were hemmed in
 By the thing that they mocked.

  

SECTION 4.

42. Say, "Who can keep
 You safe by night and by day
 From (the Wrath of) (God)
 Most Gracious?" Yet they
 Turn away from the mention
 Of their Lord.

43. Or have they gods that
 Can guard them from Us?
 They have no power to aid
 Themselves, nor can they
 Be defended from Us.

44. Nay, We gave the good things
 Of this life to these men
 And their fathers until
 The period grew long for them;
 See they not that We
 Gradually reduce the land
 (In their control) from
 Its outlying borders? Is it
 Then they who will win?

[p. 832]

45. Say, "I do but warn you
 According to revelation":
 But the deaf will not hear
 The call, (even) when
 They are warned!

46. If but a breath of the Wrath
 Of thy Lord do touch them,
 They will then say, "Woe
 To us! we did wrong indeed!"

47. We shall set up scales
 Of justice for the day
 Of Judgment, so that
 Not a soul will be dealt with
 Unjustly in the least.
 And if there be
 (No more than) the weight
 Of a mustard seed,
 We will bring it (to account):
 And enough are We
 To take account.

48. In the past We granted
 To Moses and Aaron

[p. 833]

The Criterion (for judgment),
 And a Light and a Message
 For those who would do right,--

49. Those who fear their Lord
 In their most secret thoughts,
 And who hold the Hour
 (Of Judgment) in awe.

50. And this is a blessed
 Message which We have
 Sent down: will ye then
 Reject it?

[p. 834]

51. We bestowed aforetime
 On Abraham his rectitude
 Of conduct, and well were we
 Acquainted with him.

52. Behold! he said
 To his father and his people
 "What are these images,
 To which ye are
 (So assiduously) devoted?"

53. They said, "We found
 Our fathers worshipping them."

54. He said, "Indeed ye
 Have been made in manifest
 Error--ye and your fathers."

55. They said, "Have you
 Brought us the Truth,
 Or are you one
 Of those who jest?"

56. He said, "Nay, your Lord
 Is the Lord of the heavens
 And the earth, He Who
 Created them (from nothing):
 And I am a witness
 To this (truth).

[p. 835]

57. "And by god, I have
 A plan for your idols--
 After ye go away
 And turn your backs"...

58. So he broke them to pieces,
 (All) but the biggest of them,
 That they might turn
 (And address themselves) to it.

59. They said, "Who has
 Done this to our gods?
 He must indeed be
 Some man of impiety!"

60. They said, "We heard
 A youth talk of them:
 He is called Abraham."

61. They said, "Then bring him
 Before the eyes of the people,
 That they may bear witness:"

62. They said, "Art thou
 The one that did this
 With our gods, O Abraham?"

[p. 836]

63. He said: "Nay, this
 Was done by --
 This is their biggest one!
 Ask them, if they
 Can speak intelligently!"

64. So they turned to themselves
 And said, "Surely ye
 Are the ones in the wrong!

65. Then were they confounded
 With shame: (they said),
 "Thou knowest full well that
 These (idols) do not speak!"

66. (Abraham) said, "Do ye then
 Worship, besides God,
 Things that can neither
 Be of any good to you
 Nor do you harm?

67. "Fie upon you, and upon
 The things that ye worship
 Besides God! Have ye
 No sense?"...

68. They said, "Burn him
 And protect your gods,
 If ye do (anything at all)!"

[p. 837]

69. We said, "O Fire!
 Be thou cool,
 And (a means of) safety
 For Abraham!"

70. Then they sought a stratagem
 Against him: but We
 Made them the ones
 That lost most!

71. But We delivered him
 And (his nephew) Lut
 (And directed them) to the land
 Which We have blessed
 For the nations.

72. And We bestowed on him Isaac

[p. 838]

And, as an additional gift,
 (A grandson), Jacob, and We
 Made righteous men of every one
 (Of them).

73. And We made them
 Leaders, guiding (men) by
 Our Command, and We
 Sent them inspiration
 To do good deeds,
 To establish regular prayers,
 And to practise regular charity;
 And they constantly served
 Us (and Us only).

74. And to Lut, too,
 We gave Judgment and Knowledge,
 And We saved him
 From the town which practised
 Abominations: truly they were
 A people given to Evil,
 A rebellious people.

75. And We admitted him
 To Our Mercy: for he
 Was one of the Righteous.

  

SECTION 6.

76. (Remember) Noah, when
 He cried (to Us) aforetime:
 We listened to his (prayer)
 And delivered him and his
 Family from great distress.

[p. 839]

77. We helped him against
 People who rejected Our Signs:
 Truly they were a people
 Given to Evil: so We
 Drowned them (in the Flood)
 All together.

78. And remember David
 And Solomon, when they
 Gave judgment in the matter
 Of the field into which
 The sheep of certain people
 Had strayed by night:
 We did witness their judgment.

79. To Solomon We inspired
 The (right) understanding
 Of the matter: to each
 (Of them) We gave Judgment
 And Knowledge; it was
 Our power that made
 The hills and the birds
 Celebrate Our praises,
 With David: it was We
 Who did (all these things).

80. It was We Who taught him
 The making of coats of mail

[p. 840]

For your benefit, to guard
 You from each other's violence:
 Will ye then be grateful?

81. (It was Our power that
 Made) the violent (unruly)
 Wind flow (tamely) for Solomon,
 To his order, to the land
 Which We had blessed:
 For We do know all things.

82. And of the evil ones,
 Were some who dived
 For him, and did other work
 Besides; and it was We
 Who guarded them.

83. And (remember) Job, when
 He cried to his Lord,
 "Truly distress has seized me,
 But Thou art the Most

[p. 841]

Merciful of those that are
 Merciful."

84. So We listened to him:
 We removed the distress
 That was on him,
 And We restored his people
 To him, and doubled
 Their number,--as a Grace
 From Ourselves, and a thing
 For commemoration, for all
 Who serve Us.

85. And (remember) Isma'il,
 Idris, and Zul-kifl, all
 (Men) of constancy and patience;

86. We admitted them to
 Our Mercy: for they
 Were of the Righteous ones.

[p. 842]

87. And remember Zun-nun,
 When he departed in wrath:
 He imagined that We
 Had no power over him!
 But he cried through the depths
 Of darkness, "There is
 No god but Thou:
 Glory to Thee: I was
 Indeed wrong!"

88. So We listened to him:
 And delivered him from
 Distress: and thus do We
 Deliver those who have faith.

89. And (remember) Zakariya,
 When he cried to his Lord:
 "O my Lord! leave me not
 Without offspring, though Thou
 Art the best of inheritors."

90. So We listened to him:
 And We granted him

[p. 843]

Yabya: We cured his wife's
 (Barrenness) for him. These (three)
 Were ever quick in emulation
 In good works: they used
 To call on Us with love
 And reverence, and humble themselves
 Before Us.

91. And (remember) her who
 Guarded her chastity:
 We breathed into her
 Of Our Spirit, and We
 Made her and her son
 A Sign for all peoples.

92. Verily, this Brotherhood
 Of yours is a single Brotherhood,
 And I am your Lord
 And Cherisher: therefore
 Serve Me (and no other).

93. But (later generations) cut off
 Their affair (of unity),
 One from another: (yet)
 Will they all return to Us.

[p. 844]

  

SECTION 7.

94. Whoever works any act
 Of Righteousness and has Faith,--
 His endeavour will not
 Be rejected: We shall
 Record it in his favour.

95. But there is a ban
 On any population which
 We have destroyed: that they
 Shall not return,

96. Until the Gog and Magog (people)
 Are let through (their barrier),
 And they swiftly swarm
 From every hill.

97. Then will the True Promise
 Draw nigh (of fulfilment):
 Then behold! the eyes
 Of the Unbelievers will
 Fixedly stare in horror: "Ah!
 Woe to us! we were indeed
 Heedless of this; nay, we
 Truly did wrong!"

[p. 845]

98. Verily ye, (Unbelievers),
 And the (false) gods that
 Ye worship besides God,
 Are (but) fuel for Hell!
 To it will ye (surely) come!

99. If these had been gods,
 They would not have got there!
 But each one will abide
 Therein.

100. There, sobbing will be
 Their lot, nor will they
 There hear (aught else).

101. Whose hose for whom
 The Good (Record) from Us
 Has gone before, will be
 Removed far therefrom.

102. Not the slightest sound
 Will they hear of Hell:
 What their souls desired,
 In that will they dwell.

103. The Great Terror will
 Bring them no grief:
 But the angels will meet them
 (With mutual greetings):
 "This is your Day,--
 (The Day) that ye were promised."

[p. 846]

104. The Day that We roll up
 The heavens like a scroll
 Rolled up for books (completed),--
 Even as We produced
 The first Creation, so
 Shall We produce
 A new one: a promise
 We have undertaken:
 Truly shall We fulfil it.

105. Before this We wrote
 In the Psalms, after the Message
 (Given to Moses): "My servants,
 The righteous, shall inherit
 The earth."

106. Verily in this (Qur-an)
 Is a Message for people
 Who would (truly) worship God.

107. We sent thee not, but
 As a Mercy for all creatures.

[p. 847]

108. Say: "What has come to me
 By inspiration is that
 Your God is One God:
 Will ye therefore bow
 To His Will (in Islam)?"

109. But if they turn back,
 Say: "I have proclaimed
 The Message to you all alike
 And in truth; but I
 Know not whether that
 Which ye are promised
 Is near or far.

110. "It is He Who knows
 What is open in speech
 And what ye hide
 (In your hearts).

111. "I know not but that
 It may be a trial
 For you, and a grant
 Of (worldly) livelihood
 (To you) for a time."

[p. 848]

112. Say: "O my Lord!
 Judge Thou in truth!
 "Our Lord Most Gracious
 Is the One Whose assistance
 Should be sought against
 The blasphemies ye utter!

[p. 849]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 850]

  

Sura XXII.

  

Hajj, or The Pilgrimage.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. O mankind! Fear your Lord!
 For the convulsion of the Hour
 (Of Judgment) will be
 A thing terrible!

2. The Day ye shall see it,
 Every mother giving suck
 Shall forget her suckling-babe,
 And every pregnant female
 Shall drop her load (unformed):
 Thou shalt see mankind
 As in a drunken riot,
 Yet not drunk: but dreadful
 Will be the Wrath of God.

3. And yet among men
 There are such as dispute
 About God, without knowledge,
 And follow every evil one
 Obstinate in rebellion!

4. About the (Evil One)
 It is decreed that whoever
 Turns to him for friendship,
 Him will he lead astray,
 And he will guide him
 To the Penalty of the Fire.

[p. 851]

5. O mankind! if ye have
 A doubt about the Resurrection,
 (Consider) that We created you
 Out of dust, then out of
 Sperm, then out of a leech-like
 Clot, then out of a morsel
 Of flesh, partly formed
 And partly unformed, in order
 That We may manifest
 (Our power) to you;
 And We cause whom We will
 To rest in the wombs
 For an appointed term,
 Then do We bring you out
 As babes, then (foster you)
 That ye may reach your age
 Of full strength; and some
 Of you are called to die,
 And some are sent back
 To the feeblest old age,
 So that they know nothing
 After having known (much),
 And (further), thou seest
 The earth barren and lifeless,
 But when We pour down
 Rain on it, it is stirred
 (To life), it swells,
 And it puts forth every kind
 Of beautiful growth (in pairs).

[p. 852]

6. This is so, because God
 Is the Reality: it is He
 Who gives life to the dead,
 And it is He Who has
 Power over all things.

7. And verily the Hour will come:
 There can be no doubt
 About it, or about (the fact)
 That God will raise up
 All who are in the graves.

8. Yet there is among men
 Such a one as disputes
 About God, without knowledge,
 Without guidance, and without
 A Book of Enlightenment,--

9. (Disdainfully) bending his side,
 In order to lead (men) astray
 From the Path of God:
 For him there is disgrace
 In this life, and on the Day
 Of Judgment We shall
 Make him taste the Penalty
 Of burning (Fire).

10. (It will be said): "This is
 Because of the deeds which
 Thy hands sent forth,
 For verily God is not
 Unjust to His servants."

[p. 853]

  

SECTION 2.

11. There are among men
 Some who serve God,
 As it were, on the verge:
 If good befalls them, they are,
 Therewith, well content; but
 If a trial comes to them,
 They turn on their faces:
 They lose both this world
 And the Hereafter: that
 Is loss for all to see!

12. They call on such deities:
 Besides God, as can neither
 Hurt nor profit them:
 That is straying far indeed
 (From the Way)!

13. (Perhaps) they call on one
 Whose hurt is nearer
 Than his profit: evil, indeed,
 Is the patron, and evil
 The companion (for help)!

14. Verily God will admit
 Those who believe and work
 Righteous deeds, to Gardens,
 Beneath which rivers flow:
 For God carries out
 All that He plans,

[p. 854]

15. If any think that God
 Will not help him
 (His Apostle) in this world
 And the Hereafter, let him
 Stretch out a rope
 To the ceiling and cut (himself)
 Off: then let him see
 Whether his plan will remove
 That which enrages (him)!

16. Thus have We sent down
 Clear Signs; and verily
 God Both guide whom
 He will!

17. Those who believe (in the Qur-an),
 Those who follow the Jewish (scriptures),
 And the Sabians, Christians,
 Magians, and Polytheists,--
 God will judge between them

[p. 855]

On the Day of Judgment:
 For God is witness
 Of all things.

18. Seest thou not that
 To God bow down in worship
 All things that are
 In the heavens and on earth,--
 The sun, the moon, the stars;
 The hills, the trees, the animals;
 And a great number among
 Mankind? But a great number
 Are (also) such as are
 Fit for Punishment: and such
 As God shall disgrace,
 None can raise to honour:
 For God carries out
 All that He wills.

19. These two antagonists dispute
 With each other about their Lord:
 But those who deny (their Lord),--
 For them will be cut out
 A garment of Fire:
 Over their heads will be
 Poured out boiling water.

20. With it will be scalded
 What is within their bodies,
 As well as (their) skins.

21. In addition there will be
 Maces of iron (to punish) them.

[p. 856]

22. Every time they wish
 To get away therefrom,
 From anguish, they will be
 Forced back therein, and
 (It will be said), "Taste ye
 The Penalty of Burning!"

  

SECTION 3.

23. God will admit those
 Who believe and work righteous deeds,
 To Gardens beneath which
 Rivers flow: they shall be
 Adorned therein with bracelets
 Of gold and pearls; and
 Their garments there
 Will be of silk.

24. For they have been guided
 (In this life) to the purest
 Of speeches; they have been
 Guided to the Path of Him
 Who is Worthy of (all) Praise.

25. As to those who have rejected
 (God), and would keep back (men)
 From the Way of God, and
 From the Sacred Mosque, which
 We have made (open) to (all) men--
 Equal is the dweller there
 And the visitor from the country
 And any whose purpose therein
 Is profanity or wrong-doing--
 Them will We cause to taste
 Of a most grievous Penalty.

[p. 857]

  

SECTION 4.

26. Behold! We gave the site,
 To Abraham, of the (Sacred) House,
 (Saying): "Associate not anything
 (In worship) with Me;
 And sanctify My House
 For those who compass it round,
 Or stand up,
 Or bow, or prostrate themselves
 (Therein in prayer).

27. "And proclaim the Pilgrimage
 Among men: they will come
 To thee on foot and (mounted)
 On every kind of camel,
 Lean on accout of journeys
 Through deep and distant
 Mountain highways;

28. "That they may witness
 The benefits (provided) for them,

[p. 858]

And celebrate the name
 Of God, through the Days
 Appointed, over the cattle
 Which He has provided for them
 (For sacrifice): then eat ye
 Thereof and feed the distressed
 Ones in want.

29. "Then let them complete
 The rites prescribed
 For them, perform their vows,
 And (again) circumambulate
 The Ancient House."

30. Such (is the Pilgrimage):
 Whoever honours the sacred
 Rites of God, for him
 It is good in the sight
 Of his Lord. Lawful to you
 (For food in Pilgrimage) are cattle,
 Except those mentioned to you
 (As exceptions): but shun
 The abomination of idols,
 And shun the word
 That is false,--

31. Being true in faith to God,
 And never assigning partners

[p. 859]

To Him: if anyone assigns
 Partners to God, he is
 As if he had fallen
 From heaven and been snatched up
 By birds, or the wind
 Had swooped (like a bird
 On its prey) and thrown him
 Into a far-distant place.

32. Such (is his state): and
 Whoever holds in honour
 The Symbols of God,
 (In the sacrifice of animals),
 Such (honour) should come truly
 From piety of heart.

33. In them ye have benefits
 For a term appointed:
 In the end their place
 Of sacrifice is near
 The Ancient House.

  

SECTION 5.

34. To every people did We
 Appoint rites (of sacrifice),
 That they might celebrate
 The name of God over

[p. 860]

The sustenance He gave them
 From animals (fit for food).
 But your god is One God:
 Submit then your wills to him
 (In Islam): and give thou
 The good news to those
 Who humble themselves,--

35. To those whose hearts,
 When God is mentioned,
 Are filled with fear,
 Who show patient perseverance
 Over their afflictions, keep up
 Regular prayer, and spend
 (In charity) out of what
 We have bestowed upon them.

36. The sacrificial camels
 We have made for you
 As among the symbols from
 God: in them is (much)
 Good for you: then pronounce
 The name of God over them
 As they line up (for sacrifice):
 When they are down
 On their sides (after slaughter),
 Eat ye thereof, and feed
 Such as (beg not but)
 Live in contentment,
 And such as beg
 With due humility: thus have

[p. 861]

We made animals subject
 To you, that ye
 May be grateful.

37. It is not their meat
 Nor their blood, that reaches
 God: it is your piety
 That reaches Him: He
 Has thus made them subject
 To you, that ye may glorify
 God for his guidance to you:
 And proclaim the Good News
 To all who do right.

38. Verily God will defend
 (From ill) those who believe:
 Verily, God loveth not
 Any that is a traitor
 To faith, or shows ingratitude.

  

SECTION 6.

39. To those against whom
 War is made, permission
 Is given (to fight), because
 They are wronged;--and verily,
 God is most Powerful
 For their aid;--

40. (They are) those who have
 Been expelled from their homes

[p. 862]

In defiance of right,
 (For no cause) except
 That they say," Lord
 Is God". Did not God
 Check one set of people
 By means of another,
 There would surely have been
 Pulled down monasteries, churches,
 Synagogues, and mosques, in which
 The name of God is commemorated
 In abundant measure. God will
 Certainly aid those who
 Aid His (cause);--for verily
 God is Full of Strength,
 Exalted in Might,
 (Able to enforce His Will).

41. (They are) those who,
 If We establish them
 In the land, establish
 Regular prayer and give
 Regular charity, enjoin
 The right and forbid wrong:
 With God rests the end
 (And decision) of (all) affairs.

42. If they treat thy (mission)
 As false, so did the Peoples

[p. 863]

Before them (with their Prophets),--
 The People of Noah,
 And 'Ad and Thamud;

43. Those of Abraham and Lut;

44. And the Companions
 Of the Madyan people;
 And Moses was rejected
 (In the same way). But I
 Granted respite to the Unbelievers,
 And (only) after that
 Did I punish them:
 But how (terrible) was
 My rejection (of them)!

45. How many populations have We
 Destroyed, which were given
 To wrong-doing? They tumbled down
 On their roofs. And how many
 Wells are lying idle and neglected,
 And castles lofty and well-built?

46. Do they not travel
 Through the land, so that
 Their hearts (and minds)
 May thus learn wisdom

[p. 864]

And their ears may
 Thus learn to hear?
 Truly it is not their eyes
 That are blind, but their
 Hearts which are
 In their breasts.

47. Yet they ask thee
 To hasten on the Punishment!
 But God will not fail
 In His promise. Verily
 A Day in the sight of thy Lord
 Is like a thousand years
 Of your reckoning.

48. And to how many populations
 Did I give respite, which
 Were given to wrong-doing?
 In the end I punished them.
 To Me is the destination (of all).

  

SECTION 7.

49. Say: "O men! I am
 (Sent) to you only to give

[p. 865]

A clear warning:

50. "Those who believe and work
 Righteousness, for them
 Is forgiveness and a sustenance
 Most generous.

51. "But those who strive
 Against Our Signs, to frustrate
 Them,--they will be
 Companions of the Fire."

52. Never did We send
 An apostle or a prophet
 Before thee, but, when he
 Framed a desire, Satan
 Threw some (vanity)
 Into his desire: but God
 Will cancel anything (vain)
 That Satan throws in,
 And God will confirm
 (And establish) His Signs:
 For God is full of knowledge
 And wisdom:

53. That He may make
 The suggestions thrown in
 By Satan, but a trial
 For those in whose hearts

[p. 866]

 a disease and who are
 Hardened of heart: verily
 The wrong-doers are in a schism
 Far (from the Truth):

54. And that those on whom
 Knowledge has been bestowed may learn
 That the (Qur-an) is the Truth
 From thy Lord, and that they
 May believe therein, and their hearts
 May be made humbly (open)
 To it: for verily God is
 The Guide of those who believe,
 To the Straight Way.

55. Those who reject Faith
 Will not cease to be
 In doubt concerning (Revelation)
 Until the Hour (of Judgment)
 Comes suddenly upon them,
 Or there comes to them
 The Penalty of a Day of Disaster.

56. On that Day the Dominion
 Will be that of God:
 He will judge between them:
 So those who believe
 And work righteous deeds will be
 In Gardens of Delight.

57. And for those who reject Faith
 And deny Our Signs,
 There will be a humiliating
 Punishment.

[p. 867]

  

SECTION 8.

58. Those who leave their homes
 In the cause of God,
 And are then slain or die,
 On them will God bestow verily
 A goodly Provision:
 Truly God is He Who
 Bestows the best Provision.

59. Verily He will admit then
 To a place with which
 They shall be well pleased:
 For God is All-Knowing,
 Most Forbearing.

60. That (is so). And if one
 Has retaliated to no greater
 Extent than the injury he received,
 And is again set upon
 Inordinately, God will help
 Him: for God is One
 That blots out (sins)
 And forgives (again and again).

61. What is because God merges
 Night into Day, and He
 Merges Day into Night, and
 Verily it is God Who hears

[p. 868]

And sees (all things).

62. That is because God--He
 Is the Reality; and those
 Besides Him whom they invoke,--
 They are but vain Falsehood:
 Verily God is He, Most High,
 Most Great.

63. Seest thou not that God
 Sends down rain from the sky,
 And forthwith the earth
 Becomes clothed with green?
 For God is He Who understands
 The finest mysteries, and
 Is well-acquainted (with them).

64. To Him belongs all that is
 In the heavens and on earth:
 For verily God,--He is
 Free of all wants,
 Worthy of all praise.

[p. 869]

  

SECTION 9.

65. Seest thou not that God
 Has made subject to you (men)
 All that is on the earth,
 And the ships that sail
 Through the sea by His command?
 He withholds the sky (rain)
 From falling on the earth
 Except by His leave:
 For God is Most Kind
 And Most Merciful to man.

66. It is He Who gave you life,
 Will cause you to die,
 And will again give you
 Life: truly man is
 A most ungrateful creature!

67. To every People have We
 Appointed rites and ceremonies
 Which they must follow:
 Let them not then dispute
 With thee on the matter,
 But do thou invite (them)
 To thy Lord: for thou art
 Assuredly on the Right Way.

68. If they do wrangle with thee,
 Say, "God knows best
 What it is ye are doing."

[p. 870]

69. "God will judge between you
 On the Day of Judgment
 Concerning the matters in which
 Ye differ."

70. Knowest thou not that
 God knows all that is
 In heaven and on earth?
 Indeed it is all
 In a record, and that
 Is easy for God.

71. Yet they worship, besides God,
 Things for which no authority
 Has been sent down to them,
 And of which they have
 (Really) no knowledge:
 For those that do wrong
 There is no helper.

72. When Our Clear Signs
 Are rehearsed to them,
 Thou wilt notice a denial
 On the faces of the Unbelievers!
 They nearly attack with violence
 Those who rehearse Our Signs
 To them. Say, "Shall I
 Tell you of something
 (Far) worse than these Signs?
 It is the Fire (of Hell)!

[p. 871]

God has promised it
 To the Unbelievers!
 And evil is that destination!"

  

SECTION 10.

73. O men! Here is
 A parable set forth!
 Listen to it! Those
 On whom, besides God,
 Ye call, cannot create
 (Even) a fly, if they all
 Met together for the purpose!
 And if the fly should snatch
 Away anything from them,
 They would have no power
 To release it from the fly.
 Feeble are those who petition
 And those whom they petition!

74. No just estimate have they
 Made of God: for God
 Is He Who is strong
 And able to carry out
 His Will.

75. God chooses Messengers
 From angels and from men
 For God is He Who hears
 And sees (all things).

76. He knows what is before them
 And what is behind them:

[p. 872]

And to God go back
 All questions (for decision).

77. O ye who believe!
 Bow down, prostrate yourselves,
 And adore your Lord;
 And do good;
 That ye may prosper.

78. And strive in His cause
 As ye ought to strive,
 (With sincerity and under discipline).
 He has chosen you, and has
 Imposed no difficulties on you
 In religion; it is the cult
 Of your father Abraham.
 It is He Who has named
 You Muslims, both before
 And in this (Revelation);
 That the Apostle may be
 A witness for you, and ye
 Be witnesses for mankind!
 So establish regular Prayer,
 Give regular Charity,
 And hold fast to God!
 He is your Protector--
 The best to protect
 And the Best to help!

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 873]

[p. 874]

  

Sura XXIII.

  

Mu-minun, or The Believers.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. The Believers must
 (Eventually) win through,--

2. Those who humble themselves
 In their prayers;

3. Who avoid vain talk;

4. Who are active in deeds
 Of charity;

5. Who abstain from sex,

6. Except with those joined
 To them in the marriage bond,
 Or (the captives) whom
 Their right hands possess,--
 For (in their case) they are
 Free from blame,

7. But those whose desires exceed
 Those limits are transgressors;--

[p. 875]

8. Those who faithfully observe
 Their trusts and their covenants;

9. And who (strictly) guard
 Their prayers;--

10. These will be the heirs,

11. Who will inherit Paradise:
 They will dwell therein
 (For ever).

12. Man We did create
 From a quintessence (of clay);

13. Then We placed him
 As (a drop of) sperm

[p. 876]

In a place of rest,
 Firmly fixed;

14. Then We made the sperm
 Into a clot of congealed blood;
 Then of that clot We made
 A (foetus) lump; then We
 Made out of that lump
 Bones and clothed the bones
 With flesh; then We developed
 Out of it another creature.
 So blessed be God,
 The Best to create!

15. After that, at length
 Ye will die.

16. Again, on the Day
 Of Judgment, will ye be
 Raised up.

17. And We have made, above you,
 Seven tracts; and We
 Are never unmindful
 Of (Our) Creation,

[p. 877]

18. And We send down water
 From the sky according to
 (Due) measure, and We cause it
 To soak in the soil;
 And We certainly are able
 To drain it off (with ease).

19. With it We grow for you
 Gardens of date-palms
 And vines: in them have ye
 Abundant fruits: and of them
 Ye eat (and have enjoyment),--

20. Also a tree springing
 Out of Mount Sinai,
 Which produces oil,
 And relish for those
 Who use it for food.

21. And in cattle (too) ye
 Have an instructive example:
 From within their bodies
 We produce (milk) for you

[p. 878]

To drink; there art, in them,
 (Besides), numerous (other)
 Benefits for you;
 And of their (meat) ye eat;

22. And on them, as well as
 In ships, ye ride.

  

SECTION 2.

23. (Further, We sent a long line
 Of prophets for your instruction).
 We sent Noah to his people:
 He said, "O my people!
 Worship God! Ye have
 No other god but Him.
 Will ye not fear (Him)?"

24. The chiefs of the Unbelievers
 Among his people said:
 "He is no more than a man
 Like yourselves: his wish is
 To assert his superiority
 Over you: if God had wished
 (To send messengers),
 He could have sent down
 Angels: never did we hear
 Such a thing (as he says),
 Among our ancestors of old."

25. (And some said): "He is
 Only a man possessed:
 Wait (and have patience)
 With him for a time."

[p. 879]

26. (Noah) said: "O my Lord!
 Help me: for that they
 Accuse me of falsehood!"

27. So We inspired him
 (With this message): "Construct
 The Ark within Our sight
 And under Our guidance: then
 When comes Our command,
 And the fountains of the earth
 Gush forth, take thou on board
 Pairs of every species, male
 And female, and thy family--
 Except those of them
 Against whom the Word
 Has already gone forth:
 And address Me not
 In favour of the wrong-doers;
 For they shall be drowned
 (In the Flood).

28. And when thou hast embarked
 On the Ark--thou and those
 With thee,--say: "Praise be
 To God, Who has saved us
 From the people who do wrong."

29. And say: "O my Lord!
 Enable me to disembark
 With Thy blessing: for Thou
 Art the Best to enable (us)
 To disembark."

30. Verily in this there are
 Signs (for men to understand);
 (Thus) do We try (men)."

[p. 880]

31. Then We raised after them
 Another generation.

32. And We sent to them
 An apostle from among themselves,
 (Saying), "Worship God!
 Ye have no other god
 But Him. Will ye not
 Fear (Him)?"

  

SECTION 3.

33. And the chiefs
 Of his people, who disbelieved
 And denied the Meeting
 In the Hereafter, and on whom
 We had bestowed the good things
 Of this life, said: "He is
 No more than a man
 Like yourselves: he eats
 Of that of which ye eat,
 And drinks of what ye drink.

34. "If ye obey a man
 Like yourselves, behold,
 It is certain ye will be lost.

35. "Does he promise that
 When ye die and become dust
 And bones, ye shall be
 Brought forth (again)?

36. "Far, very far is that
 Which ye are promised!

[p. 881]

37. "There is nothing but
 Our life in this world!
 We shall die and we live!
 But we shall never
 Be raised up again!

38. "He is only a man
 Who invents a lie
 Against God, but we
 Are not the ones
 To believe in him!"

39. (The prophet) said:
 "O my Lord! help me:
 For that they accuse me
 Of falsehood."

40. (God) said: "In but
 A little while, they
 Are sure to be sorry!"

41. Then the Blast overtook them
 With justice, and We made them
 As rubbish of dead leaves
 (Floating on the stream of Time)!
 So away with the people
 Who do wrong!

42. Then We raised after them
 Other generations.

43. No people can hasten
 Their term, nor can they
 Delay (it).

[p. 882]

44. Then sent We Our apostles
 In succession: every time
 There came to a people
 Their apostle, they accused him
 Of falsehood: so We made
 Them follow each other
 (In punishment): We made them
 As a tale (that is told):
 So away with a people
 That will not believe!

45. When We sent Moses
 And his brother Aaron,
 With Our Signs and
 Authority manifest,

46. To Pharaoh and his Chiefs:
 But these behaved insolently:
 They were an arrogant people.

47. They said: "Shall we believe
 In two men like ourselves?
 And their people are subject
 To us!"

48. So they accused them
 Of falsehood, and they became
 Of those who were destroyed.

49. And We gave Moses
 The Book, in order that
 They might receive guidance.

[p. 883]

50. And We made
 The son of Mary
 And his mother
 As a Sign:
 We gave them both
 Shelter on high ground,
 Affording rest and security
 And furnished with springs.

  

SECTION 4.

51. O ye apostles! enjoy
 (All) things good and pure,
 And work righteousness:
 For I am well-acquainted
 With (all) that ye do.

52. And verily this Brotherhood
 Of yours is a single Brotherhood,
 And I am your Lord
 And Cherisher: therefore
 Fear Me (and no other).

[p. 884]

53. But people have cut off
 Their affair (of unity),
 Between them, into sects:
 Each party rejoices in that
 Which is with itself.

54. But leave them
 In their confused ignorance
 For a time.

55. Do they think that because
 We have granted them abundance
 Of wealth and sons,

56. We would hasten them
 On in every good? Nay,
 They do not understand.

57. Verily those who live
 In awe for fear of their Lord;

58. Those who believe
 In the Signs of their Lord;

59. Those who join not (in worship)
 Partners with their Lord;

60. And those who dispense
 Their charity with their hearts
 Full of fear, because
 They will return to their Lord;--

61. It is these who hasten
 In every good work,
 And these who are
 Foremost in them.

[p. 885]

62. On no soul do We
 Place a burden greater
 Than it can bear:
 Before Us is a record
 Which clearly shows the truth:
 They will never be wronged.

63. But their hearts are
 In confused ignorance
 Of this; and there are,
 Besides that, deeds of theirs,
 Which they will (continue)
 To do,--

64. Until, when We seize
 In Punishment those of them
 Who received the good things
 Of this world, behold,
 They will groan in supplication!

65. (It will be said):
 "Groan not in supplication
 This day; for ye shall
 Certainly not be helped by Us.

66. "My Signs used to be
 Rehearsed to you, but ye
 Used to turn back
 On your heels--

67. "In arrogance: talking nonsense
 About the (Qur-an), like one
 Telling fables by night."

[p. 886]

68. Do they not ponder over
 The Word (of God), or
 Has anything (new) come
 To them that did not
 Come to their fathers of old?

69. Or do they not recognise
 Their Apostle, that they
 Deny him?

70. Or do they say, "he is
 Possessed"? Nay, he has
 Brought them the Truth,
 But most of them
 Hate the Truth.

71. If the Truth had been
 In accord with their desires,
 Truly the heavens and the earth,
 And all beings therein
 Would have been in confusion
 And corruption! Nay, We
 Have sent them their admonition,
 But they turn away
 From their admonition.

72. Or is it that thou
 Askest them for some
 Recompense? But the recompense
 Of thy Lord is best:
 He is the Best of those
 Who give sustenance.

73. But verily thou callest them
 To the Straight Way;

[p. 887]

74. And verily those who
 Believe not in the Hereafter
 Are deviating from that Way.

75. If We had mercy on them
 And removed the distress
 Which is on them, they
 Would obstinately persist
 In their transgression,
 Wandering in distraction
 To and fro.

76. We inflicted Punishment
 On them, but they
 Humbled not themselves
 To their Lord, nor do they
 Submissively entreat (Him)!--

77. Until We open on them
 A gate leading to
 A severe Punishment: then
 Lo! they will be plunged
 In despair therein!

  

SECTION 5.

78. It is He Who has created
 For you (the faculties of)
 Hearing, sight, feeling
 And understanding: little thanks
 It is ye give!

[p. 888]

79. And He Has multiplied you
 Through the earth, and to Him
 Shall ye be gathered back.

80. It is He Who gives
 Life and death, and to Him
 (Is due) the alternation
 Of Night and Day:
 Will ye not then understand?

81. On the contrary they say
 Things similar to what
 The ancients said.

82. They say: "What! When we
 Die and become dust and bones,
 Could we really be
 Raised up again?

83. "Such things have been promised
 To us and to our fathers
 Before! They are nothing
 But tales of the ancients!"

84. Say: "To whom belong
 The earth and all beings therein?
 (Say) if ye know!"

85. They will say, "To God!"
 Say: "Yet will ye not
 Receive admonition?"

86. Say: "Who is the Lord
 Of the seven heavens,
 And the Lord of the Throne
 (Of Glory) Supreme?"

[p. 889]

87. They will say, "(They belong)
 To God." Say: "Will ye not
 Then be filled with awe?"

88. Say: "Who is it in whose
 Hands is the governance
 Of all things,--who protects
 (All), but is not protected
 (Of any)? (Say) if ye know."

89. They will say, "(It belongs)
 To God." Say: "Then how
 Are ye deluded?"

90. We have sent them the Truth:
 But they indeed practise Falsehood!

91. No son did God beget,
 Nor is there any god
 Along with Him: (if there were
 Many gods), behold, each god
 Would have taken away
 What he had created,
 And some would have
 Lorded it over others!
 Glory to God! (He is free)
 From the (sort of) things
 They attribute to Him!

92. He knows what is hidden
 And what is open: too high
 Is He for the partners
 They attribute to Him!

[p. 890]

  

SECTION 6.

93. Say: "O my Lord!
 If Thou wilt show me
 (In my lifetime) that which
 They are warned against,--

94. "Then, O my Lord! put me not
 Amongst the people
 Who do wrong!"

95. And We are certainly able
 To show thee (in fulfilment)
 That against which they are warned.

96. Repel evil with that'
 Which is best: We are
 Well acquainted with
 The things they say.

97. And say "O my Lord!
 I seek refuge with Thee

[p. 891]

From the suggestions
 Of the Evil Ones.

98. "And I seek refuge with Thee
 O my Lord! lest they
 Should come near me."

99. (In Falsehood will they be)
 Until, when death comes
 To one of them, he says:
 "O my Lord! send me back
 (To life),--

100. "In order that I may
 Work righteousness in the things
 I neglected."--"By no means!
 It is but a word he says."--
 Before them is a Partition
 Till the Day they are
 Raised up.

101. When the Trumpet
 Is blown, there will be
 No more relationships
 Between them that day,
 Nor will one ask after another!

[p. 892]

102. Then those whose balance
 (Of good deeds) is heavy,--
 They will attain salvation:

103. But those whose balance
 Is light, will be those
 Who have lost their souls;
 In Hell will they abide.

104. The Fire will burn their faces,
 And they will therein
 Grin, with their lips displaced.

105. "Were not My Signs rehearsed
 To you, and ye did but
 Treat them as falsehoods?"

106. They will say: "Our Lord!
 Our misfortune overwhelmed us,
 And we became a people
 Astray!

107. "Our Lord! Bring us out
 Of this: if ever we return
 (To evil), then shall we be
 Wrong-doers indeed!"

108. He will say: "Be ye
 Driven into it (with ignominy)!
 And speak ye not to Me!

109. "A part of My servants
 There was, who used to pray,

[p. 893]

'Our Lord! we believe;
 Then do Thou forgive us,
 And have mercy upon us:
 For Thou art the Best
 Of those who show mercy!'

110. "But ye treated them
 With ridicule, so much so
 That (ridicule of) them made you
 Forget My Message while
 Ye were laughing at them!

111. "I have rewarded them
 This day for their patience
 And constancy: they are indeed
 The ones that have achieved Bliss:.."

112. He will say: "What number
 Of years did ye stay
 On earth?"

113. They will say: "We stayed
 A day or part of a day:
 But ask those who
 Keep account."

114. He will say: "Ye stayed
 Not but a little,--
 If ye had only known!

115. "Did ye then think
 That We had created you

[p. 894]

In jest, and that ye
 Would not be brought back
 To Us (for account)?"

116. Therefore exalted be God,
 The King, the Reality:
 There is no god but He,
 The Lord of the Throne
 Of Honour!

117. If anyone invokes, besides God,
 Any other god, he has
 No authority therefor;
 And his reckoning will be
 Only with his Lord!
 And verily the Unbelievers
 Will fail to win through

118. So say: "O my Lord!
 Grant Thou forgiveness and mercy!
 For Thou art the Best
 Of those who show mercy!"

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 895]

[p. 896]

  

Sura XXIV.

  

Nur, or Light.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A Sura which We
 Have sent down and
 Which We have ordained:
 In it have We sent down
 Clear Signs, in order that
 Ye may receive admonition.

2. The woman and the man
 Guilty of adultery or fornication,--
 Flog each of them
 With a hundred stripes:
 Let not compassion move you
 In their case, in a matter
 Prescribed by God, if ye believe
 In God and the Last Day:
 And let a party
 Of the Believers
 Witness their punishment.

3. Let no man guilty of
 Adultery or fornication marry
 Any but a woman
 Similarly guilty, or an Unbeliever:
 Nor let any but such a man
 Or an Unbeliever
 Marry such a woman:
 To the Believers such a thing
 Is forbidden.

[p. 897]

4. And those who launch
 A charge against chaste women,
 And produce not four witnesses
 (To support their allegations),--
 Flog them with eighty stripes;
 And reject their evidence
 Ever after: for such men
 Are wicked transgressors;--

5. Unless they repent thereafter
 And mend (their conduct);
 For God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

6. And for those who launch
 A charge against their spouses,
 And have (in support)
 No evidence but their own,--

[p. 898]

Their solitary evidence
 (Can be received) if they
 Bear witness four times
 (With an oath) by God
 That they are solemnly
 Telling the truth;

7. And the fifth (oath)
 (Should be) that they solemnly
 Invoke the curse of God
 On themselves if they
 Tell a lie.

8. But it would avert
 The punishment from the wife,
 If she bears witness
 Four times (with an oath)
 By God, that (her husband)
 Is telling a lie;

9. And the fifth (oath)
 Should be that she solemnly
 Invokes the wrath of God
 On herself if (her accuser)
 Is telling the truth.

10. If it were not
 For God's grace and mercy
 On you, and that God
 Is Oft-Returning,
 Full of wisdom,
 (Ye would be ruined indeed).

  

SECTION 2.

11. Those who brought forward
 The lie are a body

[p. 899]

Among yourselves: think it not
 To be an evil to you;
 On the contrary it is good
 For you: to every man
 Among them (will come
 The punishment) of the sin
 That he earned, and to him
 Who took on himself the lead
 Among them, will be
 A Penalty grievous.

12. Why did not the Believers
 Men and women--when ye
 Heard of the affair,--put
 The best construction on it
 In their own minds
 And say, "This (charge)
 Is an obvious lie"?

13. Why did they not bring
 Four witnesses to prove it?
 When they have not brought
 The witnesses, such men,
 In the sight of God,
 (Stand forth) themselves as liars!

14. Were it not for the grace
 And mercy of God on you,
 In this world and the Hereafter,
 A grievous penalty would have
 Seized you in that ye rushed
 Glibly into this affair.

15. Behold, ye received it
 On your tongues,

[p. 900]

And said out of your mouths
 Things of which ye had
 No knowledge; and ye thought
 It to be a light matter,
 While it was most serious
 In the sight of God.

16. And why did ye not,
 When ye heard it, say?--
 "It is not right of us
 To speak of this:
 Glory to God! this is
 A most serious slander!"

17. God doth admonish you,
 That ye may never repeat
 Such (conduct), if ye
 Are (true) Believers.

18. And God makes the Signs
 Plain to you: for God
 Is full of knowledge and wisdom.

19. Those who love (to see)
 Scandal published broadcast
 Among the Believers, will have
 A grievous Penalty in this life
 And in the Hereafter: God
 Knows, and ye know not.

20. Were it not for the grace
 And mercy of God on you,

[p. 901]

And that God is
 Full of kindness and mercy,
 (Ye would be ruined indeed).

  

SECTION 3.

21. O ye who believe!
 Follow not Satan's footsteps:
 If any will follow the footsteps
 Of Satan, he will (but) command
 What is shameful and wrong:
 And were it not for the grace
 And mercy of God on you.
 Not one of you would ever
 Have been pure: but God
 Doth purify whom He pleases:
 And God is One Who
 Hears and knows (all things).

22. Let not those among you
 Who are endued with grace
 And amplitude of means
 Resolve by oath against helping
 Their kinsmen, those in want,
 And those who have left

[p. 902]

Their homes in God's cause:
 Let them forgive and overlook,
 Do you not wish
 That God should forgive you?
 For God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

23. Those who slander chaste women,
 Indiscreet but believing,
 Are cursed in this life
 And in the Hereafter:
 For them is a grievous Penalty,--

24. On the Day when their tongues,
 Their hands, and their feet
 Will bear witness against them
 As to their actions.

25. On that Day God
 Will pay them back
 (All) their just dues,
 And they will realise
 That God is
 The (very) Truth,
 That makes all things manifest.

26. Women impure are for men impure
 And men impure for women impure
 And women of purity
 Are for men of purity,
 And men of purity
 Are for women of purity:
 These are not affected

[p. 903]

By what people say:
 For them there is forgiveness,
 And a provision honourable.

  

SECTION 4.

27. O ye who believe!
 Enter not houses other than
 Your own, until ye have
 Asked permission and saluted
 Those in them: that is
 Best for you, in order that
 Ye may heed (what is seemly).

28. If ye find no one
 In the house, enter not
 Until permission is given
 To you: if ye are asked
 To go back, go back:
 That makes for greater purity

[p. 904]

For yourselves: and God
 Knows well all that ye do.

29. It is no fault on your part
 To enter houses not used
 For living in, which serve
 Some (other) use for you:
 And God has knowledge
 Of what ye reveal
 And what ye conceal.

30. Say to the believing men
 That they should lower
 Their gaze and guard
 Their modesty: that will make
 For greater purity for them:
 And God is well acquainted
 With all that they do.

31. And say to the believing women
 That they should lower
 Their gaze and guard
 Their modesty; that they
 Should not display their
 Beauty and ornaments except
 What (must ordinarily) appear
 Thereof; that they should

[p. 905]

Draw their veils over
 Their bosoms and not display
 Their beauty except
 To their husbands, their fathers,
 Their husbands' fathers, their sons,
 Their husbands' sons,
 Their brothers or their brothers' sons,
 Or their sisters' sons,
 Or their women, or the slaves
 Whom their right hands
 Possess, or male servants
 Free of physical needs,
 Or small children who
 Have no sense of the shame
 Of sex; and that they
 Should not strike their feet
 In order to draw attention
 To their hidden ornaments.
 And O ye Believers!
 Turn ye all together
 Towards God, that ye
 May attain Bliss.

32. Marry those among you
 Who are single, or
 The virtuous ones among
 Your slaves, male or female:
 If they are in poverty,
 God will give them
 Means out of His grace:
 For God encompasseth all,
 And He knoweth all things.

[p. 906]

33. Let those who find not
 The wherewithal for marriage
 Keep themselves chaste, until
 God gives them means
 Out of His grace.
 And if any of your slaves
 Ask for a deed in writing
 (To enable them to earn
 Their freedom for a certain sum),
 Give them such a deed
 If ye know any good
 In them; yea, give them
 Something yourselves
 Out of the means which
 God has given to you.
 But force not your maids
 To prostitution when they desire
 Chastity, in order that ye
 May make a gain
 In the goods of this life.
 But if anyone compels them,
 Yet, after such compulsion,
 Is God Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful (to them).

34. We have already sent down
 To you verses making things
 Clear, an illustration from (the story
 Of) people who passed away
 Before you, and an admonition
 For those who fear (God).

[p. 907]

  

SECTION 5.

35. God is the Light
 Of the heavens and the earth.
 The parable of His Light
 Is as if there were a Niche
 And within it a Lamp:
 The Lamp enclosed in Glass:

[p. 908]

The glass as it were
 A brilliant star:
 Lit from a blessed Tree,
 An Olive, neither of the East
 Nor of the West,
 Whose Oil is well-nigh
 Luminous,
 Though fire scarce touched it
 Light upon Light!
 God doth guide
 Whom He will
 To His Light:
 God doth set forth Parables
 For men: and God
 Doth know all things.

36. (Lit is such a Light)
 In houses, which God
 Hath permitted to be raised
 To honour; for the celebration,

[p. 909]

In them, of His name:
 In them is He glorified
 In the mornings and
 In the evenings, (again and again),

37. By men whom neither
 Traffic nor merchandise
 Can divert from the Remembrance
 Of God, nor from regular Prayer,
 Nor from the practice
 Of regular Charity:
 Their (only) fear is
 For the Day when
 Hearts and eyes
 Will be transformed
 (In a world wholly new),--

38. That God may reward them
 According to the best
 Of their deeds, and add
 Even more for them
 Out of His Grace:
 For God doth provide
 For those whom He will,
 Without measure.

39. but the Unbelievers,--
 Their deeds are like a mirage

[p. 910]

In sandy deserts, which
 The man parched with thirst
 Mistakes for water; until
 When he comes up to it,
 He finds it to be nothing:
 But he finds God
 (Ever) with him, and God
 Will pay him his account:
 And God is swift
 In taking account.

40. Or (the Unbelievers' state)
 Is like the depths of darkness
 In a vast deep ocean,
 Overwhelmed with billow
 Topped by billow,
 Topped by (dark) clouds:
 Depths of darkness, one
 Above another: if a man
 Stretches out his hand,
 He can hardly see it!
 For any to whom God
 Giveth not light,
 There is no light!

  

SECTION 6.

41. Seest thou not that it is
 God Whose praises all beings
 In the heavens and on earth
 Do celebrate, and the birds

[p. 911]

(Of the air) with wings
 Outspread? Each one knows
 Its own (mode of) prayer
 And praise. And God
 Knows well all that they do.

42. Yea, to God belongs
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth; and to God
 Is the final goal (of all).

43. Seest thou not that God
 Makes the clouds move
 Gently, then joins them
 Together, then makes them
 Into a heap?--then wilt thou
 See rain issue forth
 From their midst. And He
 Sends down from the sky
 Mountain masses (of clouds)
 Wherein is hail: He strikes
 Therewith whom He pleases
 And He turns it away
 From whom He pleases.
 The vivid flash of His lightning
 Well-nigh blinds the sight.

44. It is God Who alternates
 The Night and the Day:

[p. 912]

Verily in these things
 Is an instructive example
 For those who have vision!

45. And God has created
 Every animal from water: sort
 Of them there are some
 That creep on their bellies;
 Some that walk on two legs;
 And some that walk on four.
 God creates what He wills;
 For verily God has power
 Over all things.

46. We have indeed sent down
 Signs that make things manifest:
 And God guides whom He wills
 To a Way that is straight.

47. They say, "We believe
 In God and in the Apostle,
 And we obey": but
 Even after that, some of them
 Turn away: they are not
 (Really) Believers.

48. When they are summoned
 To God and His Apostle,
 In order that he may judge
 Between them, behold, some
 Of them decline (to come).

[p. 913]

49. But if the right is
 On their side, they come
 To him with all submission

50. Is it that there is
 A disease in their hearts
 Or do they doubt,
 Or are they in fear,
 That God and His Apostle
 Will deal unjustly with them?
 Nay, it is they themselves
 Who do wrong.

  

SECTION 7.

51. The answer of the Believers,
 When summoned to God
 And His Apostle, in order
 That he may judge between them,
 Is no other than this:
 They say, "We hear and we obey":
 It is such as these
 That will attain felicity.

52. It is such as obey
 God and His Apostle,
 And fear God and do
 Right, that will win
 (In the end).

53. They swear their strongest oaths
 By God that, if only thou

[p. 914]

Wouldst command them, they
 Would leave (their homes).
 Say: "Swear ye not;
 Obedience is (more) reasonable;
 Verily, God is well acquainted
 With all that ye do."

54. Say: "Obey God, and obey
 The Apostle: but if ye turn
 Away, he is only responsible
 For the duty placed on him
 And ye for that placed
 On you. If ye obey him,
 Ye shall be on right guidance.
 The Apostle's duty is only
 To preach the clear (Message).

55. God has promised, to those
 Among you who believe
 And work righteous deeds, that He
 Will, of a surety, grant them
 In the land, inheritance
 (Of power), as He granted it
 To those before them; that
 He will establish in authority
 Their religion--the one
 Which He has chosen for them;
 And that He will change
 (Their state), after the fear
 In which they (lived), to one

[p. 915]

Of security and peace:
 'They will worship Me (alone)
 And not associate aught with Me.'
 If any do reject Faith
 After this, they are
 Rebellious and wicked.

56. So establish regular Prayer
 And give regular Charity;
 And obey the Apostle;
 That ye may receive mercy.

57. Never think thou
 That the Unbelievers
 Are going to frustrate
 (God's Plan) on earth:
 Their abode is the Fire,--
 And it is indeed
 An evil refuge!

  

SECTION 8.

58. O ye who believe!
 Let those whom your right hands
 Possess, and the (children) among you

[p. 916]

Who have not come of age
 Ask your permission (before
 They come to your presence),
 On three occasions: before
 Morning prayer; the while
 Ye doff your clothes
 For the noonday heat;
 And after the late-night prayer:
 These are your three times
 Of undress: outside those times
 It is not wrong for you
 Or for them to move about
 Attending to each other:
 Thus does God make clear
 The Signs to you: for God
 Is full of knowledge and wisdom.

59. But when the children among you
 Come of age, let them (also)
 Ask for permission, as do those
 Senior to them (in age):
 Thus does God make clear
 His Signs to you: for God
 Is full of knowledge and wisdom.

60. Such elderly women as are
 Past the prospect of marriage,--
 There is no blame on them
 If they lay aside

[p. 917]

Their (outer) garments, provided
 They make not a wanton display
 Of their beauty: but
 It is best for them
 To be modest: and God
 Is One Who sees and knows
 All things.

61. It is no fault in the blind
 Nor in one born lame, nor
 In one afflicted with illness,
 Nor in yourselves, that ye
 Should eat in your own houses,
 Or those of your fathers,
 Or your mothers, or your brothers,
 Or your sisters, or your father's brothers
 Or your father's sisters,
 Or your mother's brothers,
 Or your mother's sisters,
 Or in houses of which
 The keys are in your possession,
 Or in the house of a sincere
 Friend of yours: there is
 No blame on you, whether
 Ye eat in company or
 Separately. But if ye
 Enter houses, salute each other--
 A greeting of blessing
 And purity as from God.

[p. 918]

Thus does God make clear
 The Signs to you: that ye
 May understand.

  

SECTION 9.

62. Only those are Believers,
 Who believe in God and
 His Apostle: when they are
 With him on a matter
 Requiring  action,
 They do not depart until
 They have asked for his leave;
 Those who ask for thy leave
 Are those who believe in God
 And His Apostle; so when
 They ask for thy leave,
 For some business of theirs,
 Give leave to those of them
 Whom thou wilt, and ask
 God for their forgiveness:
 For God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

63. Deem not the summons
 Of the Apostle among yourselves
 Like the summons of one
 Of you to another: God
 Doth know those of you
 Who slip away under shelter
 Of some excuse: then
 Let those beware who

[p. 919]

Withstand the Apostle's order,
 Lest some trial befall them,
 Or a grievous Penalty
 Be inflicted on them.

64. Be quite sure that
 To God doth belong
 Whatever is in the heavens
 And on earth. Well doth He
 Know what ye are intent upon:
 And one day they will be
 Brought back to Him, and He
 Will tell them the truth
 Of what they did:
 For God doth know
 All things.

[p. 920]

[p. 921]

[p. 922]

[p. 923]

[p. 924]

[p. 925]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 926]

  

Sura XXV.

  

Furqan, or The Criterion.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Blessed is He Who
 Sent down the Criterion
 To His Servant, that
 May be an admonition
 To all creatures;--

2. He to Whom belongs
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth: no son
 Has He begotten, nor has He
 A partner in His dominion:
 It is He Who created
 All things, and ordered them
 In due proportions.

3. Yet have they taken,
 Besides Him, gods that can
 Create nothing but are themselves
 Created; that have no control
 Of hurt or good to themselves;
 Nor can they control Death
 Nor Life nor Resurrection.

[p. 927]

4. But the Misbelievers say:
 "Naught is this but a lie
 Which he has forged,
 And others have helped him
 At it." In truth it is they
 Who have put forward
 An iniquity and a falsehood.

5. And they say: "Tales of
 The ancients, which he has caused
 To be written: and they
 Are dictated before him
 Morning and evening."

6. Say: "The (Qur-an) was sent down
 By Him Who knows
 The Mystery (that is) in the heavens
 And the earth: verily He
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

7. find they say: "What sort
 Of an apostle is this,
 Who eats food, and walks
 Through the streets? Why
 Has not an angel
 Been sent down to him
 To give admonition with him?

[p. 928]

8. "Or (why) has not a treasure
 Been bestowed on him, or
 Why has he (not) a garden
 For enjoyment?" The wicked
 Say: "Ye follow none other
 Than a man bewitched."

9. See what kinds of comparisons
 They make for thee!
 But they have gone astray,
 And never a way will they
 Be able to find!

  

SECTION 2.

10. Blessed is He Who,
 If that were His Will,
 Could give thee better (things)
 Than those,--Gardens beneath which
 Rivers flow; and He could
 Give thee Palaces (secure
 To dwell in).

11. Nay, they deny the Hour
 (Of the Judgment to come):
 But We have prepared
 A Blazing Fire for such
 As deny the Hour:

[p. 929]

12. When it sees them
 From a place far off,
 They will hear its fury
 And its raging sigh.

13. And when they are cast,
 Bound together, into a
 Constricted place therein, they
 Will plead for destruction
 There and then!

14. "This day plead not
 For a single destruction:
 Plead for destruction oft-repeated!"

15. Say: "Is that best, or
 The eternal Garden, promised
 To the righteous? For them,
 That is a reward as well
 As a goal (of attainment).

16. "For them there will be
 Therein all that they wish for:
 They will dwell (there) for aye:
 A promise to be prayed for
 From thy Lord."

17. The Day He will gather
 Them together as well as
 Those whom they worship
 Besides God, He will ask;

[p. 930]

"Was it ye who led
 These My servants astray,
 Or did they stray
 From the Path themselves?"

18. They will say: "Glory to Thee!
 Not meet was it for us
 That we should take
 For protectors others besides Thee:
 But Thou didst bestow,
 On them and their fathers,
 Good things (in life), until
 They forgot the Message:
 For they were a people
 (Worthless and) lost."

19. (God will say): "Now
 Have they proved you liars
 In what ye say: so
 Ye cannot avert (your penalty)
 Nor (get) help." And whoever
 Among you does wrong,
 Him shall We cause to taste
 Of a grievous Penalty.

20. And the apostles whom We
 Sent before thee were all
 (Men) who ate food
 And walked through the streets:
 We have made some of you
 As a trial for others:
 Will ye have patience?
 For God is One Who
 Sees (all things).

[p. 931]

  

SECTION 3.

21. Such as fear not
 The meeting with Us
 (For Judgment) say:
 "Why are not the angels
 Sent down to us, or
 (Why) do we not see
 Our Lord?" Indeed they
 Have an arrogant conceit
 Of themselves, and mighty
 Is the insolence of their impiety!

22. The Day they see the angels,--
 No joy will there be
 To the sinners that Day:
 The (angels) will say:
 "There is a barrier
 Forbidden (to you) altogether!

23: And We shall turn
 To whatever deeds they did
 (In this life), and We shall
 Make such deeds as floating dust
 Scattered about.

[p. 932]

24. The Companions of the Garden
 Will be well, that Day,
 In their abode, and have
 The fairest of places for repose:

25. The Day the heaven shall be
 Rent asunder with clouds,
 And angels shall be sent down,
 Descending (in ranks),--

26. That Day, the dominion
 As of right and truth,
 Shall be (wholly) for (God)
 Most Merciful: it will be
 A Day of dire difficulty
 For the Misbelievers.

27. I the Day that the wrong-doer
 Will bite at his hands,
 He will say, "Oh! would that
 I had taken a (straight) path
 With the Apostle!

28. "Ah! woe is me!
 Would that I had never
 Taken such a one
 For a friend!

29. "He did lead me astray
 From the Message (of God)
 After it had come to me!
 Ah! the Evil One is
 But a traitor to man!

[p. 933]

Then the Apostle will say:

30 "O my Lord! Truly
 My people took this Qur-an
 For just foolish nonsense."

31. Thus have We made
 For every prophet an enemy
 Among the sinners: but enough
 Is thy Lord to guide
 And to help.

32. Whose who reject Faith
 Say: "Why is not the Qur-an
 Revealed to him all at once?
 Thus (is it revealed), that We
 May strengthen thy heart
 Thereby, and We have
 Rehearsed it to thee in slow,
 Well-arranged stages, gradually.

33. And no question do they
 Bring to thee but We
 Reveal to thee the truth
 And the best explanation (thereof),

[p. 934]

34. Whose who will be gathered
 To Hell (prone) on their faces,--
 They will be in an evil
 Plight, and, as to Path,
 Most astray.

  

SECTION 4.

35. (Before this,) We sent Moses
 The Book, and appointed
 His brother Aaron with him
 As Minister;

36. And We commanded: "Go ye
 Both, to the people who
 Have rejected our Signs:"
 And those (people) We destroyed
 With utter destruction.

37. And the people of Noah,--
 When they rejected the apostles,
 We drowned them,
 And We made them
 As a Sign for mankind;
 And We have prepared
 For (all) wrong-doers
 A grievous Penalty;--

38. As also 'Ad and Thamud,
 And the Companions

[p. 935]

Of the Rass, and many
 A generation between them.

39. To each one We set forth
 Parables and examples;
 And each one We broke
 To utter annihilation
 (For their sins).

40. And the (Unbelievers) must indeed
 Have passed by the town
 On which was rained
 A shower of evil: did they not
 Then see it (with their own
 Eyes)? But they fear not
 The Resurrection.

41. When they see thee,
 They treat thee no otherwise
 Than in mockery: "Is this
 The one whom God has sent
 As an apostle?"

42. "He indeed would well-nigh
 Have misled us from
 Our gods, had it not been
 That we were constant
 To them!"--Soon will they
 Know, when they see
 The Penalty, who it is
 That is most misled
 In Path!

43. Seest thou such a one
 As taketh for his god
 His own passion (or impulse)?
 Couldst thou be a disposer
 Of affairs for him?

[p. 936]

44. Or thinkest thou that most
 Of them listen or understand?
 They are only like cattle;--
 Nay, they are worse astray
 In Path.

  

SECTION 5.

45. Hast thou not turned
 Thy vision to thy Lord?--
 How He doth prolong
 The Shadow! If He willed,
 He could make it stationary!
 Then do We make
 The sun its guide;

[p. 937]

46. Then We draw it in
 Towards Ourselves,
 A contraction by easy stages.

47. And He it is Who makes
 The Night as a Robe
 For you, and Sleep as Repose,
 And makes the Day
 (As it were) a Resurrection.

48. And He it is Who sends
 The Winds as heralds
 Of glad tidings, going before
 His Mercy, and We send down

[p. 938]

Pure water from the sky,--

49. That with it We may give
 Life to a dead land,
 And slake the thirst
 Of things We have created,--
 Cattle and men in great numbers.

50. And We have distributed
 The (water) amongst them, in order
 That they may celebrate
 (Our) praises, but most men
 Are averse (to aught) but
 (Rank) ingratitude.

51. Had it been Our Will,
 We could have sent
 A warner to every centre
 Of population.

52. Therefore listen not
 To the Unbelievers, but strive

[p. 939]

Against them with the utmost
 Strenuousness, with the (Qur-an).

53. It is He Who has
 Let free the two bodies
 Of flowing water:
 One palatable and sweet,
 And the other salt
 And hitter; yet has He
 Made a barrier between them,
 A partition that is forbidden
 To be passed.

54. It is He Who has
 Created man from water:
 Then has He established
 Relationships of lineage

[p. 940]

And marriage: for thy Lord
 Has power (over all things).

55. Yet do they worship,
 Besides God, things that can
 Neither profit them nor
 Harm them: and the Misbeliever
 Is a helper (of Evil),
 Against his own Lord!

56. But thee We only sent
 To give glad tidings
 And admonition.

57. Say: "No reward do I
 Ask of you for it but this:
 That each one who will
 May take a (straight) Path
 To his Lord."

58. And put thy trust
 In Him Who lives
 And dies not; and celebrate
 His praise; and enough is He
 To be acquainted with
 The faults of His servants;--

59. He Who created the heavens
 And the earth and all
 That is between, in six days,
 And is firmly established
 On the Throne (of authority):
 God Most Gracious:
 Ask thou, then, about Him
 Of any acquainted (with such things).

[p. 941]

60. When it is said to them,
 "Adore ye (God) Most Gracious!",
 They say, "And what is (God)
 Most Gracious? Shall we adore
 That which thou commandest us?"
 And it increases their flight
 (From the Truth).

  

SECTION 6

61. Blessed is He Who made
 Constellations in the skies,
 And placed therein a Lamp
 And a Moon giving light;

62. And it is He Who made
 The Night and the Day
 To follow each other:
 For such as have the will
 To celebrate His praises
 Or to show their gratitude.

63. And the servants of (God)
 Most Gracious are those
 Who walk on the earth
 In humility, and when the ignorant
 Address them, they say,
 "Peace!";

[p. 942]

64. Those who spend the night
 In adoration of their Lord
 Prostrate and standing;

65. Those who say, "Our Lord!
 Avert from us the Wrath
 Of Hell, for its Wrath
 Is indeed an affliction grievous,--

66. "Evil indeed is it
 As an abode, and as
 A place to rest in";

67. Those who, when they spend,
 Are not extravagant and not
 Niggardly, but hold a just (balance)
 Between those (extremes);

68. Those who invoke not,
 With God, any other god,
 Nor slay such life as God
 Has made sacred, except
 For just cause, nor commit
 Fornication;--and any that does
 This (not only) meets punishment

[p. 943]

69. (But) the Penalty on the Day
 Of Judgment will be doubled
 To him, and he will dwell
 Therein in ignominy,--

70. Unless he repents, believes,
 And works righteous deeds,
 For God will change
 The evil of such persons
 Into good, and God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful,

71. And whoever repents and does good
 Has truly turned to God
 With an (acceptable) conversion;--

72. Those who witness no falsehood;
 And, if they pass by futility,
 They pass by it
 With honourable (avoidance);

73. Those who, when they are
 Admonished with the Signs
 Of their Lord, droop not down
 At them as if they were
 Deaf or blind;

74. And these who pray,
 "Our Lord! Grant unto us
 Wives and offspring who will be
 The comfort of our eyes,

[p. 944]

And give us (the grace)
 To lead the righteous."

75. Those are the ones who
 Will be rewarded with
 The highest place in heaven,
 Because of their patient constancy:
 Therein shall they be met
 With salutations and peace,

76. Dwelling therein;--how beautiful
 An abode and place of rest!

77. Say (to the Rejecters):
 "My Lord is not uneasy
 Because of you if ye call not on Him
 But ye have indeed rejected
 (Him), and soon will come
 The inevitable (punishment)!"

[p. 945]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 946]

  

Sura XXVI.

  

Shu'araa, or The Poets.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ta. Sin. Mim.

2. These are Verses of the Book
 That makes (things) clear.

3. It may be thou frettest
 Thy soul with grief, that they
 Do not become Believers.

4. If (such) were Our Will,
 We could send down to them
 From the sky a Sign,
 To which they would bend
 Their necks in humility.

5. But there comes not
 To them a newly-revealed
 Message from (God) Most Gracious,
 But they turn away therefrom.

[p. 947]

6. They have indeed rejected
 (The Message): so they will
 Know soon (enough) the truth
 Of what they mocked at!

7. Do they not look
 At the earth,--how many
 Noble things of all kinds
 We have produced therein?

8. Verily, in this is a Sign:
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

9. And verily, thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 2.

10. Behold, thy Lord called
 Moses: "Go to the people
 Of iniquity,--

11. "The people of Pharaoh:
 Will they not fear God?"

12. He said: "O my Lord!
 I do fear that they
 Will charge me with falsehood:

[p. 948]

13. "My breast will be straitened?'
 And my speech may not go
 (Smoothly): so send unto Aaron.

14. "And (further), they have
 A charge of crime against me;
 And I fear they may
 Slay me."

15. God said: "By no means!
 Proceed then, both of you,
 With Our Signs; We
 Are with you, and will
 Listen (to your call).

16. "So go forth, both of you,
 To Pharaoh, and say:
 'We have been sent
 By the Lord and Cherisher
 Of the Worlds;

17. "'Send thou with us
 The Children of Israel.'"

18. (Pharaoh) said: "Did we not
 Cherish thee as a child
 Among us, and didst thou not
 Stay in our midst
 Many years of thy life?

[p. 949]

19. "And thou didst a deed
 Of thine which (thou knowest)
 Thou didst, and thou art
 An ungrateful (wretch)!"

20. Moses said: "I did it
 Then, when I was
 In error.

21. "So I fled from you (all)
 When I feared you;
 But my Lord has (since)
 Invested me with judgment
 (And wisdom) and appointed me
 As one of the apostles.

22. "And this is the favour
 With which thou dost
 Reproach me,--that thou
 Hast enslaved the Children
 Of Israel!"

23. Pharaoh said: "And what
 Is the 'Lord and Cherisher
 Of the Worlds'?

[p. 950]

24. (Moses) said: "The Lord
 And Cherisher of the heavens
 And the earth, and all between,
 If ye want to be
 Quite sure."

25. (Pharaoh) said to those
 Around: "Do ye not listen
 (To what he says)?

26. (Moses) said: "Your Lord
 And the Lord of your fathers
 From the beginning!"

27. (Pharaoh) said: "Truly
 Your apostle who has been
 Sent to you is
 A veritable madman!"

28. (Moses) said: "Lord of the East
 And the West, and all between!
 If ye only had sense!"

29. (Pharaoh) said: "If thou
 Dost put forward any god
 Other than me, I will
 Certainly put thee in prison!"

30. (Moses) said: "Even if I
 Showed you something
 Clear (and) convincing?"

[p. 951]

31. (Pharaoh) said: "Show it then,
 If thou tellest the truth!"

32. So (Moses) threw his rod,
 And behold, it was
 A serpent, plain (for all to see)!

33. And he drew out his hand,
 And behold, it was white
 To all beholders!

  

SECTION 3.

34. (Pharaoh) said to the Chiefs
 Around him: "This is indeed
 A sorcerer well-versed:

35. "His plan is to get you out
 Of your land by his sorcery;
 Then what is it ye counsel?"

36. They said: "Keep him
 And his brother in suspense
 (For a while), and dispatch
 To the Cities heralds to collect--

37. "And bring up to thee
 All (our) sorcerers well-versed."

38. So the sorcerers were got
 Together for the appointment
 Of a day well-known,

39. And the people were told:
 "Are ye (now) assembled?--

40. "That we may follow
 The sorcerers (in religion)
 If they win?"

[p. 952]

41. So when the sorcerers arrived,
 They said to Pharaoh:
 "Of course--shall we have
 A (suitable) reward
 If we win?"

42. He said: "Yea, (and more),--
 For ye shall in that case
 Be (raised to posts)
 Nearest (to my person)."

43. Moses said to them:
 "Throw ye--that which
 Ye are about to throw!"

44. So they threw their ropes
 And their rods, and said:
 "By the might of Pharaoh,
 It is we who will
 Certainly win!"

45. Then Moses threw his rod,
 When, behold, it straightway
 Swallows up all
 The falsehoods which they fake!

46. When did the sorcerers
 Fall down, prostrate in adoration,

47. Saying: "We believe
 In the Lord of the Worlds,

48. "The Lord of Moses and Aaron."

[p. 953]

49. Said (Pharaoh): "Believe ye
 In Him before I give
 You permission? Surely he
 Is your leader, who has
 Taught you sorcery!
 But soon shall ye know!

50. "Be sure I will cut off
 Your hands and your feet
 On opposite sides, and I
 Will cause you all
 To die on the cross!"

51. They said: "No matter!
 For us, we shall but
 Return to our Lord!

52. "Only, our desire is
 That our Lord will
 Forgive us our faults,
 That we may become
 Foremost among the Believers!"

  

SECTION 4.

53. By inspiration We told Moses:
 "Travel by night with
 My servants; for surely
 Ye shall be pursued."

54. Then Pharaoh sent heralds
 To (all) the Cities,

[p. 954]

55. (Saying): "These (Israelites)
 Are but a small band,

56. "And they are raging
 Furiously against us;

57. "But we are a multitude
 Amply fore-warned."

58. So We expelled them
 From gardens, springs,

59. Treasures, and every kind
 Of honourable position;

60. Thus it was, but
 We made the Children
 Of Israel inheritors
 Of such things.

61. So they pursued them
 At sunrise.

62. And when the two bodies
 Saw each other, the people
 Of Moses said: "We are
 Sure to be overtaken."

63. (Moses) said: "By no means!
 My Lord is with me!
 Soon will He guide me!"

[p. 955]

64. Then We told Moses
 By inspiration: "Strike
 The sea with thy rod."
 So it divided, and each
 Separate part became
 Like the huge, firm mass
 Of a mountain.

65. And We made the other
 Party approach thither.

66. We delivered Moses and all
 Who were with him;

67. But We drowned the others.

68. Verily in this is a Sign:
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

69. And verily thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 5.

70. And rehearse to them
 (Something of) Abraham's story.

[p. 956]

71. Behold, he said
 To his father and his people:
 "What worship ye?"

72. They said: "We worship
 Idols, and we remain constantly
 In attendance on them."

73. He said: "Do they listen
 To you when ye call (on them),
 Or do you good or harm?"

74. They said: "Nay, but we
 Found our fathers doing
 Thus (what we do)."

75. He said: "Do ye then
 See whom ye have been
 Worshipping,--

76. "Ye and your fathers before you?--

77. "For they are enemies to me;
 Not so the Lord and Cherisher
 Of the Worlds;

78. "Who created me, and
 It is He who guides me;

79. "Who gives me food and drink,

80. "And when I am ill,
 It is He who cures me;

81. "Who will cause me to die,
 And then to live (again);

[p. 957]

82. "And who, I hope,
 Will forgive me my faults
 On the Day of Judgment.

83. "O my Lord! bestow wisdom
 On me, and join me
 With the righteous;

84. "Grant me honourable mention
 On the tongue of truth
 Among the latest (generations);

85. "Make me one of the inheritors
 Of the Garden of Bliss;

86. "Forgive my father, for that
 He is among those astray;

87. "And let me not be
 In disgrace on the Day
 When (men) will be raised up;--

88. "The Day whereon neither
 Wealth nor sons will avail,

89. "But only he (will prosper)
 That brings to God
 A sound heart;

90. "To the righteous, the Garden
 Will be brought near,

[p. 958]

91. "And to those straying in Evil,
 The Fire will be placed
 In full view;

92. "And it shall be said
 To them, 'Where are
 The (gods) ye worshipped--

93. "'Besides God? Can they
 Help you or help themselves?'

94. "Then they will be thrown
 Headlong into the (Fire),--
 They and those straying
 In Evil,

95. "And the whole hosts
 Of Iblis together.

96. "They will say there
 In their mutual bickerings:

97. "'By God, we were truly
 In an error manifest,

98. "'When we held you as equals
 With the Lord of the Worlds;

99. "'And our seducers were
 Only those who were
 Steeped in guilt.

100. "'Now, then, we have none
 To intercede (for us),

[p. 959]

101. "'Nor a single friend
 To feel (for us).

102. "'Now if we only had
 A chance of return,
 We shall truly be
 Of those who believe!'"

103. Verily in this is a Sign
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

104. And verily thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 6.

105. The people of Noah rejected
 The apostles.

106. Behold, their brother Noah
 Said to them: "Will ye not
 Fear (God)?

107. "I am to you an apostle
 Worthy of all trust:

108. "So fear God, and obey me.

109. "No reward do I ask
 Of you for it: my reward
 Is only from the Lord
 Of the Worlds:

[p. 960]

110. "So fear God, and obey me."

111. They said: "Shall we
 Believe in thee when it is
 The meanest that follow thee?"

112. He said: "And what
 Do I know as to
 What they do?

113. "Their account is only
 With my Lord, if ye
 Could (but) understand.

114. "I am not one to drive away
 Those who believe.

115. "I am sent only
 To warn plainly in public."

116. They said: "If thou
 Desist not, O Noah!
 Thou shalt be stoned
 (to death)."

117. He said: "O my Lord!
 Truly my people have
 Rejected me.

118. "Judge thou, then, between me
 And them openly, and deliver

[p. 961]

Me and those of the Believers
 Who are with me."

119. So We delivered him
 And those with him,
 In the Ark filled
 (With all creatures).

120. Thereafter We drowned those
 Who remained behind.

121. Verily in this is a Sign:
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

122. And verily thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 7.

123. The 'Ad (people) rejected'
 The apostles.

124. Behold, their brother Hud
 Said to them: "Will ye not
 Fear (God)?

[p. 962]

125. "I am to you an apostle
 Worthy of all trust:

126. "So fear God and obey me.

127. "No reward do I ask
 Of you for it my reward
 Is only from the Lord
 Of the Worlds.

128. "Do ye build a landmark
 On every high place
 To amuse yourselves?

129. "And do ye get for yourselves
 Fine buildings in the hope
 Of living therein (for ever)?

130. "And when ye exert
 Your strong hand,
 Do ye do it like men
 Of absolute power?

131. "Now fear God, and obey me.

132. "Yea, fear Him Who
 Has bestowed on you
 Freely all that ye know.

133. "Freely has He bestowed
 On you cattle and sons,--

[p. 963]

134. "And Gardens and Springs.

135. "Truly I fear for you
 The Penalty of a Great Day."

136. They said: "It is the same
 To us whether thou
 Admonish us or be not
 Among (our) admonishers!

137. "This is no other than
 A customary device
 Of the ancients,

138. "And we are not the ones
 To receive Pains and Penalties!"

139. So they rejected him,
 And We destroyed them.
 Verily in this is a Sign:
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

140. And verily thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 8.

141. The Thamud (people) rejected
 The apostles.

[p. 964]

142. Behold, their brother Salih
 Said to them: "Will you not
 Fear (God)?

143. "I am to you an apostle
 Worthy of all trust.

144. "So fear God, and obey me.

145. "No reward do I ask
 Of you for it: my reward
 Is only from the Lord
 Of the Worlds.

146. "Will ye be left secure,
 In (the enjoyment of) all
 That ye have here?--

147. "Gardens and Springs,

148. "And corn-fields and date palms
 With spathes near breaking
 (With the weight of fruit)?

149. "And ye carve houses
 Out of (rocky) mountains
 With great skill.

150. "But fear God and obey me;

151. "And follow not the bidding
 Of those who are extravagant,--

152. "Who make mischief in the land,
 And mend not (their ways)."

153. Whey said: "Thou art only
 One of those bewitched!'

[p. 965]

154. "Thou art no more than
 A mortal like us:
 Then bring us a Sign,
 If thou tellest the truth!"

155. He said: "Here is
 A she-camel: she has
 A right of watering,
 And ye have a right
 Of watering, (severally)
 On a day appointed.

156. "Touch her not with harm,
 Lest the Penalty
 Of a Great Day
 Seize you."

157. But they ham-strung her:
 Then did they become
 Full of regrets.

158. But the Penalty seized them.
 Verily in this is a Sign:
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

159. And verily thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

[p. 966]

  

SECTION 9

160. The people of Lut rejected'
 The apostles.

161. Behold, their brother Lut
 Said to them: "Will ye not
 Fear (God)?

162. "I am to you an apostle
 Worthy of all trust.

163. "So fear God and obey me.

164. "No reward do I ask
 Of you for it my reward
 Is only from the Lord
 Of the Worlds.

165. "Of all the creatures
 In the world, will ye
 Approach males,

166. "And leave those whom God
 Has created for you
 To be your mates?
 Nay, ye are a people
 Transgressing (all limits)!"

167. Whey said: "If thou desist not,
 O Lut! thou wilt assuredly
 Be cast out!"

168. He said: "I do detest
 Your doings:"

[p. 967]

169. "O my Lord! deliver me
 And my family from
 Such things as they do!"

170. So We delivered him
 And his family,--all

171. Except an old woman
 Who lingered behind.

172. But the rest We destroyed Utterly.

173. We rained down on them
 A shower (of brimstone):
 And evil was the shower
 On those who were admonished
 (But heeded not)!

174. Verily in this is a Sign
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

175. And verily thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 10.

176. The Companions of the Wood
 Rejected the apostles.

177. Behold, Shu'aib said to them:
 Will ye not fear (God)?

178. "I am to you an apostle
 Worthy of all trust.

[p. 968]

179. "So fear God and obey me.

180. "No reward do I ask
 Of you for it: my, reward
 Is only from the Lord
 Of the Worlds.

181. "Give just measure,''
 And cause no loss
 (To others by fraud).

182. "And weigh with scales
 True and upright.

183. "And withhold not things
 Justly due to men,
 Nor do evil in the land,
 Working mischief.

184. "And fear Him Who created
 You and (Who created)
 The generations before (you)"

185. Whey said: "Thou art only
 One of those bewitched!

186. "Thou art no more than
 A mortal like us,
 And indeed we think
 Thou art a liar!

187. "Now cause a piece
 Of the sky to fall on us,
 If thou art truthful!"

188. He said: "My Lord
 Knows best what ye do."

[p. 969]

189. But they rejected him.
 Then the punishment
 Of a day of overshadowing gloom
 Seized them, and that was
 The Penalty of a Great Day.

190. Verily in that is a Sign:
 But most of them
 Do not believe.

191. And verily thy Lord
 Is He, the Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 11.

192. Verily this is a Revelation
 From the Lord of the Worlds:

193. With it came down
 The Spirit of Faith and Truth--

[p. 970]

194. To thy heart and mind,
 That thou mayest admonish

195. In the perspicuous
 Arabic tongue.

196. Without doubt it is (announced)
 In the mystic Book
 Of former peoples.

197. Is it not a Sign
 To them that the Learned
 Of the Children of Israel
 Knew it (as true)?

198. Had We revealed it
 To any of the non Arabs,

199. And had he recited it
 To them, they would not
 Have believed in it.

200. Thus have We caused it
 To enter the hearts
 Of the Sinners.

[p. 971]

201. They will not believe
 In it until they see
 The grievous Penalty;

202. But the (Penalty) will come
 To them of a sudden,
 While they preceive it not;

203. Then they will say:
 "Shall we be respited?"

204. Do they then ask
 For Our Penalty to be
 Hastened on?

205. Seest thou? If We do
 Let them enjoy (this life)
 For a few years,

206. Yet there comes to them
 At length the (Punishment)
 Which they were promised!

207. It will profit them not
 That they enjoyed (this life)!

208. Never did We destroy
 A population, but had
 Its warners--

209. By way of reminder;
 And We never are unjust.

210. No evil ones have brought
 Down this (Revelation):

[p. 972]

211. It would neither suit them
 Nor would they be able
 (To produce it).

212. Indeed they have been removed
 Far from even (a chance of)
 Hearing it.

213. So call not on any
 Other god with God,
 Or thou wilt be among
 Those under the Penalty.

214. And admonish thy nearest
 Kinsmen,

215. And lower thy wing
 To the Believers who
 Follow thee.

216. Then if they disobey thee,
 Say: "I am free (of responsibility)
 For what ye do!"

217. And put thy trust
 On the Exalted in Might,
 The Merciful,--

218. Who seeth thee standing
 Forth (in prayer),

219. And thy movements among
 Those who prostrate themselves.

[p. 973]

220. For it is He
 Who heareth and knoweth
 All things.

221. Shall I inform you.
 (O people!), on whom it is
 That the evil ones descend?

222. They descend on every
 Lying, wicked person,

223. (Into whose ears) they pour
 Hearsay vanities, and most
 Of them are liars.

224. And the Poets,--
 It is those straying in Evil,
 Who follow them:

225. Seest thou not that they
 Wander distracted in every
 Valley?--

226. And that they say
 What they practise not?--

227. Except those who believe,
 Work righteousness, engage much

[p. 974]

In the remembrance of God,
 And defend themselves only after
 They are unjustly attacked.
 And soon will the unjust'
 Assailants know what vicissitudes
 Their affairs will take!

[p. 975]

[p. 976]

[p. 977]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 978]

  

Sura XXVII.

  

Naml, or the Ants.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ta. Sin.
 These are verses
 Of the Qur-an,--a Book
 That makes (things) clear;

2. A Guide; and Glad Tidings
 For the Relievers,--

3. Those who establish regular prayers
 And give in regular charity,
 And also have (full) assurance
 Of the Hereafter.

4. As to those who believe not
 In the Hereafter, We have
 Made their deeds pleasing
 In their eyes; and so they
 Wander about in distraction.

5. Such are they for whom
 A grievous Penalty is (waiting):
 And in the Hereafter theirs
 Will be the greatest loss.

6. As to thee, the Qur-an
 Is bestowed upon thee
 From the presence of One
 Who is Wise and All-Knowing.

[p. 979]

7. Behold! Moses said
 To his family "I perceive
 A fire; soon will I bring you
 From there some information,
 Or I will bring you
 A burning brand to light
 Our fuel, that ye may
 Warm yourselves.

8. But when he came
 To the (Fire), a voice
 Was heard: "Blessed are those
 In the Fire and those around:
 And Glory to God,
 The Lord of the Worlds.

9. "O Moses! Verily,
 I am God, the Exalted
 In Might, the Wise!...

10. "Now do thou throw thy rod!"
 But when he saw it
 Moving (of its own accord)
 As if it had been a snake,
 He turned back in retreat,
 And retraced not his steps:
 "O Moses!" (it was said),
 "Fear not: truly, in My presence,
 Those called as apostles
 Have no fear,--

[p. 980]

11. "But if any have done wrong
 And have thereafter substituted
 Good to take the place of evil,
 Truly, I am Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

12. "Now put thy hand into
 Thy bosom, and it will
 Come forth white without stain
 (Or harm): (these are) among
 The nine Signs (thou wilt take)
 To Pharaoh and his people:
 For they are a people
 Rebellious in transgression."

13. But when Our Signs came
 To them, that should have""
 Opened their eyes, they said:
 "This is sorcery manifest!"

14. And they rejected those Signs
 In iniquity and arrogance,
 Though their souls were convinced
 Thereof: so see what was
 The end of those
 Who acted corruptly!

[p. 981]

  

SECTION 2.

15. We gave (in the past)
 Knowledge to David and Solomon
 And they both said:
 "Praise be to God, Who
 Has favoured us above many
 Of His servants who believe!

16. And Solomon was David's heir.
 He said: "O ye people!
 We have been taught the speech"
 Of Birds, and on us
 Has been bestowed (a little)
 Of all things: this is
 Indeed Grace manifest (from God.)"

17. And before Solomon were marshalled

[p. 982]

His hosts,--of Jinns and men
 And birds, and they were all
 Kept in order and ranks.

18. At length, when they came
 To a (lowly) valley of ants,
 One of the ants said:
 "O ye ants, get into
 Your habitations, lest Solomon
 And his hosts crush you
 (Under foot) without knowing it."

19. So he smiled, amused
 At her speech; and he said:
 "O my Lord! so order me
 That I may be grateful
 For Thy favours, which Thou
 Hast bestowed on me and
 On my parents, and that
 I may work the righteousness
 That will please Thee:
 And admit me, by Thy Grace,
 To the ranks of Thy
 Righteous Servants."

[p. 983]

20. And he took a muster
 Of the Birds; and he said:
 "Why is it I see not
 The Hoopoe? Or is he
 Among the absentees?"

21. "I will certainly punish him
 With a severe penalty,
 Or execute him, unless he
 Bring me a clear reason
 (For absence)."

22. But the Hoopoe tarried not
 Far: he (came up and) said:
 "I have compassed (territory)
 Which thou hast not compassed,
 And I have come to thee
 From Saba with tidings true.

23. "I found (there) a woman
 Ruling over them and provided
 With every requisite; and she
 Has a magnificent throne.

[p. 984]

24. "I found her and her people
 Worshipping the sun besides God:
 Satan has made their deeds
 Seem pleasing in their eyes,
 And has kept them away
 From the Path,--so
 They receive no guidance,--

25. "(Kept them away from the Path),
 That they should not worship
 God, Who brings to light
 What is hidden in the heavens
 And the earth, and knows
 What ye hide and what
 Ye reveal.

26. "God!--there is no god
 But He!--Lord of the Throne's
 Supreme!"

27. (Solomon) said: "Soon shall we
 See whether thou hast told
 The truth or lied!

[p. 985]

28. "Go thou, with this letter
 Of mine, and deliver it
 To them: then draw back
 From them, and (wait to) see
 What answer they return"...

29. (The Queen) said: "Ye chiefs!
 Here is--delivered to me--
 A letter worthy of respect.

30. "It is from Solomon, and is
 (As follows), 'In the name
 Of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful:

31. "'Be ye not arrogant
 Against me, but come
 To me in submission
 (To the true Religion).'"

  

SECTION 3.

32. the said: "Ye chiefs!
 Advise me in (this)
 My affair: no affair
 Have I decided
 Except in your presence."

33. They said: "We are endued
 With strength, and given
 To vehement war:
 But the command is
 With thee; so consider
 What thou wilt command."

34. She said: "Kings, when they
 Enter a country, despoil it,

[p. 986]

And make the noblest
 Of its people its meanest
 Thus do they behave.

35. "But I am going to send
 Him a present, and (wait)
 To see with what (answer)
 Return (my) ambassadors."

36. Now when (the embassy) came
 To Solomon, he said:
 "Will ye give me abundance
 In wealth? But that which
 God has given me is better
 Than that which He has
 Given you! Nay it is ye
 Who rejoice in your gift!

37. "Go back to them, and be sure
 We shall come to them
 With such hosts as they
 Will never be able to meet:
 We shall expel them
 From there in disgrace,
 And they will feel
 Humbled (indeed)."

38. He said (to his own men):
 "Ye Chiefs! which of you
 Can bring me her throne
 Before they come to me
 In submission?"

39. Said an 'Ifrit, of the Jinns:
 "I will bring it to thee

[p. 987]

Before thou rise from thy
 Council: indeed I have
 Full strength for the purpose,
 And may he trusted."

40. Said one who had knowledge
 Of the Book: "I will
 Bring it to thee within
 The twinkling of an eye!"
 Then when (Solomon) saw it
 Placed firmly before him,
 He said: "This is
 By the grace of my Lord!
 To test me whether I am
 Grateful or ungrateful!
 And if any is grateful,
 Truly his gratitude is (a gain)
 For his own soul; hut if
 Any is ungrateful, truly
 My Lord is Free of all Needs,
 Supreme in Honour!"

41. He said: "Transform her throne
 Out of all recognition by her:
 Let us see whether she
 Is guided (to the truth)

[p. 988]

Or is one of those who
 Receive no guidance."

42. So when she arrived,
 She was asked, "Is this
 Thy throne?" She said,
 "It was just like this;
 And knowledge was bestowed
 On us in advance of this,
 And we have submitted
 To God (in Islam)."

43. And he diverted her
 From the worship of others
 Besides God: for she was
 (Sprung) of a people
 That had no faith.

44. She was asked to enter
 The lofty Palace: but
 When she saw it, she
 Thought it was a lake
 Of water, and she (tucked up
 Her skirts), uncovering her legs.
 He said: "This is
 But a palace paved

[p. 989]

Smooth with slabs of glass."
 She said: "O my Lord!
 I have indeed wronged"
 My soul: I do (now)
 Submit (in Islam), with Solomon,
 To the Lord of the Worlds."

  

SECTION 4.

45. We sent (aforetime),
 To the Thamud, their brother
 Salih, saying, "Serve God":
 But behold, they became
 Two factions quarrelling
 With each other.

46. He said: "O my people!
 Why ask ye to hasten on

[p. 990]

The evil in preference to the good?
 If only ye ask God for forgiveness,
 Ye may hope to receive mercy.

47. They said: "Ill omen
 Do we augur from thee
 And those that are with thee".
 He said: "Your ill omen
 Is with God; yea, ye are
 A people under trial."

48. There were in the City
 Nine men of a family,
 Who made mischief in the land,
 And would not reform.

49. They said: "Swear
 A mutual oath by God
 That we shall make
 A secret night attack
 On him and his people,
 And that we shall then
 Say to his heir (when he
 Seeks vengeance), 'We were not
 Present at the slaughter
 Of his people, and we are
 Positively telling the truth'."

[p. 991]

50. They plotted and planned,
 But We too planned,
 Even while they perceived it not.

51. Then see what was the end
 Of their plot!--this,
 That We destroyed them
 And their people, all (of them).

52. Now such were their houses,--
 In utter ruin,--because
 They practised wrong-doing.
 Verily in this is a Sign
 For people of knowledge.

53. And We saved those
 Who believed and practised
 Righteousness.

54. (We also sent) Lut
 (As an apostle): behold,
 He said to his people,
 "Do ye do what is shameful
 Though ye see (its iniquity)?

55. Would ye really approach men
 In your lusts rather than
 Women? Nay, ye are
 A people (grossly) ignorant!

56. But his people gave
 No other answer but this:
 They said, "Drive out

[p. 992]

The followers of Lut from
 Your city: these are
 Indeed men who want
 To be clean and pure!"

57. But We saved him
 And his family, except
 His wife: her We destined
 To be of those
 Who lagged behind.

58. And We rained down on them
 A shower (of brimstone):
 And evil was the shower
 On those who were admonished
 (But heeded not)!

  

SECTION 5.

59. Say: Praise be to God,
 And Peace on His servants
 Whom He has chosen
 (For His Message). (Who)
 Is better?--God or
 The false gods they associate
 (With Him)?

[p. 993]

60. Or, who has created
 The heavens and the earth,
 And who sends you down
 Rain from the sky?
 Yea, with it We cause
 To grow well-planted orchards
 Full of beauty and delight:
 It is not in your power
 To cause the growth
 Of the trees in them. (Can there be
 Another) god besides God?
 Nay, they are a people
 Who swerve from justice.

61. Or, who has made the earth
 Firm to live in; made
 Rivers in its midst; set
 Thereon mountains immovable;
 And made a separating bar
 Between the two bodies
 Of flowing water?
 (Can there be another) god
 Besides God? Nay, most
 Of them know not.

62. Or, who listens to the (soul)
 Distressed when it calls
 On Him, and who relieves
 Its suffering, and makes you

[p. 994]

(Mankind) inheritors of the earth?'
 (Can there be another) god
 Besides God? Little it is
 That ye heed!

63. Or, who guides you
 Through the depths of darkness
 On land and sea, and who
 Sends the winds as heralds
 Of glad tidings, going before
 His Mercy? (Can there be
 Another) god besides God?--
 High is God above what
 They associate with Him!

64. Or, who originates Creation,
 Then repeats it,
 And who gives you sustenance
 From heaven and earth?
 (Can there be another) god
 Besides God? Say, "Bring forth
 Your argument, if ye
 Are telling the truth!"

65. Say: None in the heavens
 Or on earth, except God,
 Knows what is hidden:
 Nor can they perceive
 When they shall be raised
 Up (for Judgment).

66. Still less can their knowledge
 Comprehend the Hereafter: nay,

[p. 995]

They are in doubt and uncertainty
 Thereanent; nay, they are blind
 Thereunto!

  

SECTION 6.

67. The Unbelievers say: "What!
 When we become dust,
 We and our fathers,--shall we
 Really be raised (from the dead)?

68. "It is true we were promised
 This,--we and our fathers
 Before (us): these are nothing
 But tales of the ancients."

69. Say: "Go ye through the earth
 And see what has been
 The end of those guilty
 (Of sin)."

70. But grieve not over them,
 Nor distress thyself
 Because of their plots.

71. They also say: "When will
 This promise (come to pass)?
 (Say) if ye are truthful."

72. Say: "It may be that
 Some of the events which
 Ye wish to hasten on
 May be (close) in your pursuit!"

[p. 996]

73. But verily thy Lord is
 Full of grace to mankind:
 Yet most of them are ungrateful.

74. And verily thy Lord knoweth
 All that their hearts do hide,
 As well as all that
 They reveal.

75. Nor is there aught
 Of the Unseen, in heaven
 Or earth, but is (recorded)
 In a clear record.

76. Verily this Qur-an doth explain
 To the Children of Israel
 Most of the matters
 In which they disagree.

77. And it certainly is
 A Guide and a Mercy
 To those who believe.

78. Verily thy Lord will decide
 Between them by His Decree:
 And He is Exalted in Might,
 All-Knowing.

79. So put thy trust in God:
 For thou art on (the Path
 Of) manifest Truth.

[p. 997]

80. Truly thou canst not cause
 The Dead to listen, nor
 Canst thou cause the Deaf
 To hear the call,
 (Especially) when they
 Turn back in retreat.

81. Nor canst thou be a guide
 To the Blind, (to prevent them)
 From straying: only those
 Wilt thou get to listen
 Who believe in Our Signs,
 And they will bow in Islam.

82. And when the Word is
 Fulfilled against them (the unjust),
 We shall produce from the earth
 A Beast to (face) them:
 He will speak to them,
 For that mankind did not
 Believe with assurance
 In Our Signs.

  

SECTION 7.

83. One Day We shall gather
 Together from every people
 A troop of those who reject
 Our Signs, and they shall
 Be kept in ranks,--

84. Until, when they come
 (Before the Judgment-seat),
 (God) will say: "Did ye
 Reject My Signs, though ye

[p. 998]

Comprehended them not
 In knowledge, or what
 Was it ye did?"

85. And the Word will be
 Fulfilled against them, because
 Of their wrong-doing, and they
 Will be unable to speak
 (In plea).

86. See they not that We
 Have made the Night
 For them to rest in
 And the Day to give
 Them light? Verily in this
 Are Signs for any people 
 That believe!

87. And the Day that the Trumpet
 Will be sounded--then will be
 Smitten with terror those
 Who are in the heavens,
 And those who are on earth,
 Except such as God will please
 (To exempt): and all shall come
 To His (Presence) as beings
 Conscious of their lowliness.

88. Thou seest the mountains
 And thinkest them firmly fixed:
 But they shall pass away
 As the clouds pass away:

[p. 999]

(Such is) the artistry of God,
 Who disposes of all things
 In perfect order: for He is
 Well acquainted with all that ye do.

89. If any do good, good will
 (Accrue) to them therefrom;
 And they will be secure
 From terror that Day.

90. And if any do evil,
 Their faces will be thrown
 Headlong into the Fire:
 "Do ye receive a reward
 Other than that which ye
 Have earned by your deeds?"

91. For me, I have been
 Commanded to serve the Lord
 Of this City, Him Who has
 Sanctified it and to Whom
 (Belong) all things:
 And I am commanded
 To be of those who bow
 In Islam to God's Will,--

92. And to rehearse the Qur-an:
 And if any accept guidance,

[p. 1000]

They do it for the good
 Of their own souls,
 And if any stray, say:
 "I am only a Warner".

93. And say: "Praise be to God,
 Who will soon show you
 His Signs, so that ye
 Shall know them"; and thy Lord
 Is not unmindful
 Of all that ye do.

[p. 1001]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1002]

  

Sura XXVIII.

  

Qasas, or the Narration.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ta. Sin. Mim.

2. These are Verses of the Book
 That makes (things) clear.

3. We rehearse to thee some
 Of the story of Moses
 And Pharaoh in Truth,
 For people who believe.

4. Truly Pharaoh elated himself
 In the land and broke up
 Its people into sections,
 Depressing a small group
 Among them: their sons he slew,
 But he kept alive their females:
 For he was indeed
 A maker of mischief.

5. And We wished to be
 Gracious to those who were
 Being depressed in the land,
 To make them leaders (in faith)
 And make them heirs,

[p. 1003]

6. To establish a firm place
 For them in the land,
 And to show Pharaoh, Haman,
 And their hosts, at their hands,
 The very things against which
 They were taking precautions.

7. So We sent this inspiration
 To the mother of Moses:
 "Suckle (thy child), but when
 Thou hast fears about him,
 Cast him into the river,
 But fear not nor grieve:
 For We shall restore him
 To thee, and We shall make
 Him one of Our apostles."

8. Then the people of Pharaoh
 Picked him up (from the river):
 (It was intended) that (Moses)
 Should be to them an adversary
 And a cause of sorrow:
 For Pharaoh and Haman
 And (all) their hosts were
 Men of sin.

9. The wife of Pharaoh said:
 "(Here is) a joy of the eye,'
 For me and for thee:
 Slay him not. It may be

[p. 1004]

That he will be of use
 To us, or we may adopt
 Him as a son." And they
 Perceived not (what they
 Were doing)!

10. But there came to be
 A void in the heart
 Of the mother of Moses:
 She was going almost to
 Disclose his (case), had We
 Not strengthened her heart
 (With faith), so that she
 Might remain a (firm) believer.

11. And she said to the sister
 Of (Moses), "Follow him".
 So she (the sister) watched him
 In the character of a stranger.
 And they knew not.

12. And We ordained that he
 Refused suck at first, until
 (His sister came up
 And) said: "Shall I
 Point out to you the people
 Of a house that will nourish
 And bring him up for you'"
 And be sincerely attached
 To him?"...

13. Thus did We restore him
 To his mother, that her eye
 Might be comforted, that she
 Might not grieve, and that
 She might know that the promise
 Of God is true: but
 Most of them do not understand.

[p. 1005]

  

SECTION 2.

14. When he reached full age,
 And was firmly established
 (In life), We bestowed on him
 Wisdom and knowledge: for thus
 Do We reward those
 Who do good.

15. And he entered the City
 At a time when its people
 Were not watching: and he
 Found there two men fighting,--
 One of his own religion,
 And the other, of his foes.
 Now the man of his own
 Religion appealed to him
 Against his foe, and Moses
 Struck him with his fist
 And made an end of him.
 He said: "This is a work
 Of Evil (Satan): for he is
 An enemy that manifestly
 Misleads!"

16. He prayed: "O my Lord!
 I have indeed wronged my soul!
 Do Thou then forgive me!"
 So (God) forgave him: for He
 Is the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

[p. 1006]

17. He said: "O my Lord!
 For that Thou hast bestowed
 Thy Grace on me, never
 Shall I be a help
 To those who sin!"

18. So he saw the morning
 In the City, looking about,
 In a state of fear, when
 Behold, the man who had,
 The day before, sought his help
 Called aloud for his help
 (Again). Moses said to him:
 "Thou art truly, it is clear,
 A quarrelsome fellow!"

19. Then, when he decided to lay
 Hold of the man who was
 An enemy to both of them,
 That man said: "O Moses!
 Is it thy intention to slay me
 As thou slewest a man
 Yesterday? Thy intention is
 None other than to become
 A powerful violent man
 In the land, and not to be
 One who sets things right!

[p. 1007]

20. And there came a man,
 Running, from the furthest end
 Of the City. He said:
 "O Moses! the Chiefs
 Are taking counsel together
 About thee, to slay thee:
 So get thee away, for I
 Do give thee sincere advice."

21. He therefore got away therefrom,
 Looking about, in a state
 Of fear. He prayed:
 "O my Lord! save me
 From people given to wrong-doing."

  

SECTION 3.

22. When, when he turned his face
 Towards (the land of) Madyan,
 He said: "I do hope
 That my Lord will show me
 The smooth and straight Path."

23. And when he arrived at
 The watering (place) in Madyan;
 He found there a group
 Of men watering (their flocks),
 And besides them he found
 Two women who were keeping

[p. 1008]

Back (their flocks). He said:
 "What is the matter with you?"
 They said: "We cannot water
 (Our flocks) until the shepherds
 Take back (their flocks):
 And our father is
 A very old man."

24. So he watered (their flocks)
 For them; then he turned back
 To the shade, and said:
 "O my Lord!
 Truly am I
 In (desperate) need
 Of any good
 That Thou dost send me!"

25. Afterwards one of the (damsels)
 Came (back) to him, walking
 Bashfully. She said: "My father
 Invites thee that he may
 Reward thee for having watered
 (Our flocks) for us." So when
 He came to him and narrated
 The story, he said:

[p. 1009]

"Fear thou not: (well) hast thou
 Escaped from unjust people."

26. Said one of the (damsels):
 "O my (dear) father! engage
 Him on wages: truly the best
 Of men for thee to employ is
 The (man) who is strong and trusty"...

27. He said: "I intend to wed
 One of these my daughters
 To thee, on, condition that
 Thou serve me for eight years;
 But if thou complete ten years,
 It will be (grace) from thee.
 But I intend not to place
 Thee under a difficulty:

[p. 1010]

Thou wilt find me,
 Indeed, if God wills,
 One of the righteous."

28. He said: "Be that (the agreement)
 Between me and thee:
 Whichever of the two terms
 I fulfil, let there be
 No ill-will to me.
 Be God a witness
 To what we say."

  

SECTION 4.

29. Now when Moses had fulfilled
 The term, and was travelling
 With his family, he perceived
 A fire in the direction
 Of Mount Tur. He said
 To his family: "Tarry ye;
 I perceive a fire; I hope
 To bring you from there
 Some information, or a burning
 Firebrand, that ye may
 Warm yourselves."

30. But when he came
 To the (Fire), a voice

[p. 1011]

Was heard from the right bank
 Of the valley, from a tree
 In hallowed ground:
 "O Moses! Verily
 I am God, the Lord
 Of the Worlds...

31. "Now do thou throw thy rod!"
 But when he saw it
 Moving (of its own accord)
 As if it had been a snake,
 He turned back in retreat,
 And retraced not his steps:
 "O Moses!" (it was said),
 "Draw near, and fear not:
 For thou art of those
 Who are secure.

32. "Move thy hand into
 Thy bosom, and it will
 Come forth white without stain
 (Or harm), and draw thy hand
 Close to thy side
 (To guard) against fear.
 Those are the two credentials
 From thy Lord to Pharaoh
 And his Chiefs: for truly
 They are a people
 Rebellious and wicked."

33. He said: "O my Lord!
 I have slain a man

[p. 1012]

Among them, and I fear
 Lest they slay me.

34. "And my brother Aaron--
 He is more eloquent in speech
 Than I: so send him
 With me as a helper,
 To confirm (and strengthen) me:
 For I fear that they may
 Accuse me of falsehood."

35. He said: "We will certainly
 Strengthen thy arm through
 Thy brother, and invest you both
 With authority, so they
 Shall not be able to
 Touch you: with Our Signs
 Shall ye triumph,--you two
 As well as those
 Who follow you."

36. When Moses came to them
 With Our Clear Signs, they said:
 "This is nothing but sorcery
 Faked up: never did we
 Hear the like among our fathers
 Of old!"

[p. 1013]

37. Moses said: "My Lord
 Knows best who it is
 That comes with guidance
 From Him and whose End
 Will be best in the Hereafter:
 Certain it is that
 The wrong-doers will not prosper."

38. Pharaoh said: "O Chiefs!
 No god do I know for you
 But myself: therefore,
 O Haman! light me a (kiln
 To bake bricks) out of clay,
 And build me a lofty
 Palace, that I may mount up
 To the god of Moses:
 But as far as I am concerned,
 I think (Moses) is a liar!"

39. And he was arrogant and insolent
 In the land, beyond reason,--
 He and his hosts: they thought
 That they would not have
 To return to Us!"

40. So We seized him
 And his hosts, and We
 Flung them into the sea:
 Now behold what was the End
 Of those who did wrong!

[p. 1014]

41. And We made them (but)
 Leaders inviting to the Fire;
 And on the Day of Judgment
 No help shall they find.

42. In this world We made
 A Curse to follow them:
 And on the Day of Judgment
 They will be among
 The loathed (and despised).

  

SECTION 5.

43. We did reveal to Moses
 The Book after We had
 Destroyed the earlier generations,
 (To give) Insight to men,
 And Guidance and Mercy,
 That they might receive admonition.

[p. 1015]

44. Thou wast not on the Western
 Side when We decreed
 The Commission to Moses,
 Nor wast thou a witness
 (Of those events).

45. But We raised up (new)
 Generations, and long were the ages
 That passed over them;
 But thou vast not a dweller
 Among the people of Madyan,
 Rehearsing Our Signs to them;
 But it is We Who send
 Apostles (with inspiration).

46. Nor wast thou at the side
 Of (the Mountain of) Tur
 When We called (to Moses).
 Yet (art thou sent)
 As a Mercy from thy Lord,
 To give warning to a people
 To whom no warner had come
 Before thee: in order that
 They may receive admonition.

47. If (We had) not (sent thee
 To the Quraish),--in case
 A calamity should seize them
 For (the deeds) that their hands
 Have sent forth, they might say:
 "Our Lord! why didst Thou not

[p. 1016]

Send us an apostle? We
 Should then have followed
 Thy Signs and been amongst
 Those who believe!"

48. But (now), when the Truth
 Has come to them from Ourselves,
 They say, "Why are not
 (Signs) sent to him, like
 Those which were sent to Moses?"
 Do they not then reject
 (The Signs) which were formerly
 Sent to Moses? They say: 
 "Two kinds of sorcery,
 Each assisting the other .
 And they say: "For us,
 We reject all (such things)!"

49. Say: "Then bring ye
 A Book from God,
 Which is a better Guide
 Than either of them,
 That I may follow it!
 (Do), if ye are truthful!"

50. But if they hearken not
 To thee, know that they
 Only follow their own lusts:
 And who is more astray
 Than one who follows his own
 Lusts, devoid of guidance
 From God? For God guides not
 People given to wrong-doing.

[p. 1017]

  

SECTION 6.

51. Now have We caused
 The Word to reach them
 Themselves, in order that
 They may receive admonition.

52. Those to whom We sent
 The Book before this,--they
 Do believe in this (Revelation);

53. And when it is recited
 To them, they say: "We
 Believe therein, for it is
 The Truth from our Lord:
 Indeed we have been Muslims
 (Bowing to God's Will)
 From before this.

54. Twice will they be given
 Their reward, for that they
 Have persevered, that they avert
 Evil with Good, and that
 They spend (in charity) out of
 What We have given them.

55. And when they hear vain talk,
 They turn away therefrom
 And say: "To us our deeds,
 And to you yours;

[p. 1018]

Peace be to you: we
 Seek not the ignorant."

56. It is true thou wilt not
 Be able to guide every one;
 Whom thou lowest; but God
 Guides those whom He will.
 And He knows best those
 Who receive guidance.

57. They say: "If we were
 To follow the guidance with thee,
 We should be snatched away
 From our land." Have We not
 Established for them a secure
 Sanctuary, to which are brought
 As tribute fruits of all kinds,--
 A provision from Ourselves?
 But most of them understand not.

58. And how many populations
 We destroyed, which exulted
 In their life (of ease and plenty)!
 Now those habitations of theirs,
 After them, are deserted,--
 All but a (miserable) few!
 And We are their heirs!"

[p. 1019]

59. Nor was thy Lord the one
 To destroy a population until
 He had sent to its Centre
 An apostle, rehearsing to them
 Our Signs; nor are We
 Going to destroy a population
 Except when its members
 Practise iniquity.

60. The (material) things which
 Ye are given are but
 The conveniences of this life
 And the glitter thereof;
 But that which is with God
 Is better and more enduring:
 Will ye not then be wise?

  

SECTION 7.

61. Are (these two) alike?--
 One to whom We have made
 A goodly promise, and who
 Is going to reach its (fulfilment),
 And one to whom We have
 Given the good things of this
 Life, but who, on the Day
 Of Judgment, is to be among
 Those brought up (for punishment)?

[p. 1020]

62. That Day (God) will
 Call to them, and say:
 "Where are My 'partners'?--
 Whom ye imagined (to be such)?"

63. Those against whom the charge
 Will be proved, will say:
 "Our Lord! These are the ones
 Whom we led astray:
 We led them astray, as we
 Were astray ourselves: we free
 Ourselves (from them) in Thy presence:
 It was not us they worshipped."

64. It will be said (to them):
 "Call upon your 'partners'
 (For help)": they will call
 Upon them, but they will not
 Listen to them; and they
 Will see the Penalty (before them);
 (How they will wish)
 'If only they had been
 Open to guidance!'

65. That Day (God) will
 Call to them, and say:
 "What was the answer
 Ye gave to the apostles?"

66. Then the (whole) story that day
 Will seem obscure to them
 (Like light to the blind)
 And they will not be able
 (Even) to question each other.

[p. 1021]

67. But any that (in this life)
 Had repented, believed, and worked
 Righteousness, will have hopes
 To be among those who
 Achieve salvation.

68. Why by Lord does create and choose
 As He pleases: no choice
 Have they (in the matter):
 Glory to God! and far
 Is He above the partners
 They ascribe (to Him)!

69. And thy Lord knows all
 That their hearts conceal
 And all that they reveal.

70. And He is God: there is
 No god. but He. To Him
 Be praise, at the first
 And at the last:
 For Him is the Command,
 And to Him shall ye
 (All) be brought back.

71. Say: See ye? If God
 Were to make the Night

[p. 1022]

Perpetual over you to the Day
 Of Judgment, what god
 Is there other than God,
 Who can give you enlightenment?
 Will ye not then hearken?

72. Say: See ye? If God
 Were to make the Day
 Perpetual over you to the Day
 Of Judgment, what god
 Is there other than God,
 Who can give you a Night
 In which ye can rest?
 Will ye not then see?

73. It is out of His Mercy
 That He has made for you
 Night and Day,--that ye
 May rest therein, and that
 Ye may seek of His Grace;--
 And in order that ye
 May be grateful.

74. The Day that He will
 Call on them, He will say:
 "Where are My 'partners'?--
 Whom ye imagined (to be such)?"

75. And from each people
 Shall We draw a witness,
 And We shall say: "Produce
 Your Proof": then shall they
 Know that the Truth is in
 God (alone), and the (lies)
 Which they invented will
 Leave them in the lurch.

[p. 1023]

  

SECTION 8.

76. Qarun was doubtless,
 Of the people of Moses; but
 He acted insolently towards them:
 Such were the treasures We
 Had bestowed on him, that
 Their very keys would
 Have been a burden to
 A body of strong men.
 Behold, his people said to him:
 "Exult not, for God loveth not
 Those who exult (in riches).

77. "But seek, with the (wealth)
 Which God has bestowed on thee,
 The Home of the Hereafter,
 Nor forget thy portion in this

[p. 1024]

World: but do thou good,
 As God has been good
 To thee, and seek not
 (Occasions for) mischief in the land:
 For God loves not those
 Who do mischief."

78. He said: "This has been given
 To me because of a certain
 Knowledge which I have."
 Did he not know that God
 Had destroyed, before him,
 (Whole) generations,--which were
 Superior to him in strength
 And greater in the amount
 (Of riches) they had collected?
 But the wicked are not
 Called (immediately) to account
 For their sins.

79. So he went forth among
 His people in the (pride
 Of his worldly) glitter.
 Said those whose aim is
 The Life of this World:
 "Oh! that we had the like
 Of what Qarun has got!
 For he is truly a lord
 Of mighty good fortune!"

80. But those who had been granted
 (True) knowledge said: "Alas
 For you! The reward of God
 (In the Hereafter) is best
 For those who believe
 And work righteousness: but this

[p. 1025]

None shall attain, save those
 Who steadfastly persevere
 (in good)."

81. Then We caused the earth
 To swallow up him and
 His house; and he had not
 (The least little) party
 To help him against God,
 Nor could he defend himself.

82. And those who had envied
 His position the day before
 Began to say on the morrow:
 "Ah! It is indeed God
 Who enlarges the provision"'
 Or restricts it, to any
 Of His servants He pleases!
 Had it not been that God
 Was gracious to us, He
 Could have caused the earth
 To swallow us up! Ah!
 Those who reject God
 Will assuredly never prosper."

  

SECTION 9.

83. What Home of the Hereafter
 We shall give to those
 Who intend not high-handedness
 Or mischief on earth:

[p. 1026]

And the End is (best)
 For the righteous.

84. If any does good, the reward
 To him is better than
 His deed; but if any
 Does evil, the doers of evil
 Are only punished (to the extent)
 Of their deeds.

85. Verily He Who ordained
 The Qur-an for thee, will bring
 Thee back to the Place
 Of Return. Say: "My Lord
 Knows best who it is
 That brings true guidance,
 And who is in manifest error."

86. And thou hadst not expected
 That the Book would be
 Sent to thee except as
 A Mercy from thy Lord:
 Therefore lend not thou support
 In any way to those

[p. 1027]

Who reject (God's Message).

87. And let nothing keep thee
 Back from the Signs of God
 After they have been revealed
 To thee: and invite (men)
 To thy Lord, and be not
 Of the company of those
 Who join gods with God.

88. And call not, besides God,
 On another god. There is
 No god but He. Everything
 (That exists) will perish
 Except His own Face
 To Him belongs the Command,
 And to Him will ye
 (All) be brought back.

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1028] [p. 1029]

 

  

Sura XXIX.

  

'Ankabut, or the Spider

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. M.

2. Do men think that
 They will he left alone
 On saying, "We believe",
 And that they will not
 Be tested?

3. We did test those
 Before them, and God will
 Certainly know those who are
 True from those who are false.

4. Do those who practise
 Evil think that they
 Will get the better of us?
 Evil is their judgment!

5. For those whose hopes are
 in the meeting with God
 (In the Hereafter, let them strive);
 For the Term (appointed)

[p. 1030]

By God is surely coming:
 And He hears and knows
 (All things).

6. And if any strive (with might
 And main), they do so
 For their own souls:
 For God is free of all
 Needs from all creation.

7. Whose who believe and work
 Righteous deeds,--from them
 Shall We blot out all evil
 (That may be) in them,
 And We shall reward
 Them according to
 The best of their deeds.

8. We have enjoined on man
 Kindness to parents: but if
 They (either of them) strive
 (To force) thee to join
 With Me (in worship)
 Anything of which thou hast
 No knowledge, obey them not.
 Ye have (all) to return
 To Me, and I will
 Tell you (the truth)
 Of all that ye did.

[p. 1031]

9. And those who believe
 And work righteous deeds,--
 Them shall We admit
 To the company of the Righteous.

10. Then there are among men
 Such as say, "We believe
 In God"; but when they suffer
 Affliction in (the cause of) God,
 They treat men's oppression
 As if it were the Wrath
 Of God! And if help
 Comes (to thee) from thy Lord,
 They are sure to say,'
 "We have (always) been
 With you!" Does not God
 Know best all that is
 In the hearts of all Creation?

11. And God most certainly knows
 Those who believe, and as certainly
 Those who are Hypocrites.

12. And the Unbelievers say
 To those who believe:
 "Follow our path, and we
 Will bear (the consequences)"
 Of your faults." Never
 In the least will they
 Bear their faults: in fact
 They are liars!

[p. 1032]

13. They will bear their own
 Burdens, and (other) burdens
 Along with their own,
 And on the Day of Judgment.
 They will be called to account
 For their falsehoods.

  

SECTION 2.

14. We (once) sent Noah
 To his people, and he tarried
 Among them a thousand years
 Less fifty: but the Deluge
 Overwhelmed them while they
 (Persisted in) sin.

15. But We saved him
 And the Companions
 Of the Ark, and We made
 The (Ark) a Sign
 For all Peoples!

16. And (We also saved)
 Abraham: behold, he said
 To his people, "Serve God
 And fear Him: that
 Will be best for you
 If ye understand!

17. "For ye do worship idols
 Besides God, and ye invent
 Falsehood. The things that ye
 Worship besides God have
 No power to give you sustenance:

[p. 1033]

Then seek ye sustenance
 From God, serve Him,
 And be grateful to Him:
 To Him will be your return.

18. "And if ye reject (the Message),
 So did generations before you:
 And the duty of the apostle
 Is only to preach publicly
 (And clearly)."

19. See they not how God
 Originates creation, then
 Repeats it: truly that
 Is easy for God.

20. Say: "Travel through the earth
 And see how God did
 Originate creation; so will
 God produce a later creation:
 For God has power
 Over all things.

21. "He punishes whom He pleases,
 And He grants mercy to whom

[p. 1034]

He pleases, and towards Him
 Are ye turned.

22. "Not on earth nor in heaven
 Will ye be able (fleeing)
 To frustrate (His Plan),
 Nor have ye, besides God,
 Any protector or helper."

  

SECTION 3.

23. Those who reject the Signs
 Of God and the Meeting
 With Him (in the Hereafter),
 It is they who shall despair
 Of My mercy: it is they
 Who will (suffer)
 A most grievous Penalty.

24. So naught was the answer
 Of (Abraham's) people except
 That they said: "Slay him
 Or burn him." But God
 Did save him from the Fire
 Verily in this are Signs
 For people who believe.

25. And he said: "For you,
 Ye have taken (for worship)
 Idols besides God, out of
 Mutual love and regard

[p. 1035]

Between yourselves in this life;
 But on the Day of Judgment
 Ye shall disown each other
 And curse each other:
 And your abode will be
 The Fire, and ye shall have
 None to help."

26. But Lut had faith in Him:
 He said: "I will leave
 Home for the sake of
 My Lord: for He is
 Exalted in Might, and Wise."

27. And We gave (Abraham)
 Isaac and Jacob, and ordained
 Among his progeny Prophethood
 And Revelation, and We
 Granted him his reward
 In this life; and he was
 In the Hereafter (of the company)
 Of the Righteous.

28. And (remember) Lut: behold,
 He said to his people:

[p. 1036]

"Ye do commit lewdness,
 Such as no people in Creation
 (Ever) committed before you.

29. "Do ye indeed approach men,
 And cut off the highway?
 And practise wickedness
 (Even) in your councils?"
 But his people gave no answer
 But this: they said:
 "Bring us the Wrath of God
 If thou tellest the truth."

30. He said: "O my Lord!
 Help Thou me against people
 Who do mischief!"

  

SECTION 4.

31. When Our Messengers came
 To Abraham with the good news,
 They said: "We are indeed
 Going to destroy the people
 Of this township: for truly
 They are (addicted to) crime."

[p. 1037]

32. He said: "But there is
 Lut there." They said:
 "Well do we know who
 Is there: we will certainly
 Save him and his following,--
 Except his wife: she is
 Of those who lag behind!"

33. And when Our Messengers
 Came to Lut, he was
 Grieved on their account,
 And felt himself powerless
 (To protect) them: but they said:
 "Fear thou not, nor grieve:
 We are (here) to save thee
 And thy following, except
 Thy wife: she is
 Of those who lag behind.

34. "For we are going to
 Bring down on the people
 Of this township a Punishment
 From heaven, because they
 Have been wickedly rebellious."

35. And We have left thereof
 An evident Sign,
 For any people who
 (Care to) understand.

[p. 1038]

36. To the Madyan (people)
 (We sent) their brother Shu'aib.
 Then he said: "O my people!
 Serve God, and fear the Last
 Day: nor commit evil
 On the earth, with intent
 To do mischief."

37. But they rejected him:
 Then the mighty Blast
 Seized them, and they lay
 Prostrate in their homes
 By the morning.

38. (Remember also) the 'Ad
 And the Thamud (people):
 Clearly will appear to you
 From (the traces) of their buildings
 (Their fate): the Evil One
 Made their deeds alluring
 To them, and kept them hack
 From the Path, though they
 Were gifted with Intelligence
 And Skill.

[p. 1039]

39. (Remember also) Qarun,
 Pharaoh, and Haman: there came
 To them Moses with Clear Signs,
 But they behaved with insolence
 On the earth; yet they
 Could not overreach (Us).

40. Each one of them We seized
 For his crime: of them,
 Against some We sent
 A violent tornado (with showers
 Of stones); some were caught
 By a (mighty) Blast; some
 We caused the earth
 To swallow up; and some
 We drowned (in the waters):
 It was net God Who
 Injured (or oppressed) them:
 They injured (and oppressed)
 Their own souls.

41. The parable of those who
 Take protectors other than God
 Is that of the Spider,
 Who builds (to itself)

[p. 1040]

A house; but truly
 The flimsiest of houses
 Is the Spider's house;--
 If they but knew.

42. Verily God doth know
 Of (every thing) whatever
 That they call upon
 Besides Him: and He is
 Exalted (in power), Wise.

43. And such are the Parables
 We set forth for mankind,
 But only those understand them
 Who have Knowledge.

44. God created the heavens
 And the earth in true (proportions):
 Verily in that is a Sign
 For those who believe.

[p. 1041]

  

SECTION 5.

45. Recite what is sent
 Of the Book by inspiration
 To thee, and establish
 Regular Prayer: for Prayer
 Restrains from shameful
 And unjust deeds;
 And remembrance of God
 Is the greatest (thing in life)
 Without doubt. And God knows
 The (deeds) that ye do.

46. And dispute ye not
 With the People of the Book,
 Except with means better
 (Than mere disputation), unless
 It be with those of them
 Who inflict wrong (and injury):
 But say, "We believe
 In the Revelation which has
 Come down to us and in that
 Which came down to you;

[p. 1042]

Our God and your God
 Is One; and it is to Him
 We bow (in Islam)."

47. And thus (it is) that We
 Have sent down the Book
 To thee. So the People
 Of the Book believe therein,
 As also do some of these
 (Pagan Arabs): and none
 But Unbelievers reject Our Signs.

48. And thou vast not (able)
 To recite a Book before
 This (Book came), nor art thou
 (Able) to transcribe it
 With thy right hand:
 In that case, indeed, would

[p. 1043]

The talkers of vanities
 Have doubted.

49. Nay, here are Signs
 Self-evident in the hearts
 Of those endowed with
 knowledge:
 And none but the unjust
 Reject Our Signs.

50. Yet they say: "Why
 Are not Signs sent down
 To him from his Lord?"
 Say: "The Signs are indeed
 With God: and I am
 Indeed a clear Warner.

51. And is it not enough
 For them that We have
 Sent down to thee
 The Book which is rehearsed
 To them? Verily, in it
 Is Mercy and a Reminder
 To those who believe.

  

SECTION 6.

52. Say: "Enough is God
 For a Witness between me

[p. 1044]

And you: He knows
 What is in the heavens
 And on earth. And it is
 Those who believe in vanities
 And reject God, that
 Will perish (in the end).

53. They ask thee
 To hasten on the Punishment
 (For them): had it not been
 For a term (of respite)
 Appointed, the Punishment
 Would certainly have come
 To them: and it will
 Certainly reach them,--
 Of a sudden, while they
 Perceive not!

54. They ask thee
 To hasten on the Punishment:
 But, of a surety,
 Hell will encompass
 The rejecters of Faith!--

55. On the Day that
 The Punishment shall cover them
 From above them and
 From below them,
 And (a Voice) shall say:
 "Taste ye (the fruits)
 Of your deeds!

[p. 1045]

56. O My servants who believe!
 Truly, spacious is My Earth:
 Therefore serve ye Me--
 (And Me alone)!

57. Every soul shall have
 A taste of death:
 In the end to Us
 Shall ye be brought back.

58. But those who believe
 And work deeds of righteousness--
 To them shall We give
 A Home in Heaven,--
 Lofty mansions beneath which
 Flow rivers,--to dwell therein
 For aye;--an excellent reward
 For those who do (good)!--

59. Those who persevere in patience,
 And put their trust
 In their Lord and Cherisher.

60. How many are the creatures
 That carry not their own

[p. 1046]

Sustenance? It is God
 Who feeds (both) them and you:
 For He hears and knows
 (All things).

61. If indeed thou ask them
 Who has created the heavens
 And the earth and subjected
 The sun and the moon
 (To His Law), they will
 Certainly reply, "God".
 How are they then deluded
 Away (from the truth)?

62. God enlarges the sustenance
 (Which He gives) to whichever
 Of His servants He pleases;
 And He (similarly) grants
 By (strict) measure, (as He pleases):
 For God has full knowledge
 Of all things.

63. And if indeed thou ask them
 Who it is that sends down
 Rain from the sky,
 And gives life therewith
 To the earth after its death,
 They will certainly reply,
 "God!" Say, "Praise be
 To God!" But most
 Of them understand not.

[p. 1047]

  

SECTION 7.

64. What is the life of this world
 But amusement and play?
 But verily the Home
 In the Hereafter,--that is
 Life indeed, if they but knew.

65. Now, if they embark
 On a boat, they call
 On God, making their devotion
 Sincerely (and exclusively) to Him;
 But when He has delivered
 Them safely to (dry) land,
 Behold, they give a share
 (Of their worship to others)!--

66. Disdaining ungratefully Our gifts,
 And giving themselves up
 To (worldly) enjoyment! But soon
 Will they know.

67. Do they not then see
 That We have made
 A Sanctuary secure, and that
 Men are being snatched away
 From all around them?
 Then, do they believe in that

[p. 1048]

Which is vain, and reject
 The Grace of God?

68. And who does more wrong
 Than he who invents
 A lie against God
 Or rejects the Truth
 When it reaches him?
 Is there not a home
 In Hell for those who
 Reject Faith?

69. And those who strive
 In Our (Cause),--We will
 Certainly guide them
 To Our Paths:
 For verily God
 Is with those
 Who do right.

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1049]

[p. 1050]

[p. 1051]

  

Sura XXX.

  

Rum, or The Roman Empire.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. M.

2. The Roman Empire
 Has been defeated--

3. In a land close by;
 But they, (even) after
 (This) defeat of theirs,
 Will soon be victorious--

4. Within a few years.
 With God is the Decision,
 In the Past
 And in the Future:
 On that Day shall
 The Believers rejoice--

[p. 1052]

5. With the help of God.
 He helps whom He will,
 And He is Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful.

6. (It is) the promise of God.
 Never does God depart
 From His promise:
 But most men understand not.

7. They know but the outer
 (Things) in the life
 Of this world: but
 Of the End of things
 They are heedless.

8. Do they not reflect
 In their own minds?
 Not but for just ends
 And for a term appointed,
 Did God create the heavens
 And the earth, and all
 Between them: yet are there
 Truly many among men
 Who deny the meeting
 With their Lord
 (At the Resurrection)!

[p. 1053]

9. Do they not travel
 Through the earth, and see
 What was the End
 Of those before them?
 They were superior to them
 In strength: they tilled
 The soil and populated it
 In greater numbers than these
 Have done: there came to them
 Their apostles with Clear (Signs),
 (Which they rejected, to their
 Own destruction): it was not
 God who wronged them, but
 They wronged their own souls.

10. In the long run
 Evil in the extreme
 Will be the End of those
 Who do evil; for that
 They rejected the Signs
 Of God, and held them up
 To ridicule.

  

SECTION 2.

11. It is God Who begins
 (The process of) creation;
 Then repeats it; then
 Shall ye be brought back
 To Him.

[p. 1054]

12. On the Day that
 The Hour will be established,
 The guilty will be
 Struck dumb with despair.

13. No intercessor will they have
 Among their "Partners",
 And they will (themselves)
 Reject their "Partners".

14. On the Day that
 The Hour will he established,--
 That Day shall (all men)
 Be sorted out.

15. Then those who have believed
 And worked righteous deeds,
 Shall be made happy
 In a Mead of Delight.

16. And those who have rejected
 Faith and falsely denied
 Our Signs and the meeting
 Of the Hereafter,--such
 Shall be brought forth to
 Punishment.

17. So (give) glory to God,
 When ye reach eventide

[p. 1055]

And when ye rise
 In the morning;

18. Yea, To Him be praise,
 In the heavens and on earth;
 And in the late afternoon
 And when the day
 Begins to decline.

19. It is He Who brings out
 The living from the dead,
 And brings out the dead
 From the living, and Who
 Gives life to the earth
 After it is dead:
 And thus shall ye be
 Brought out (from the dead).

  

SECTION 3.

20. Among His Signs is this,
 That He created you

[p. 1056]

From dust; and then,--
 Behold, ye are men
 Scattered (far and wide)!

21. And among His Signs
 Is this, that He created
 For you mates from among
 Yourselves, that ye may
 Dwell in tranquillity with them,
 And He has put love
 And mercy between your (hearts):
 Verily in that are Signs
 For those who reflect.

22. And among His Signs
 Is the creation of the heavens
 And the earth, and the variations
 In your languages
 And your colours: verily
 In that are Signs
 For those who know.

23. And among His Signs
 Is the sleep that ye take
 By night and by day,
 And the quest that ye

[p. 1057]

(Make for livelihood)
 Out of His Bounty: verily
 In that are Signs
 For those who hearken.

24. And among His Signs,
 He shows you the lightning,
 By way both of fear
 And of hope, and He sends
 Down rain from the sky
 And with it gives life to
 The earth after it is dead:
 Verily in that are Signs
 For those who are wise.

25. And among His Signs is this,
 That heaven and earth
 Stand by His Command:
 Then when He calls you,
 By a single call, from the earth,
 Behold, ye (straightway) come forth.

[p. 1058]

26. To Him belongs every being
 That is in the heavens
 And on earth: all are
 Devoutly obedient to Him.

27. It is He Who begins
 (The process of) creation;
 Then repeats it; and
 For Him it is most easy.
 To Him belongs the loftiest
 Similitude (we can think of)
 In the heavens and the earth:
 For He is Exalted in Might,
 Full of wisdom.

  

SECTION 4.

28. He does propound
 To you a similitude
 From your own (experience):
 Do ye have partners
 Among those whom your right hands
 Possess, to share as equals
 In the wealth We have

[p. 1059]

Bestowed on you? Do ye
 Fear them as ye fear
 Each other? Thus do We
 Explain the Signs in detail
 To a people that understand.

29. Nay, the wrong-doers (merely)
 Follow their own lusts,
 Being devoid of knowledge.
 But who will guide those
 Whom God leaves astray?
 To them there will be
 No helpers.

30. So set thou thy face
 Steadily and truly to the Faith:
 (Establish) God's handiwork according
 To the pattern on which
 He has made mankind:
 No change (let there be)
 In the work (wrought)

[p. 1060]

By God: that is
 The standard Religion
 But most among mankind
 Understand not.

31. Turn ye back in repentance
 To Him, and fear Him:
 Establish regular prayers,
 And be not ye among those
 Who join gods with God,--

32. Those who split up
 Their Religion, and become
 (Mere) Sects,--each party
 Rejoicing in that which
 Is with itself!

33. When trouble touches men,
 They cry to their Lord,
 Turning back to Him
 In repentance: but when
 He gives them a taste
 Of Mercy as from Himself,
 Behold, some of them
 Pay part-worship to
 Other god's besides their Lord,--

34. (As if) to show their ingratitude
 For the (favours) We have
 Bestowed on them! Then enjoy
 (Your brief day); but soon

[p. 1061]

Will ye know (your folly).

35. Or have We sent down
 Authority to them, which
 Points out to them
 The things to which
 They pay part-worship?

36. When We give men
 A taste of Mercy,
 They exult thereat:
 And when-some evil
 Afflicts them because of
 What their (own) hands
 Have sent forth, behold,
 They are in despair!

37. See they not that God
 Enlarges the provision and
 Restricts it, to whomsoever
 He pleases? Verily in that
 Are Signs for those who believe.

38. So give what is due
 To kindred, the needy,
 And the wayfarer.
 That is best for those

[p. 1062]

Who seek the Countenance,
 Of God, and it is they
 Who will prosper.

39. That which ye lay out
 For increase through the property
 Of (other) people, will have
 No increase with God:
 But that which ye lay out
 For charity, seeking
 The Countenance of God,
 (Will increase): it is
 These who twill get
 A recompense multiplied.

40. It is God Who has
 Created you: further, He has
 Provided for your sustenance;
 Then He will cause you
 To die; and again He will
 Give you life. Are there
 Any of your (false) "Partners"
 Who can do any single
 One of these things?
 Glory to Him! and High
 Is He above the partners
 They attribute (to Him)!

[p. 1063]

  

SECTION 5.

41. Mischief has appeared
 On land and sea because
 Of (the meed) that the hands
 Of men have earned,
 That (God) may give them
 A taste of some of their
 Deeds: in order that the
 May turn back (from Evil).

42. Say: "Travel through the earth
 And see what was the End
 Of those before (you):
 Most of them worshipped
 Others besides God."

43. But set thou thy face
 To the right Religion,
 Before there come from God
 The Day which there is

[p. 1064]

No chance of averting:
 On that Day shall men
 Be divided (in two).

44. Those who reject Faith
 Will suffer from that rejection:
 And those who work righteousness
 Will spread their couch
 (Of repose) for themselves
 (In heaven):

45. That He may reward those
 Who believe and work righteous
 Deeds, out of His Bounty.
 For He loves not those
 Who reject Faith.

46. Among His Signs is this,
 That He sends the Winds,
 As heralds of Glad Tidings,
 Giving you a taste
 Of His (Grace and) Mercy,--
 That the ships may sail
 (Majestically) by His Command
 And that ye may seek

[p. 1065]

Of His Bounty: in order
 That ye may be grateful.

47. We did indeed send,
 Before thee, apostles
 To their (respective) peoples,
 And they came to them
 With Clear Signs: then,
 To those who transgressed,
 We meted out Retribution:
 And it was due from us
 To aid those who believed.

48. It is God Who sends
 The Winds, and they raise
 The Clouds: then does He
 Spread them in the sky
 As He wills, and break them
 Into fragments, until thou seest
 Rain-drops issue from the midst
 Thereof: then when He has
 Made them reach such
 His servants as He wills,
 Behold, they do rejoice!--

49. Even though, before they received
 (The rain)--just before this--
 They were dumb with despair!

50. Then contemplate (O man!)
 The memorials of God's Mercy!--
 How He gives life
 To the earth after
 Its death: verily the Same
 Will give life to the men

[p. 1066]

Who are dead: for He
 Has power over all things.

51. And if We (but) send
 A Wind from which
 They see (their tilth)
 Turn yellow,--behold,
 They become, thereafter,
 Ungrateful (Unbelievers)!

52. So verily thou canst not
 Make the dead to hear,
 Nor canst thou make
 The deaf to hear
 The call, when they show
 Their backs and turn away.

53. Nor canst thou lead back
 The blind from their straying:
 Only those wilt thou make
 To hear, who believe
 In Our Signs and submit
 (Their wills in Islam).

  

SECTION 6.

54. It is God Who
 Created you in a state
 Of (helpless) weakness, then
 Gave (you) strength after weakness,

[p. 1067]

Then, after strength, gave (you)
 Weakness and a hoary head:
 He creates as He wills,
 And it is He Who has
 All knowledge and power.

55. On the Day that
 The Hour (of reckoning)
 Will be established,
 The transgressors will swear
 That they tarried not
 But an hour: thus were
 They used to being deluded!

56. But those endued with knowledge
 And faith will say:
 "Indeed ye did tarry,
 Within God's Decree,
 To the Day of Resurrection,
 And this is the Day
 Of Resurrection: but ye--
 Ye were not aware!"

57. So on that Day no excuse
 Of theirs will
 Avail the Transgressors,
 Nor will they be invited (then)
 To seek grace (by repentance).

[p. 1068]

58. Verily We have propounded
 For men, in this Qur-an.
 Every kind of Parable:
 But if thou bring to them
 Any Sign, the Unbelievers
 Are sure to say, "Ye
 Do nothing but talk vanities."

59. Thus does God seal up
 The hearts of those
 Who understand not.

60. So patiently persevere: for
 Verily the promise of God
 Is true: nor let those
 Shake thy firmness, who have
 (Themselves) no certainty of faith.

[p. 1069]

[p. 1070]

[p. 1071]

[p. 1072]

[p. 1073]

[p. 1074]

[p. 1075]

[p. 1076]

[p. 1077]

[p. 1078]

[p. 1079]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1080]

  

Sura XXXI.

  

Luqman (the Wise).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. M.

2. These are Verses
 Of the Wise Book,--

3. A Guide and a Mercy
 To the Doers of Good,--

4. Those who establish regular Prayer,
 And give regular Charity,
 And have (in their hearts)
 The assurance of the Hereafter.

5. These are on (true) guidance
 From their Lord; and these
 Are the ones who will prosper.

6. But there are, among men,
 Those who purchase idle tales,'

[p. 1081]

Without knowledge (or meaning),
 To mislead (men) from the Path
 Of God and throw ridicule
 (On the Path): for such
 There will be a humiliating
 Penalty.

7. When Our Signs are rehearsed
 To such a one, he turns
 Away in arrogance, as if
 He heard them not, as if
 There were deafness in both
 His ears: announce to him
 A grievous Penalty.

8. For those who believe
 And work righteous deeds,
 There will be Gardens
 Of Bliss,--

9. To dwell therein. The promise
 Of God is true: and He
 Is Exalted in power, Wise.

10. He created the heavens
 Without any pillars that ye
 Can see; He set
 On the earth mountains
 Standing firm, lest it
 Should shake with you;
 And He scattered through it
 Beasts of all kinds.
 We send down rain
 From the sky, and produce

[p. 1082]

On the earth every kind.
 Of noble creature, in pairs.

11. Such is the Creation of God:
 Now show Me what is there
 That others besides Him
 Have created: nay, but
 The Transgressors are
 In manifest error.

  

SECTION 2.

12. We bestowed (in the past)
 Wisdom on Luqman:
 "Show (thy) gratitude to God."
 Any who is (so) grateful
 Does so to the profit
 Of his own soul: but if
 Any is ungrateful, verily
 God is free of all wants,
 Worthy of all praise.

13. Behold, Luqman said
 To his son by way of

[p. 1083]

Instruction: "O my son!
 Join not in worship
 (Others) with God: for
 False worship is indeed
 The highest wrong-doing."

14. And We have enjoined on man
 (To be good) to his parents:
 In travail upon travail
 Did his mother bear him,
 And in years twain
 Was his weaning: (hear
 The command), "Show gratitude
 To Me and to thy parents:
 To Me is (thy final) Goal.

15. "But if they strive
 To make thee join
 In worship with Me
 Things of which thou hast
 No knowledge, obey them not;
 Yet bear them company
 In this life with justice
 (And consideration), and follow
 The way of those who
 Turn to Me (in love):
 In the End the return
 Of you all is to Me,
 And I will tell you
 The truth (and meaning)
 Of all that ye did."

[p. 1084]

16. "O my son!" (said Luqman),
 "If there be (but) the weight
 Of a mustard-seed and
 It were (hidden) in a rock,'
 Or (anywhere) in the heavens or
 On earth, God will bring it
 Forth: for God understands'
 The finest mysteries, (and)
 Is well-acquainted (with them).

17. "O my son! establish
 Regular prayer, enjoin what is
 Just, and forbid what is wrong:
 And bear with patient constancy
 Whate'er betide thee; for this
 Is firmness (of purpose)
 In (the conduct of) affairs.

18. "And swell not thy cheek
 (For pride) at men,
 Nor walk in insolence
 Through the earth;
 For God loveth not
 Any arrogant boaster.

19. "And be moderate
 In thy pace, and lower

[p. 1085]

Thy voice; for the harshest
 Of sounds without doubt
 Is the braying of the ass."

  

SECTION 3.

20. Do ye not see
 That God has subjected
 To your (use) all things
 In the heavens and on earth,
 And has made His bounties
 Flow to you in exceeding
 Measure, (both) seen and unseen?
 Yet there are among men
 Those who dispute about God,
 Without knowledge and without
 Guidance, and without a Book
 To enlighten them!

21. When they are told to follow
 The (Revelation) that God
 Has sent down, they say:
 "Nay, we shall follow
 The ways that we found
 Our fathers (following)."

[p. 1086]

What! even if it is
 Satan beckoning them
 To the Penalty
 Of the (Blazing) Fire?

22. Whoever submits
 His whole self to God,
 And is a doer of good,
 Has grasped indeed
 The most trustworthy hand-hold
 And with God rests the End
 And Decision of (all) affairs.

23. But if any reject Faith,
 Let not his rejection
 Grieve thee: to Us
 Is their Return, and We
 Shall tell them the truth
 Of their deeds: for God
 Knows well all that is
 In (men's) hearts.

24. We grant them their pleasure
 For a little while
 In the end shall We
 Drive them to
 A chastisement unrelenting.

25. If thou ask them,
 Who it is that created
 The heavens and the earth.
 They will certainly say,

[p. 1087]

"God". Say: "Praise be to God!"
 But most of them
 Understand not.

26. To God belong all things
 In heaven and earth: verily
 God is He (that is)
 Free of all wants,
 Worthy of all praise.

27. And if all the trees
 On earth were pens
 And the Ocean (were ink),
 With seven Oceans behind it
 To add to its (supply),
 Yet would not the Words
 Of God be exhausted
 (In the writing): for God
 Is Exalted in power,
 Full of Wisdom.

28. And your creation
 Or your resurrection
 Is in no wise but
 As an individual soul:
 For God is He Who
 Hears and sees (all things).

[p. 1088]

29. Seest thou not that
 God merges Night into Day
 And He merges Day into Night;
 That He has subjected the sun,
 And the moon (to His Law),
 Each running its course
 For a term appointed; and
 That God is well acquainted
 With all that ye do?

30. That is because God is
 The (only) Reality, and because
 Whatever else they invoke
 Besides Him is Falsehood;
 And because God,--He is
 The Most High, Most Great.

  

SECTION 4.

31. Seest thou not that
 The ships sail through
 The Ocean by the grace
 Of God?--that He may
 Show you of His Signs?
 Verily in this are Signs
 For all who constantly persevere
 And give thanks.

32. When a wave covers them
 Like the canopy (of clouds),
 They call to God
 Offering Him sincere devotion.

[p. 1089]

But when He has delivered them
 Safely to land, there are
 Among them those that halt
 Between (right and wrong).
 But none reject Our Signs
 Except only a perfidious
 Ungrateful (wretch)!

33. O mankind! do your duty
 To your Lord, and fear
 (The coming of) a Day
 When no father can avail
 Aught for his son, nor
 A son avail aught
 For his father.
 Verily, the promise of God
 Is true: let not then
 This present life deceive you,
 Nor let the Chief Deceiver
 Deceive you about God.

34, Verily the knowledge
 Of the Hour is
 With God (alone).
 It is He Who sends down
 Rain, and He Who knows
 What is in the wombs.

[p. 1090]

Nor does any one know
 What it is that he will
 Earn on the morrow:
 Nor does any one know
 In what land he is
 To die. Verily with God
 Is full knowledge and He
 Is acquainted (with all things)

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1091]

[p. 1092]

  

Sura XXXII

  

Sajda, or Adoration.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A. L. M.

2. (This is) the revelation
 Of the Book in which
 There is no doubt,--
 From the Lord of the Worlds.

3. Or do they say,
 "He has forged it"?
 Nay, it is the Truth
 From thy Lord, that thou
 Mayest admonish a people
 To whom no warner
 Has come before thee:
 In order that they
 May receive guidance.

4. It is God Who has
 Created the heavens
 And the earth, and all
 Between them, in six Days,

[p. 1093]

And is firmly established
 On the Throne (of authority):
 Ye have none, besides Him,
 To protect or intercede (for you):
 Will ye not then
 Receive admonition?

5. He rules (all) affairs
 From the heavens
 To the earth: in the end
 Will (all affairs) go up
 To Him, on a Day,
 The space whereof will be
 (As) a thousand years
 Of your reckoning.

6. Such is He, the Knower
 Of all things, hidden
 And open, the Exalted
 (In power), the Merciful;--

7. He Who has made
 Everything which He has created
 Most Good: He began
 The creation of man
 With (nothing more than) clay,

[p. 1094]

8. And made his progeny
 From a quintessence
 Of the nature of
 A fluid despised:

9. But He fashioned him
 In due proportion, and breathed
 Into him something of
 His spirit. And He gave
 You (the faculties of) hearing
 And sight and feeling
 (And understanding):
 Little thanks do ye give!

10. And they say: "What!
 When we lie, hidden
 And lost, in the earth,
 Shall we indeed be
 In a Creation renewed?
 Nay, they deny the Meeting
 With their Lord!"

11. Say: "The Angel of Death,
 Put in charge of you,
 Will (duly) take your souls:
 Then shall ye be brought
 Back to your Lord."

[p. 1095]

  

SECTION 2.

12. If only thou couldst see
 When the guilty ones
 Will bend low their heads
 Before their Lord, (saying:)
 "Our Lord! We have seen
 And we have heard:
 Now then send us back
 (To the world): we will
 Work righteousness: for we
 Do indeed (now) believe."

13. If We had so willed,
 We could certainly have brought
 Every soul its true guidance:
 But the Word from Me
 Will come true, "I will
 Fill Hell with Jinns
 And men all together."

14. "Taste ye then--for ye
 Forgot the Meeting
 Of this Day of yours,
 And We too will
 Forget you--taste ye
 The Penalty of Eternity
 For your (evil) deeds!"

15. Only those believe
 In Our Signs, who, when

[p. 1096]

They are recited to them,
 Fall down in adoration,
 And celebrate the praises
 Of their Lord, nor are they
 (Ever) puffed up with pride.

16. Their limbs do forsake
 Their beds of sleep, the while
 They call on their Lord,
 In Fear and Hope:
 And they spend (in charity)
 Out of the sustenance which
 We have bestowed on them.

17. Now no person knows
 What delights of the eye
 Are kept hidden (in reserve)
 For them--as a reward
 For their (good) Deeds.

18. Is then the man
 Who believes no better
 Than the man who is
 Rebellious and wicked?
 Not equal are they.

19. For those who believe
 And do righteous deeds,
 Are Gardens as hospitable
 Homes, for their (good) deeds.

[p. 1097]

20. As to those who are
 Rebellious and wicked, their abode
 Will be the Fire: every time
 They wish to get away
 Therefrom, they will be forced
 Thereinto, and it will be said
 To them: "Taste ye
 The Penalty of the Fire,
 The which ye were wont
 To reject as false."

21. And indeed We will make
 Them taste of the Penalty
 Of this (life) prior to
 The supreme Penalty, in order
 That they may (repent and) return.

22. And who does more wrong
 Than one to whom are recited
 The Signs of his Lord,
 And who then turns away
 Therefrom? Verily from those
 Who transgress We shall exact
 (Due) Retribution.

  

SECTION 3.

23. We did indeed aforetime
 Give the Book to Moses:

[p. 1098]

Be not then in doubt
 Of its reaching (thee):
 And We made it
 A guide to the Children
 Of Israel.

24. And We appointed, from among
 Them, Leaders, giving guidance
 Under Our command, so long
 As they persevered with patience
 And continued to have faith
 In Our Signs.

25. Verily thy Lord will judge
 Between them on the Day
 Of Judgment, in the matters
 Wherein they differ
 (among themselves)

26. Does it not teach them
 A lesson, how many generations
 We destroyed before them,
 In whose dwellings they
 (Now) go to and fro?
 Verily in that are Signs:
 Do they not then listen?

[p. 1099]

27. And do they not see
 That We do drive Rain
 To parched soil (bare
 Of herbage), and produce therewith
 Crops, providing food
 For their cattle and themselves?
 Have they not the vision?

28. They say: "When will
 This Decision be, if ye
 Are telling the truth?"

29. Say: "On the Day
 Of Decision, no profit
 Will it he to Unbelievers
 If they (then) believe!
 Nor Will they he granted
 A respite."

30. So turn away from them,
 And wait: they too
 Are waiting.

[p. 1100] [p. 1101]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1102]

  

Sura XXXIII.

  

Ahzab, or The Confederates.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. O Prophet! Fear God,
 And hearken not
 To the Unbelievers
 And the Hypocrites:
 Verily god is full
 Of knowledge and wisdom.

2. But follow that which
 Comes to thee by inspiration
 From thy Lord: for God
 Is well acquainted
 With (all) that ye do.

3. And put thy trust
 In God, and enough is God
 As a Disposer of affairs.

4. God has not made
 For any man two hearts

[p. 1103]

In his (one) body: nor has
 He made your wives whom
 Ye divorce by Zihar
 Your mothers: nor has He
 Made your adopted sons
 Your sons. Such is (only)
 Your (manner of) speech
 By your mouths. but God
 Tells (you) the Truth, and He
 Shows the (right) Way.

5. Call them by (the names
 Of) their fathers: that is
 Juster in the sight of God.
 But if ye know not
 Their father's (names, call
 Them) your Brothers in faith,
 Or your Maulas.
 But there is no blame
 On you if ye make
 A mistake therein:
 (What counts is)
 The intention of your hearts:
 And god is Oft-Returning,
 Most Merciful.

[p. 1104]

6. The Prophet is closer
 To the Believers than
 Their own selves,
 And his wives are
 Their mothers. Blood-relations
 Among each other have
 Closer personal ties,
 In the Decree of God.
 Than (the Brotherhood of)
 Believers and Muhajirs:
 Nevertheless do ye
 What is just to your
 Closest friends: such is
 The writing in the Decree
 (Of God).

7. And remember We took
 From the Prophets their
 Covenant:
 As (We did) from thee:
 From Noah, Abraham, Moses,
 And Jesus the son of Mary:
 We took from them
 A solemn Covenant:

[p. 1105]

8. That (God) may question
 The (Custodians) of Truth concerning
 The Truth they (were charged with):
 And He has prepared
 For the Unbelievers
 A grievous Penalty.

  

SECTION 2.

9. O ye who believe!
 Remember the Grace of God,
 (Bestowed) on you, when
 There came down on you
 Hosts (to overwhelm you):
 But We sent against them

[p. 1106]

A hurricane and forces
 That ye saw not:
 But God sees (clearly)
 All that ye do.

10. Behold! they came on you
 From above you and from
 Below you, and behold,
 The eyes became dim
 And the hearts gaped
 Up to the throats,
 And ye imagined various
 (Vain) thoughts about God!

11. In that situation
 Were the Believers tried:
 They were shaken as by
 A tremendous shaking.

12. Find behold! The Hypocrites
 And those in whose hearts
 Is a disease (even) say: "God
 And His Apostle promised us
 Nothing but delusions!"

13. Behold! A party among them
 Said: "Ye men of Yathrib!
 Ye cannot stand (the attack)!
 Therefore go back!"
 And a band of them
 Ask for leave of the Prophet,

[p. 1107]

Saying, "Truly our houses
 Are bare and exposed," though
 They were not exposed:
 They intended nothing but
 To run away.

14. And if an entry had
 Been effected to them
 From the sides of the (City),
 And they had been
 Incited to sedition.
 They would certainly have
 Brought it to pass, with
 None but a brief delay!

15. And yet they had already
 Covenanted with God not to turn
 Their backs, and a covenant
 With God must (surely)
 Be answered for.

16. Say: "Running away will not
 Profit you if ye are
 Running away from death
 Or slaughter; and even if
 (Ye do escape), no more
 Than a brief (respite)
 Will ye be allowed to enjoy!"

[p. 1108]

17. Say: "Who is it that can
 Screen you from God
 If it be His wish
 To give you Punishment
 Or to give you Mercy?"
 Nor will they find for themselves,
 Besides God, any protector
 Or helper.

18. Verily God knows those
 Among you who keep back
 (Men) and those who say
 To their brethren, "Come along
 To us", but come not
 To the fight except
 For just a little while,

19. Covetous over you
 Then when fear comes,
 Thou wilt see them looking
 To thee, their eyes revolving,
 Like (those of) one over whom
 Hovers death: but when
 The fear is past,
 They will smite you
 With sharp tongues, covetous
 Of goods. Such men have
 No faith, and so God
 Has made their deeds
 Of none effect: and that
 Is easy for God.

[p. 1109]

20. They think that the Confederates
 Have not withdrawn; and if
 The Confederates should come (again),
 They would wish they were
 In the deserts (wandering)
 Among the Bedouins, and
 Seeking news about you
 (From a safe distance);
 And if they were
 In your midst, they
 Would fight but little.

  

SECTION 3.

21. Ye have indeed
 In the Apostle of God
 A beautiful pattern (of conduct)
 For any one whose hope is
 In God and the Final Day,
 And who engages much
 In the praise of God.

[p. 1110]

22. When the Believers saw
 The Confederate forces,
 They said: "This is
 What God and His Apostle is
 Had promised us, and God
 And His Apostle told us
 What was true." And it
 Only added to their faith
 And their zeal in obedience.

23. Among the Believers are then
 Who have been true to
 Their Covenant with God:
 Of them some have completed
 Their vow (to the extreme),
 And some (still) wait:
 But they have never changed
 (Their determination) in the least:

24. That God may reward
 The men of Truth for
 Their Truth, and punish
 The Hypocrites if that be

[p. 1111]

His Will, or turn to them
 In Mercy: for God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

25. And God turned back
 The Unbelievers for (all)
 Their fury: no advantage
 Did they gain; and enough
 Is God for the Believers
 In their fight. And God
 Is full of Strength, Able
 To enforce His Will.

26. And those of the people
 Of the Book who aided
 Them--God did take them
 Down from their strongholds

[p. 1112]

And cast terror into
 Their hearts, (so that)
 Some ye slew, and some
 Ye made prisoners,

27. And He made you heirs
 Of their lands, their houses,
 And their goods,
 And of a land which

[p. 1113]

Ye had not frequented
 (Before). And God has
 Power over all things.

  

SECTION 4.

28. O Prophet! say
 To thy Consorts:
 "If it be that ye desire
 The life of this world,
 And its glitter,--then come!
 I will provide for your

[p. 1114]

Enjoyment and set you free
 In a handsome manner.

29. But if ye seek God
 And His Apostle, and
 The Home of the Hereafter,
 Verily God has prepared
 For the well-doers amongst you
 A great reward.

30. O Consorts of the Prophet
 If any of you were guilty
 Of evident unseemly conduct,
 The Punishment would be
 Doubled to her, and that
 Is easy for God

[p. 1115]

31. But any of you that is
 Devout in the service of
 God and His Apostle,
 And works righteousness,--
 To her shall We grant
 Her reward twice: and We
 Have prepared for her
 A generous Sustenance.

32. O Consorts of the Prophet!
 Ye are not like any
 Of the (other) women:
 If ye do fear (God),
 Be not too complaisant
 Of speech, lest one
 In whose heart is
 A disease should be moved
 With desire: but speak ye
 A speech (that is) just.

33. And stay quietly in
 Your houses, and make not
 A dazzling display, like
 That of the former Times
 Of Ignorance; and establish
 Regular Prayer, and give
 Regular Charity; and obey
 God and His Apostle.
 And God only wishes
 To remove all abomination

[p. 1116]

From you, ye Members
 Of the Family, and to make
 You pure and spotless.

34. And recite what is
 Rehearsed to you in your
 Homes, of the Signs of God
 And His Wisdom:
 For God understands
 The finest mysteries and
 Is well-acquainted (with them).

  

SECTION 5.

35. For Muslim men and women,--
 For believing men and women,
 For devout men and women,
 For true men and women,
 For men and women who are
 Patient and constant, for men
 And women who humble themselves
 For men and women who give
 In charity, for men and women
 Who fast (and deny themselves),
 For men and women who
 Guard their chastity, and
 For men and women who

[p. 1117]

Engage much in God's praise,--
 For them has God prepared
 Forgiveness and great reward.

36. It is not fitting
 For a Believer, man or woman.
 When a matter has been decided
 By God and His Apostle,
 To have any option
 About their decision:
 If any one disobeys God
 And His Apostle, he is indeed
 On a clearly wrong Path.

37. Behold! thou didst say
 To one who had received
 The grace of God
 And thy favour: "Retain thou
 (In wedlock) thy wife,
 And fear God." But thou
 Didst hide in thy heart
 That which God was about
 To make manifest: thou didst
 Fear the people, but it is

[p. 1118]

More fitting that thou shouldst
 Fear God. Then when Zaid
 Had dissolved (his marriage)
 With her, with the necessary
 (Formality), We joined her
 In marriage to thee:
 In order that (in future)
 There may be no difficulty
 To the Believers in (the matter
 Of) marriage with the vives
 Of their adopted sons, when
 The latter have dissolved
 With the necessary (formality)
 (Their marriage) with them.
 And God's command must
 Be fulfilled.

38. There can be no difficulty
 To the Prophet in what
 God has indicated to him
 As a duty. It was
 The practice (approved) of God
 Amongst those of old
 That have passed away.
 And the command of God
 Is a decree determined.

39. (It is the practice of those)
 Who preach the Messages
 Of God, and fear Him,
 And fear none but God.

[p. 1119]

And enough is God
 To call (men) to account.

40. Muhammad is not
 The father of any
 Of your men, but (he is)
 The Apostle of God,
 And the Seal of the Prophets:
 And God has full knowledge
 Of all things.

  

SECTION 6.

41. O ye who believe!
 Celebrate the praises of God,
 And do this often;

42. And glorify Him
 Morning and evening.

43. He it is Who sends
 Blessings on you, as do
 His angels, that He may
 Bring you out from the depths
 Of Darkness into Light:
 And He is Full of Mercy
 To the Believers.

44. Their salutation on the Day
 They meet Him will be
 "Peace!"; and He has
 Prepared for them
 A generous Reward.

45. O Prophet! Truly We
 Have sent thee as

[p. 1120]

A Witness, a Bearer
 Of Glad Tidings,
 And a Warner,--

46. And as one who invites
 To God's (Grace) by His leave,
 And as a Lamp
 Spreading Light.

47. Then give the glad tidings
 To the Believers, that
 They shall have from God
 A very great Bounty.

48. And obey not (the behests)
 Of the Unbelievers
 And the Hypocrites,
 And heed not their annoyances,
 But put thy trust in God.
 For enough is God
 As a Disposer of affairs.

49. O ye who believe!
 When ye marry believing women,
 And then divorce them
 Before ye have touched them,

[p. 1121]

No period of 'Iddat
 Have ye to count
 In respect of them:
 So give them a present,
 And set them free
 In a handsome manner.

50. O Prophet! We have
 Made lawful to thee
 Thy wives to whom thou
 Hast paid their dowers;
 And those whom thy
 Right hand possesses out of
 The prisoners of war whom
 God has assigned to thee;
 And daughters of thy paternal
 Uncles and aunts, and daughters
 Of thy maternal uncles
 And aunts, who migrated
 (From Mecca) with thee;
 And any believing woman
 Who dedicates her soul

[p. 1122]

To the Prophet if the Prophet
 Wishes to wed her;--this
 Only for thee, and not
 For the Believers (at large);
 We know what We have
 Appointed for them as to
 Their wives and the captives
 Whom their right hands
 Possess;--in order that
 There should be no difficulty
 For thee. And God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

51. Thou mayest defer (the turn
 Of) any of them that thou
 Pleasest, and thou mayest receive
 Any thou pleasest: and there
 Is no blame on thee if
 Thou invite one whose (turn)

[p. 1123]

Thou hadst set aside.
 This were nigher to
 The cooling of their eyes,
 The prevention of their grief,
 And their satisfaction--
 That of all of them--
 With that which thou
 Hast to give them:
 And God knows (all)
 That is in your hearts:
 And God is All-Knowing,
 Most Forbearing.

52. It is not lawful for thee
 (To marry more) women
 After this, nor to change
 Them for (other) wives,
 Even though their beauty
 Attract thee, except any
 Thy right hand should
 Possess (as handmaidens):
 And God doth watch
 Over all things.

[p. 1124]

  

SECTION 7.

53. O ye who believe!
 Enter not the Prophet's houses,--
 Until leave is given you,
 For a meal, (and then)
 Not (so early as) to wait
 For its preparation: but when
 Ye are invited, enter;
 And when ye have taken
 Your meal, disperse,
 Without seeking familiar talk.
 Such (behaviour) annoys
 The Prophet: he is ashamed
 To dismiss you, but
 God is not ashamed
 (To tell you) the truth.
 And when ye
 Ask (his ladies)
 For anything ye want,
 Ask them from before
 A screen: that makes
 For greater purity for
 Your hearts and for theirs.
 Nor is it right for you

[p. 1125]

That ye should annoy
 God's Apostle, or that
 Ye should marry his widows
 After him at any time.
 Truly such a thing is
 In God's sight an enormity.

54. Whether ye reveal anything
 Or conceal it, verily
 God has full knowledge
 Of all things.

55. There is no blame
 (On these ladies if they
 Appear) before their fathers
 Or their sons, their brothers,
 Or their brothers' sons,
 Or their sisters' sons,
 Or their women,
 Or the (slaves) whom
 Their right hands possess.
 And, (ladies), fear God;
 For God is Witness
 To all things.

56. God and His Angels
 Send blessings on the Prophet:

[p. 1126]

O ye that believe!
 Send ye blessings on him,
 And salute him
 With all respect.

57. Those who annoy
 God and His Apostle--
 God has cursed them
 In this world and
 In the Hereafter,
 And has prepared for them
 A humiliating Punishment.

58. And those who annoy
 Believing men and women
 Undeservedly, bear
 (on themselves)
 A calumny and a glaring sin.

  

SECTION 8.

59. O Prophet! Tell
 Thy wives and daughters,
 And the believing women,
 That they should cast
 Their outer garments over
 Their persons (when abroad):
 That is most convenient,
 That they should be known

[p. 1127]

(As such) and not molested.
 And God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

60. Truly, if the Hypocrites,
 And those in whose hearts
 Is a disease, and those who
 Stir up sedition in the City,
 Desist not, We shall certainly
 Stir thee up against them:
 Then will they not be
 Able to stay in it
 As thy neighbours
 For any length of time:

61. They shall have a curse
 On them: wherever they
 Are found, they shall be
 Seized and slain
 (Without mercy).

62. (Such was) the practice
 (Approved) of God among those
 Who lived aforetime:
 No change wilt thou find
 In the practice (approved)
 Of God.

[p. 1128]

63. Men ask thee concerning
 The Hour: say, "The knowledge
 Thereof is with God (alone)":
 And what will make thee
 Understand?--perchance
 The Hour is nigh!

64. Verily God has cursed
 The Unbelievers and prepared
 For them a Blazing Fire,--

65. To dwell therein for ever:
 No protector will they find,
 Nor helper.

66. The Day that their faces
 Will be turned upside down
 In the Fire, they will say:
 "Woe to us! would that
 We had obeyed God
 And obeyed the Apostle!"

67. And they would say:
 "Our Lord! We obeyed
 Our chiefs and our great ones,
 And they misled us
 As to the (right) path.

68. "Our Lord! Give them
 Double Penalty
 And curse them
 With a very great Curse!"

[p. 1129]

  

SECTION 9.

69. O ye who believe!
 Be ye not like those
 Who vexed and insulted Moses,
 But God cleared him
 Of the (calumnies) they
 Had uttered: and he
 Was honourable in God's sight.

70. O ye who believe!
 Fear God, and (always) say
 A word directed to the Right:

71. That He may make
 Your conduct whole and sound
 And forgive you your sins:
 He that obeys God
 And His Apostle, has already
 Attained the highest
 Achievement.

72. We did indeed offer
 The Trust to the Heavens

[p. 1130]

And the Earth
 And the Mountains;
 But they refused
 To undertake it,
 Being afraid thereof:
 But man undertook it;--
 He was indeed unjust
 And foolish;--

[p. 1131]

73. (With the result (that
 God has to punish
 The Hypocrites, men and women,
 And the Unbelievers, men
 And women, and God turns
 In Mercy to the Believers,
 Men and women: for God
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

[p. 1132]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1133]

  

Sura XXXIV.

  

Saba, or the City of Saba

(see verse 15).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Praise be to God,
 To Whom belong all things
 In the heavens and on earth:
 To Him be Praise
 In the Hereafter:
 And He is Full of Wisdom,
 Acquainted with all things.

2. He knows all that goes
 Into the earth, and all that
 Comes out thereof; all that
 Comes down from the sky
 And all that ascends thereto
 And He is the Most Merciful,
 The Oft-Forgiving.

3. The Unbelievers say,
 "Never to us will come

[p. 1134]

The Hour": say, "Nay!
 But most surely,
 By my Lord, it will come
 Upon you;--by Him
 Who knows the unseen,--
 From Whom is not hidden
 The least little atom
 In the Heavens or on earth:
 Nor is there anything less
 Than that, or greater, but
 Is in the Record Perspicuous:

4. That He may reward
 Those who believe and work
 Deeds of righteousness: for such
 Is Forgiveness and a Sustenance
 Most Generous."

5. But those who strive
 Against Our Signs, to frustrate
 Them,--for such will be
 A Penalty,--a Punishment
 Most humiliating.

6. And those to whom
 Knowledge has come see
 That the (Revelation) sent down
 To thee from thy Lord--
 That is the Truth,
 And that it guides

[p. 1135]

To the Path of the Exalted
 (In Might), Worthy
 Of all praise.

7. The Unbelievers say
 (In ridicule): "Shall we
 Point out to you a man
 That will tell you,
 When ye are all scattered
 To pieces in disintegration,
 That ye shall (then be
 Raised) in a New Creation?

8. "Has he invented a falsehood
 Against God, or has
 A spirit (seized) him?"--
 Nay, it is those who
 Believe not in the Hereafter,
 That are in (real) Penalty,
 And in farthest Error.

9. See they not what is
 Before them and behind them,
 Of the sky and the earth
 If We wished, We could
 Cause the earth to swallow
 Them up, or cause a piece
 Of the sky to fall upon them.
 Verily in this is a Sign
 For every devotee that
 Turns to God (in repentance).

[p. 1136]

  

SECTION 2.

10. We bestowed Grace aforetime
 On David from Ourselves:
 "O ye Mountains! sing ye
 Back the Praises of God
 With him! and ye birds
 (Also)! And We made
 The iron soft for him;--

11. (Commanding), "Make thou
 Coats of mail, balancing well
 The rings of chain armour,
 And work ye righteousness;
 For be sure I see
 (Clearly) all that ye do."

12. And to Solomon (We
 Made) the Wind (obedient):
 Its early morning (stride)
 Was a month's (journey),
 And its evening (stride)
 Was a month's (journey);
 And We made a Font
 Of molten brass to flow

[p. 1137]

For him; and there were
 Jinns that worked in front
 Of him, by the leave
 Of his Lord, and if any
 Of them turned aside
 From Our command, We
 Made him taste
 Of the Penalty
 Of the Blazing Fire.

13. They worked for him
 As he desired, (making) Arches,
 Images, Basons
 As large as Reservoirs,
 And (cooking) Cauldrons fixed
 (In their places): "Work ye,
 Sons of David, with thanks!
 But few of My servants
 Are grateful!"

14. Then, when We decreed
 (Solomon's) death, nothing showed them
 His death except a little
 Worm of the earth, which

[p. 1138]

Kept (slowly) gnawing away
 At his staff: so when he
 Fell down, the Jinns saw
 Plainly that if they had
 Known the unseen, they
 Would not have tarried
 In the humiliating Penalty
 (Of their Task).

15. There was, for Saba,
 Aforetime, a Sign in their
 Home-land--two Gardens
 To the right and to the left.
 "Eat of the Sustenance (provided)
 By your Lord, and be grateful
 To Him: a territory fair and happy,
 And a Lord Oft-Forgiving!

16. But they turned away
 (From God), and We sent
 Against them the flood
 (Released) from the Dams,

[p. 1139]

And We converted their two
 Garden (rows) into "gardens"
 Producing bitter fruit,
 And tamarisks, and some few
 (Stunted) Lote-trees.

17. That was the Requital
 We gave them because
 They ungratefully rejected Faith:
 And never do We give
 (Such) requital except to such
 As are ungrateful rejecters.

18. Between them and the Cities
 On which We had poured
 Our blessings, We had placed
 Cities in prominent positions,
 And between them We had
 Appointed stages of journey
 In due proportion: "Travel therein,
 Secure, by night and by day."

19. But they said: "Our Lord!
 Place longer distances

[p. 1140]

Between our journey-stages":
 But they wronged themselves (therein).
 At length We made them
 As a tale (that is told),
 And We dispersed them
 All in scattered fragments.
 Verily in this are Signs
 For every (soul that is)
 Patiently constant and grateful.

20. And on them did Satan
 Prove true his idea,
 And they followed him, all
 But a Party that believed.

21. But he had no authority
 Over them,--except that We
 Might test the man who
 Believes in the Hereafter
 From him who is in doubt
 Concerning it: and thy Lord
 Doth watch over all things.

[p. 1141]

  

SECTION 3.

22. Say: "Call upon other (gods)
 Whom ye fancy, besides God:
 They have no power,
 Not the weight of an atom,--
 In the heavens or on earth:
 No (sort of) share have they
 Therein, nor is any of them
 A helper to God.

23. "No intercession can avail
 In His Presence, except for those
 For whom He has granted
 Permission. So far (is this
 The case) that, when terror
 Is removed from their hearts
 (At the Day of Judgment, then)
 Will they say, "What is it
 That your Lord commanded?"
 They will say, "That which is
 True and just; and He is
 The Most High, Most Great."

24. Say: "Who gives you
 Sustenance, from the heavens

[p. 1142]

And the earth?" Say:
 "It is God; and certain it is
 That either we or ye
 Are on right guidance
 Or in manifest error!"

25. Say: "Ye shall not be
 Questioned as to our sins,
 Nor shall we be questioned
 As to what ye do."

26. Say: "Our Lord will gather us
 Together and will in the end
 Decide the matter between us
 (And you) in truth and justice:
 And He is the One to decide,
 The One Who knows all."

27. Say: "Show me those whom
 Ye have joined with Him
 As partners: by no means
 (Can ye). Nay, He is God,
 The Exalted in Power,
 The Wise."

28. We have not sent thee
 But as a universal (Messenger)

[p. 1143]

To men, giving them
 Glad tidings, and warning them
 (Against sin), but most men
 Understand not.

29. They say: "When will this
 Promise (come to pass)
 If ye are telling the truth?"

30. Say: "The appointment to you
 Is for a Day, which ye
 Cannot put back for an hour
 Nor put forward."

  

SECTION 4.

31. The Unbelievers say:
 "We shall neither believe
 In this scripture nor in (any)
 That (came) before it."
 Couldst thou but see when
 The wrong-doers will be made
 To stand before their Lord,
 Throwing back the word (of blame)

[p. 1144]

On one another! Those who
 Had been despised will say
 To the arrogant ones:
 "Had it not been for you,
 We should certainly
 Have been believers!"

32. The arrogant ones will say
 To those who had been despised:
 "Was it we who kept you
 Back from Guidance after
 It reached you? Nay, rather,
 It was ye who transgressed.

33. Those who had been despised
 Will say to the arrogant ones:
 "Nay! it was a plot
 (Of yours) by day and by night:
 Behold! ye (constantly) ordered us
 To be ungrateful to God
 And to attribute equals to Him!
 They will declare (their) repentance
 When they see the Penalty:
 We shall put yokes

[p. 1145]

On the necks of the Unbelievers:
 It would only be a requital
 For their (ill) Deeds.

34. Never did We send
 A Warner to a population,
 But the wealthy ones among them
 Said: "We believe not
 In the (Message) with which
 Ye have been sent."

35. They said: "We have more
 In wealth and in sons
 And we cannot be punished."

36. Say: "Verily my Lord enlarges
 And restricts the Provision
 To whom He pleases, but
 Most men understand not."

  

SECTION 5.

37. It is not your wealth
 Nor your sons, that will
 Bring you nearer to Us
 In degree: but only
 Those who believe and work
 Righteousness--these are
 The ones for whom there is
 A multiplied Reward

[p. 1146]

For their deeds, while
 Secure they (reside)
 In the dwellings on high!

38. Those who strive against
 Our Signs, to frustrate them,
 Will be given over
 Into Punishment.

39. Say: "Verily my Lord enlarges
 And restricts the Sustenance
 To such of His servants
 As He pleases: and nothing
 Do ye spend in the least
 (In His Cause) but He
 Replaces it: for He is
 The Best of those who
 Grant Sustenance.

40. One Day He will
 Gather them all together,
 And say to the angels,
 "Was it you that these
 Men used to worship?"

41. They will say, "Glory to Thee!
 Our (tie) is with Thee
 As Protector--not with them.
 Nay, but they worshipped

[p. 1147]

The Jinns: most of them
 Believed in them."

42. So on that Day
 No power shall they have
 Over each other, for profit
 Or harm: and We shall
 Say to the wrong-doers,
 "Taste ye the Penalty's
 Of the Fire,--the which
 Ye were wont to deny!"

43. When Our Clear Signs
 Are rehearsed to them,
 They say, "This is only
 A man who wishes
 To hinder you from the (worship)
 Which your fathers practised."
 And they say, "This is
 Only a falsehood invented!"
 And the Unbelievers say
 Of the Truth when it comes
 To them, "This is nothing
 But evident magic!"

44. But We had not given
 Them Books which they could
 Study, nor sent apostles
 To them before thee
 As Warners.

[p. 1148]

45. And their predecessors rejected
 (The Truth); these have
 Not received a tenth
 Of what We had granted
 To those: yet when they rejected
 My apostles, how (terrible)
 Was My rejection (of them)!

  

SECTION 6.

46. Say: "I do admonish you
 On one point: that ye
 Do stand up before God,--
 (It may be) in pairs,
 Or (it may be) singly,--
 And reflect (within yourselves):
 Your Companion is not
 Possessed: he is no less
 Than a Warner to you,
 In face of a terrible
 Penalty."

47. Say: "No reward do I
 Ask of you: it is (all)
 In your interest: my reward
 Is only due from God:
 And He is Witness
 To all things."

48. Say: "Verily my Lord
 Doth cast the (mantle

[p. 1149]

Of) Truth (over His servants),--
 He that has full knowledge
 Of (all) that is hidden."

49. Say: "The Truth has arrived,
 And Falsehood neither creates
 Anything new, nor restores
 Anything."

50. Say: "If I am astray,
 I only stray to the loss
 Of my own soul: but if
 I receive guidance, it is seen
 Because of the inspiration
 Of my Lord to me:
 It is He Who hears
 All things, and is (ever) near."

51. If thou couldst but see
 When they will quake
 With terror; but then
 There will be no escape
 (For them), and they will he
 Seized from a position
 (Quite) near.

[p. 1150]

52. And they will say,
 "We do believe (now)
 In the (Truth)"; but how
 Could they receive (Faith)
 From a position (so) far off,--

53. Seeing that they did reject
 Faith (entirely) before, and
 That they (continually) cast
 (Slanders) on the Unseen
 From a position far off?

54. And between them
 And their desires,
 Is placed a barrier,
 As was done in the past
 With their partisans:
 For they were indeed
 In suspicious (disquieting) doubt.

[p. 1151]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1152]

  

Sura XXXV.

  

Fatir, or The Originator of Creation; or Malaika, or The Angels.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Praise be to God,
 Who created (out of nothing)
 The heavens and the earth,
 Who made the angels
 Messengers with wings,--
 Two, or three, or four (Pairs):
 He adds to Creation
 As He pleases: for God
 Has power over all things.

2. What God out of His Mercy
 Doth bestow on mankind
 There is none can withhold:
 What He doth withhold,

[p. 1153]

There is none can grant,
 Apart from Him:
 And He is the Exalted
 In Power, Full of Wisdom.

3. O men! call to mind
 The grace of God unto you!
 Is there a Creator, other
 Than God, to give you
 Sustenance from heaven
 Or earth? There is
 No god but He: how
 Then are ye deluded
 Away from the Truth?

4. And if they reject thee,
 So were apostles rejected
 Before thee: to God
 Go back for decision
 All affairs.

5. O men! certainly
 The promise of God
 Is true. Let not then
 This present life deceive you,

[p. 1154]

Nor let the Chief Deceiver
 Deceive you about God.

6. Verily Satan is an enemy
 To you: so treat him
 As an enemy. He only
 Invites his adherents,
 That they may become
 Companions of the Blazing Fire.

7. For those who reject God,
 Is a terrible Penalty: but
 For those who believe
 And work righteous deeds,
 Is Forgiveness, and
 A magnificent Reward.

  

SECTION 2.

8. Is he, then, to whom
 The evil of his conduct
 Is made alluring, so
 That he looks upon it
 As good, (equal to one
 Who is rightly guided)?
 For God leaves to stray
 Whom He wills, and guides
 Whom He wills. So
 Let not thy soul go out
 In (vainly) sighing after them:
 For God knows well
 All that they do!

9. It is God Who sends
 Forth the Winds, so that

[p. 1155]

They raise up the Clouds,
 And We drive them
 To a land that is dead,
 And revive the earth therewith
 After its death: even so
 (Will be) the Resurrection!

10. If any do seek
 For glory and power,--
 To God belong
 All glory and power.
 To Him mount up
 (All) Words of Purity:
 It is He Who exalts
 Each Deed of Righteousness.
 Those that lay Plots
 Of Evil,--for them
 Is a Penalty terrible;
 And the plotting of such
 Will be void (of result).

11. And God did create
 You from dust;
 Then from a sperm-drop;
 Then He made you
 In pairs. And no female
 Conceives, or lays down
 (Her load), but with His
 Knowledge. Nor is a man

[p. 1156]

Long-lived granted length
 Of days, nor is a part
 Cut off from his life,
 But is in a Decree
 (Ordained). All this
 Is easy to God.

12. Nor are the two bodies
 Of flowing water alike,--
 The one palatable, sweet,
 And pleasant to drink,
 And the other, salt
 And bitter. Yet from each
 (Kind of water) do ye
 Eat flesh fresh and tender,
 And ye extract ornaments
 To wear; and thou seest
 The ships therein that plough
 The waves, that ye may
 Seek (thus) of the Bounty
 Of God that ye
 May be grateful.

13. He merges Night into Day,
 And He merges Day

[p. 1157]

Into Night, and He has
 Subjected the sun and
 The moon (to His Law):
 Each one runs its course
 For a term appointed.
 Such is God your Lord:
 To Him belongs all Dominion.
 And those whom ye invoke
 Besides Him have not
 The least power.

14. If ye invoke them,
 They will not listen
 To your call, and if
 They were to listen,
 They cannot answer
 Your (prayer). On the Day
 Of Judgment they will reject
 Your "Partnership". And none,
 (O man!) can tell thee
 (The Truth) like the One
 Who is acquainted with all things.

  

SECTION 3.

15. O ye men! It is
 Ye that have need

[p. 1158]

Of God: but God is
 The One Free of all wants,
 Worthy of all praise.

16. If He so pleased, He
 Could blot you out
 And bring in
 A New Creation.

17. Nor is that (at all)
 Difficult for God.

18. Nor can a bearer of burdens
 Bear another's burden.
 If one heavily laden should
 Call another to (bear) his load,
 Not the least portion of it
 Can be carried (by the other),
 Even though he be nearly
 Related. Thou canst but
 Admonish such as fear
 Their Lord unseen
 And establish regular Prayer.
 And whoever purifies himself

[p. 1159]

Does so for the benefit
 Of his own soul; and
 The destination (of all)
 Is to God.

19. The blind and the seeing
 Are not alike;

20. Nor are the depths
 Of Darkness and the Light;

21. Nor are the (chilly) shade
 And the (genial) heat of the sun:

22. Nor are alike those
 That are living and those
 That are dead. God can
 Make any that He wills
 To hear; but thou
 Canst not make those
 To hear who are
 (Buried) in graves.

23. Thou art no other
 Than a warner.

24. Verily We have sent thee
 In truth, as a bearer
 Of glad tidings,
 And as a warner:

[p. 1160]

And there never was
 A people, without a warner
 Having lived among them
 (In the past).

25. And if they reject thee,
 So did their predecessors,
 To whom came their apostles
 With Clear Signs, Books
 Of dark prophecies,
 And the Book
 Of Enlightenment.

26. In the end did I
 Punish those who rejected
 Faith: and how (terrible)
 Was My rejection (of them)!

  

SECTION 4.

27. Seest thou not that
 God sends down rain
 From the sky? With it
 We then bring out produce
 Of various colours
 And in the mountains

[p. 1161]

Are tracts white and red,
 Of various shades of colour,
 And black intense in hue.

28. And so amongst men
 And crawling creatures and cattle,
 Are they of various colours.
 Those truly fear God,
 Among His Servants,
 Who have knowledge:
 For God is Exalted in Might,
 Oft-Forgiving.

29. Those who rehearse the Book
 Of God, establish regular Prayer,
 And spend (in Charity)
 Out of what We have provided
 For them, secretly and openly,
 Hope for a Commerce
 That will never fail:

[p. 1162]

30. For He will pay them
 Their meed, nay, He will
 Give them (even) more
 Out of His Bounty:
 For He is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Ready to appreciate (service).

31. That which We have revealed
 To thee of the Book
 Is the Truth,--confirming
 What was (revealed) before it:
 For God is assuredly--
 With respect to His servants--
 Well acquainted and
 Fully Observant.

32. Then We have given
 The Book for inheritance
 To such of Our servants
 As We have chosen:
 But there are among them
 Some who wrong their own

[p. 1163]

Souls; some who follow
 A middle course; and some
 Who are, by God's leave,
 Foremost in good deeds;
 That is the highest Grace.

33. Gardens of Eternity will they
 Enter: therein will they
 Be adorned with bracelets
 Of gold and pearls;
 And their garments there
 Will be of silk.

34. And they will say:
 "Praise be to God,
 Who has removed from us
 (All) sorrow: for our Lord
 Is indeed Oft-Forgiving
 Ready to appreciate (service):

35. "Who has, out of His Bounty,
 Settled us in a Home
 That will last: no toil
 Nor sense of weariness
 Shall touch us therein."

36. But those who reject (God)--
 For them will be
 The Fire of Hell:
 No term shall be determined

[p. 1164]

For them, so they should die,
 Nor shall its Penalty
 Be lightened for them.
 Thus do We reward
 Every ungrateful one!

37. Therein will they cry
 Aloud (for assistance):
 "Our Lord! Bring us out:
 We shall work righteousness,
 Not the (deeds) we used
 To do"--"Did We not
 Give you long enough life
 So that he that would
 Should receive admonition?
 And (moreover) the warner
 Came to you. So taste ye
 (The fruits of your deeds):
 For the Wrong-doers
 There is no helper."

  

SECTION 5.

38. Verily God knows
 (All) the hidden things
 Of the heavens and the earth:
 Verily He has full knowledge
 Of all that is
 In (men's) hearts.

39. He it is that has made
 You inheritors in the earth:

[p. 1165]

If, then, any do reject
 (God), their rejection (works)
 Against themselves: their rejection
 But adds to the odium
 For the Unbelievers
 In the sight of their Lord:
 Their rejection but adds
 To (their own) undoing.

40. Say: "Have ye seen
 (These) "Partners" of yours
 Whom ye call upon
 Besides God? Show me
 What it is they have created
 In the (wide) earth.
 Or have they a share
 In the heavens? Or
 Have We given them a Book
 From which they (can derive)
 Clear (evidence)?--Nay,
 The wrong-doers promise
 Each other nothing but delusions.

41. It is God Who sustains
 The heavens and the earth,
 Lest they cease (to function):
 And if they should fail,
 There is none--not one--
 Can sustain them thereafter:

[p. 1166]

Verily He is Most Forbearing,
 Oft-Forgiving.

42. They swore their strongest oaths
 By God that if a warner
 Came to them, they would
 Follow his guidance better
 Than any (other) of the Peoples:
 But when a warner came
 To them, it has only
 Increased their flight
 (From righteousness),--

43. On account of their arrogance
 In the land and their
 Plotting of Evil.
 But the plotting of Evil
 Will hem in only
 The authors thereof. Now
 Are they but looking for
 The way the ancients
 Were dealt with? But
 No change wilt thou find
 In God's way (of dealing):
 No turning off wilt thou
 Find in God's way (of dealing).

[p. 1167]

44. Do they not travel
 Through the earth, and see.
 What was the End
 Of those before them,
 Though they were superior
 To them in strength?
 Nor is God to be frustrated
 By anything whatever
 In the heavens
 Or on earth: for He
 Is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.

45. If God were to punish
 Men according to what
 They deserve, He would not
 Leave on the back
 Of the (earth) a single
 Living creature: but He
 Gives them respite
 For a stated Term:
 When their Term expires,
 Verily God has in His sight
 All His servants.

[p. 1168]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1169]

  

Sura XXXVI.

  

Ya-Sin (being Abbreviated Letters).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ya Sin.

2. By the Qur-an
 Full of Wisdom,--

3. Thou art indeed
 One of the apostles,

4. On a Straight Way.

5. It is a Revelation
 Sent down by (Him),
 The Exalted in Might,
 Most Merciful,

6. In order that thou mayest
 Admonish a people,
 Whose fathers had received
 No admonition, and who
 Therefore remain heedless
 (Of the Signs of God).

[p. 1170]

7. The Word is proved true
 Against the greater part of them:
 For they do not believe.

8. We have put yokes
 Round their necks
 Right up to their chins,
 So that their heads are
 Forced up (and they cannot see).

9. And We have put
 A bar in front of them
 And a bar behind them,
 And further, We have
 Covered them up; so that
 They cannot see.

10. The same is it to them
 Whether thou admonish them
 Or thou do not admonish
 Them: they will not believe.

[p. 1171]

11. Thou canst but admonish
 Such a one as follows
 The Message and fears
 The (Lord) Most Gracious, unseen:
 Give such a one, therefore,
 Good tidings, of Forgiveness
 And a reward most generous.

12. Verily We shall give life
 To the dead, and We record
 That which they send before
 And that which they leave
 Behind, and of all things
 Have We taken account

[p. 1172]

In a clear Book
 (Of evidence).

  

SECTION 2.

13. Set forth to them,
 By way of a parable,
 The (story of) the Companions
 Of the City. Behold,
 There came apostles to it.

14. When We (first) sent
 To them two apostles,
 They rejected them:
 But We strengthened them
 With a third: they said,
 "Truly, we have been sent
 On a mission to you."

[p. 1173]

15. The (people) said: "Ye are
 Only men like ourselves
 And (God) Most Gracious
 Sends no sort of revelation:
 Ye do nothing but lie."

16. They said: "Our Lord doth
 Know that we have been sent
 On a mission to you:

17. "And our duty is only
 To proclaim the clear Message.

18. The (people) said: "For us,
 We augur an evil omen

[p. 1174]

From you: if ye desist not,
 We will certainly stone you.
 And a grievous punishment
 Indeed will be inflicted
 On you by us."

19. They said: "Your evil omens
 Are with yourselves:
 (Deem ye this an evil omen).
 If ye are admonished?
 Nay, but ye are a people
 Transgressing all bounds!

20. Then there came running,
 From the farthest part
 Of the City, a man,
 Saying, "O my People!
 Obey the apostles:

21. "Obey those who ask
 No reward of you
 (For themselves), and who have
 Themselves received Guidance

[p. 1175]

22, "It would not be reasonable
 In me if I did not
 Serve Him Who created me,
 And to Whom ye shall
 (All) be brought back.

23. "Shall I take (other) gods
 Besides Him? If (God)
 Most Gracious should
 Intend some adversity for me,
 Of no use whatever
 Will be their intercession
 For me, nor can they
 Deliver me.

24."I would indeed,
 If I were to do so,
 Be in manifest Error.

25. "For me, I have faith
 In the Lord of you (all):
 Listen, then, to me!"

26. It was said: "Enter thou
 The Garden." He said:
 "Ah me! Would that
 My People knew (what I know)!--

[p. 1176]

27. "For that my Lord
 Has granted me Forgiveness
 And has enrolled me
 Among those held in honour!"

28. And We sent not down
 Against his People, after him,
 Any hosts from heaven,
 Nor was it needful
 For Us so to do.

29. It was no more than
 A single mighty Blast,
 And behold! they were (like ashes)
 Quenched and silent.

30. Ah! alas for (My) servants!
 There comes not an apostle
 To them but they mock him!

31. See they not how many
 Generations before them
 We destroyed? Not to them
 Will they return:

[p. 1177]

32. But each one of them
 All--will be brought
 Before Us (for judgment).

  

SECTION 3.

33. A Sign for them
 Is the earth that is dead:
 We do give it life,
 And produce grain therefrom,
 Of which ye do eat.

34. And We produce therein
 Orchards with date-palms
 And vines, and We cause
 Springs to gush forth therein:

35. That they may enjoy
 The fruits of this (artistry):
 It was not their hands
 That made this:
 Will they not then give thanks?

[p. 1178]

36. Glory to God, Who created
 In pairs all things that
 The earth produces, as well as
 Their own (human) kind
 And (other) things of which
 They have no knowledge.

37. And a Sign for them
 Is the Night: We withdraw
 Therefrom the Day, and behold
 They are plunged in darkness;

38. And the Sun
 Runs his course
 For a period determined
 For him: that is
 The decree of (Him),
 The Exalted in Might,
 The All-Knowing.

39. And the Moon,
 We have measured for her
 Mansions (to traverse)
 Till she returns
 Like the old (and withered)
 Lower part of a date-stalk.

[p. 1179]

40. It is not permitted
 To the Sun to catch up
 The Moon, nor can
 The Night outstrip the Day:
 Each (just) swims along (its own) orbit
 (According to Law).

41. And a Sign for them
 Is that We bore
 Their race (through the Flood)
 In the loaded Ark;

42. And We have created
 For them similar (vessels)
 On which they ride.

43. If it were Our Will,
 We could drown them:
 Then would there be
 No helper (to hear
 Their cry), nor could
 They be delivered,

[p. 1180]

44. Except by way of Mercy
 From Us, and by way
 Of (worldly) convenience
 (To serve them) for a time.

45. When they are told,
 "Fear ye that which is
 Before you and that which
 Will be after you, in order
 That ye may receive Mercy,"
 (They turn back).

46. Not a Sign comes to them
 From among the Signs
 Of their Lord, but they
 Turn away therefrom.

47. And when they are told,
 "Spend ye of (the bounties)
 With which God
 Has provided you," the Unbelievers
 Say to those who believe:
 "Shall we then feed those
 Whom, if God had so willed,
 He would have fed, (Himself)?--

[p. 1181]

Ye are in nothing
 But manifest error."

48. Further, they say, "When
 Will this promise (come to pass),
 If what ye say is true?"

49. They will not (have
 To) wait for aught
 But a single Blast:
 It will seize them while
 They are yet disputing
 Among themselves!

50. No (chance) will they then
 Have, by will, to dispose
 (Of their affairs), nor
 To return to their own people!

  

SECTION 4.

51. The trumpet shall be
 Sounded, when behold!
 From the sepulchres (men)
 Will rush forth
 To their Lord!

[p. 1182]

52. They will say: "Ah!
 Woe unto us! Who
 Hath raised us up
 From our beds of repose?"
 (A voice will say:)
 "This is what (God)
 Most Gracious had promised.
 And true was the word
 Of the apostles!"

53. It will be no more
 Than a single Blast,
 When to! they will all
 Be brought up before Us!

54. Then, on that Day,
 Not a soul will be
 Wronged in the least,
 And ye shall but
 Be repaid the meeds
 Of your past Deeds.

55. Verily the Companions
 Of the Garden shall
 That Day have joy
 In all that they do:

[p. 1183]

56. They and their associates
 Will be in groves
 Of (cool) shade, reclining
 On Thrones (of dignity);

57. (Every) fruit (enjoyment)
 Will be there for them;
 They shall have whatever
 They call for;

58. "Peace!"--a Word
 (Of salutation) from a Lord
 Most Merciful!

59. "And O ye in sin!
 Get ye apart this Day!

60. "Did I not enjoin
 On you, O ye children

[p. 1184]

Of Adam, that ye
 Should not worship Satan;
 For that he was to you
 An enemy avowed?--

61. "And that ye should
 Worship Me, (for that) this
 Was the Straight Way?

62. "But he did lead astray
 A great multitude of you.
 Did ye not, then, understand?

63. "This is the Hell
 Of which ye were
 (Repeatedly) warned!

64. "Embrace ye the (Fire)
 This Day, for that ye
 (Persistently) rejected (Truth)."

65. That Day shall We set
 A seal on their mouths.
 But their hands will speak
 To Us, and their feet
 Bear witness, to all
 That they did.

[p. 1185]

66. If it had been Our Will,
 We could surely have
 Blotted out their eyes;
 Then should they have
 Run about groping for the Path,
 But how could they have seen?

67. And if it had been
 Our Will, We could
 Have transformed them
 (To remain) in their places;
 Then should they have been
 Unable to move about,
 Nor could they have returned
 (After error).

  

SECTION 5.

68. If We grant long life
 To any, We cause him
 To be reversed in nature:
 Will they not then understand?

69. We have not instructed
 The (Prophet) in Poetry,
 Nor is it meet for him:
 This is no less than

[p. 1186]

A Message and a Qur-an
 Making things clear:

70. That it may give admonition
 To any (who are) alive,
 And that the charge
 May be proved against those
 Who reject (Truth).

71. See they not that it is
 We Who have created
 For them--among the things
 Which our hands have fashioned--
 Cattle, which are under
 Their dominion?--

72. And that We have
 Subjected them to their (use)?
 Of them some do carry them
 And some they eat:

73. And they have (other) profits
 From them (besides), and they
 Get (milk) to drink.
 Will they not then
 Be grateful?

74. Yet they take (for worship)
 Gods other than God,

[p. 1187]

(Hoping) that they might
 Be helped!

75. They have not the power
 To help them: but they
 Will be brought up
 (Before Our Judgment-seat)
 As a troop (to be condemned).

76. Let not their speech, then,
 Grieve thee. Verily We know
 What they hide as well as
 What they disclose.

77. Doth not man see
 That it is We Who
 Created him from sperm?
 Yet behold! he (stands forth)
 As an open adversary!

78. And he makes comparisons
 For Us, and forgets his own
 (Origin and) Creation:
 He says, "Who can give
 Life to (dry) bones
 And decomposed ones (at that)?"

[p. 1188]

79. Say, "He will give them
 Life Who created them
 For the first time!
 For He is well-versed
 In every kind of creation!

80. "The same Who produces
 For you fire out of
 The green tree, when behold!
 Ye kindle therewith
 (Your own fires)!

81. "Is not He Who created
 The heavens and the earth
 Able to create the like
 Thereof?"--Yea, indeed!
 For he is the Creator Supreme,
 Of skill and knowledge (infinite)!

82. Verily, when He intends
 A thing, His Command is,
 "Be", and it is!

83. So glory to Him
 In Whose hands is
 The dominion of all things:
 And to Him will
 Be all brought back.

[p. 1189]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1190]

  

Sura XXXVII.

  

Saffat, or Those Ranged in Ranks.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By those who range
 Themselves in ranks,

2. And so are strong
 In repelling (evil),

3. And thus proclaim
 The Message (of God)!

4. Verily, verily, your God
 Is One!--

5. Lord of the heavens
 And of the earth,

[p. 1191]

And all between them,
 And Lord of every point
 At the rising of the sun!

6. We have indeed decked
 The lower heaven with beauty
 (In) the stars,--

7. (For beauty) and for guard
 Against all obstinate
 Rebellious evil spirits,

8. (So) they should not strain
 Their ears in the direction
 Of the Exalted Assembly

[p. 1192]

But be cast away
 From every side,

9. Repulsed, for they are
 Under a perpetual penalty,

10. Except such as snatch away
 Something by stealth, and they
 Are pursued by a flaming
 Fire, of piercing brightness.

11. Just ask their opinion:
 Are they the more difficult
 To create, or the (other) beings
 We have created?
 Them have We created
 Out of a sticky clay!

12. Truly dost thou marvel,
 While they ridicule,

13. And, when they are
 Admonished, pay no heed,--

14. And, when they see
 A Sign, turn it
 To mockery,

15. And say, "This is nothing
 But evident sorcery!

16. "What! when we die,
 And become dust and bones,

[p. 1193]

Shall we (then) be
 Raised up (again)?

17. "And also our fathers
 Of old?"

18. Say thou: "Yea, and ye shall
 Then be humiliated
 (On account of your evil).

19. Then it will be a single
 (Compelling) cry;
 And behold, they will
 Begin to see!

20. They will say, "Ah!
 Woe to us! this is
 The Day of Judgment!"

21. (A voice will say,)
 "This is the Day
 Of Sorting Out, whose
 Truth ye (once) denied!"

  

SECTION 2.

22. "Bring ye up",
 It shall be said,

[p. 1194]

"The wrong-doers
 And their wives,
 And the things they worshipped--

23. "Besides God,
 And lead them to the Way
 To the (Fierce) Fire!

24. "But stop them,
 For they must be asked:

25. "What is the matter
 With you that ye
 Help not each other?"

26. Nay, but that day they
 Shall submit (to judgment);

27. And they will turn to
 One another, and question
 One .

28. They will say: "It was ye
 Who used to come to us
 From the right hand
 (Of power and authority)!"

[p. 1195]

29. They will reply: "Nay, ye
 Yourselves had no Faith!

30. "Nor had we any authority
 Over you. Nay, it was
 Ye who were a people
 In obstinate rebellion!

31. "So now has been proved true,
 Against us, the Word
 Of our Lord that we
 Shall indeed (have to) taste
 (The punishment of our sins).

32. "We led you astray: for truly
 We were ourselves astray."

33. Truly, that Day, they will
 (All) share in the Penalty.

34. Verily that is how We
 Shall deal with Sinners.

35. For they, when they were
 Told that there is
 No god except God, would
 Puff themselves up with Pride,

[p. 1196]

36. And say: "What! Shall we
 Give up our gods.
 For the sake of
 A Poet possessed?"

37. Nay! he has come
 With the (very) Truth,
 And he confirms (the Message
 Of) the apostles (before him).

38. Ye shall indeed taste
 Of the Grievous Penalty;--

39. But it will be no more
 Than the retribution
 Of (the Evil) that ye
 Have wrought;--

40. But the sincere (and devoted)
 Servants of God,--

41. For them is a Sustenance
 Determined,

42. Fruits (Delights); and they
 (Shall enjoy) honour and dignity,

43. In Gardens of Felicity,

[p. 1197]

44. Facing each other
 On Thrones (of dignity):

45. Round will be passed
 To them a Cup
 From a clear-flowing fountain,

46. Crystal-white, of a taste
 Delicious to those
 Who drink (thereof),

47. Free from headiness;
 Nor will they suffer
 Intoxication therefrom.

48. And besides them will be
 Chaste women, restraining
 Their glances, with big eyes
 (Of wonder and beauty).

49. As if they were
 (Delicate) eggs closely guarded.

50. When they will turn to
 One another and question
 One another.

51. One of them will start
 The talk and say:
 "I had an intimate
 Companion (on the earth),

[p. 1198]

52. "Who used to say,
 "What! art thou amongst those
 Who bear witness to
 The truth (of the Message)?

53. "When we die and become
 Dust and bones, shall we
 Indeed receive rewards
 And punishments?"

54. (A voice) said: "Would ye
 Like to look down?"

55. He looked down
 And saw him
 In the midst of the Fire.

56. He said: "By God!
 Thou wast little short
 Of bringing me to perdition!

57. "Had it not been for
 The Grace of my Lord,
 I should certainly have been
 Among those brought (there)!

58. "Is it (the case) that
 We shall not die,

59. "Except our first death,
 And that we
 Shall not be punished?"

60. Verily this is
 The supreme achievement!

[p. 1199]

61. For the like of this
 Let all strive,
 Who wish to strive.

62. Is that the better entertainment
 Or the Tree of Zaqqum?

63. For We have truly
 Made it (as) a trial
 For the wrong-doers.

64. For it is a tree
 That springs out
 Of the bottom of Hell-fire:

65. The shoots of its fruit-stalks
 Are like the heads
 Of devils:

66. Truly they will eat thereof
 And fill their bellies therewith.

67. Then on top of that
 They will be given
 A mixture made of
 Boiling water.

68. Then shall their return
 Be to the (Blazing) Fire.

[p. 1200]

69. Truly they found their fathers
 On the wrong Path;

70. So they (too) were rushed
 Down on their footsteps!

71. And truly before them,
 Many of the ancients
 Went astray;--

72. But We sent aforetime,
 Among them, (apostles)
 To admonish them;--

73. Then see what was
 The End of those who
 Were admonished (but heeded not),--

74. Except the sincere (and devoted)
 Servants of God.

[p. 1201]

  

SECTION 3.

75. (In the days of old),
 Noah cried to Us,
 And We are the Best
 To hear prayer.

76. And We delivered him
 And his people from
 The Great Calamity,

77. And made his progeny
 To endure (on this earth);

78. And We left (this blessing)
 For him among generations
 To come in later times:

79. "Peace and salutation to Noah
 Among the nations!"

80. Thus indeed do We reward
 Those who do right.

81. For he was one
 Of Our believing Servants.

[p. 1202]

82. Then the rest We overwhelmed
 In the Flood.

83. Verily among those
 Who followed his Way
 Was Abraham.

84. Behold, he approached his Lord
 With a sound heart.

85. Behold, he said to his father
 And to his people, "What
 Is that which ye worship?

86. "Is it a Falsehood--
 Gods other than God--
 That ye desire?

87. "Then what is your idea
 About the Lord of the
 Worlds?"

88. Then did he cast
 A glance at the Stars,

89. And he said, "I am
 Indeed sick (at heart)!"

[p. 1203]

90. So they turned away
 From him, and departed.

91. When did he turn
 To their gods and said,
 "Will ye not eat
 (Of the offerings before you)?...

92. "What is the matter
 With you that ye
 Speak not (intelligently)?"

93. Then did he turn
 Upon them, striking (them)
 With the right hand.

94. Then came (the worshippers)
 With hurried steps,
 And faced (him).

95. He said: "Worship ye
 That which ye have
 (Yourselves) carved?

96. "But God has created you
 And your handiwork!"

97. They said, "Build him
 A furnace, and throw him
 Into the blazing fire!"

98. (This failing), they then
 Sought a stratagem against him,

[p. 1204]

But We made them the ones
 Most humiliated!

99. He said: "I will go
 To my Lord! He
 Will surely guide me!

100. "O my Lord! grant me
 A righteous (son)!"

101. So We gave him
 The good news
 Of a boy ready
 To suffer and forbear.

102. Then, when (the son)
 Reached (the age of)
 (Serious) work with him,
 He said: "O my son
 I see in vision
 That I offer thee in sacrifice:
 Now see what is
 Thy view!" (The son) said:
 "O my father! Do
 As thou art commanded:

[p. 1205]

Thou will find me,
 If God so wills one
 Practising Patience and Constancy!"

103. So when they had both
 Submitted their wills (to God),
 And he had laid him
 Prostrate on his forehead
 (For sacrifice),

104. We called out to him,
 "O Abraham!

105. "Thou hast already fulfilled
 The vision!"--thus indeed
 Do We reward
 Those who do right.

106. For this was obviously
 A trial--

[p. 1206]

107. And We ransomed him
 With a momentous sacrifice:

108. And We left (this blessing)
 For him among generations
 (To come) in later times:

109. "Peace and salutation
 To Abraham!"

110. Thus indeed do We reward
 Those who do right

111. For he was one
 Of Our believing Servants.

112. And We gave him
 The good news
 Of Isaac--a prophet,--
 One of the Righteous.

113. We blessed him and Isaac:
 But of their progeny
 Are (some) that do right,
 And (some) that obviously
 Do wrong, to their own souls.

  

SECTION 4.

114. Again, (of old,)
 We bestowed Our favour

[p. 1207]

On Moses and Aaron,

115. And We delivered them
 And their people from
 (Their) Great Calamity;

116. And We helped them,
 So they overcame
 (their troubles);

117. And We gave them
 The Book which helps
 To make things clear;

118. And We guided them
 To the Straight Way.

119. And We left (this blessing)
 For them among generations
 (To come) in later times:

120. "Peace and salutation
 To Moses and Aaron!"

121. Thus indeed do We reward
 Those who do right.

122. For they were two
 Of Our believing Servants.

[p. 1208]

123. So also was Elias
 Among those sent (by Us).

124. Behold, he said
 To his people,
 "Will ye not fear (God)?

125. "Will ye call upon Baal
 And forsake the Best
 Of Creators,--

126. "God, your Lord and Cherisher
 And the Lord and Cherisher
 Of your fathers of old?"

127. But they rejected him,
 And they will certainly
 Be called up (for punishment),--

128. Except the sincere and devoted
 Servants of God (among them).

129. And We left (this blessing)
 For him among generations
 (To come) in later times:

130. "Peace and salutation
 To such as Elias!"

[p. 1209]

131. Thus indeed do We reward
 Those who do right.

132. For he was one
 Of Our believing Servants.

133. So also was Lot
 Among those sent (by Us).

134. Behold, We delivered him
 And his adherents, all

135. Except an old woman
 Who was among those
 Who lagged behind:

136. Then We destroyed
 The rest.

137. Verily, ye pass
 By their (sites),
 By day--

138. And by night:
 Will ye not understand?

[p. 1210]

  

SECTION 5.

139. So also was Jonah
 Among those sent (by Us).

140. When he ran away
 (Like a slave from captivity)
 To the ship (fully) laden,

141. He (agreed to) cast lots,
 And he was condemned:

142. Then the big Fish
 Did swallow him,
 And he had done
 Acts worthy of blame.

143. Had it not been
 That he (repented and)
 Glorified God,

144. He would certainly have
 Remained inside the Fish
 Till the Day of Resurrection.

[p. 1211]

145. But We cast him forth
 On the naked shore
 In a state of sickness,

146. And We caused to grow,
 Over him, a spreading plant
 Of the Gourd kind.

147. And We sent him
 (On a mission)
 To a hundred thousand
 (Men) or more.

148. And they believed;
 So We permitted them
 To enjoy (their life)
 For a while.

149. Now ask them their opinion:
 Is it that thy Lord
 Has (only) daughters, and they
 Have sons?--

150. Or that We created
 The angels female, and they
 Are witnesses (thereto)?

151. Is it not that they
 Say, from their own invention,

[p. 1212]

152. "God has begotten children"?
 But they are liars!

153. Did He (then) choose
 Daughters rather than sons?

154. What is the matter
 With you? How judge ye?

155. Will ye not then
 Receive admonition?

156. Or have ye
 An authority manifest?

157. Then bring ye your Book
 (Of authority) if ye be
 Truthful!

158. And they have invented
 A blood-relationship
 Between Him and the Jinns:
 But the Jinns know
 (Quite well) that they
 Have indeed to appear
 (Before His Judgment-seat)!

159. Glory to God! (He is free)
 From the things they ascribe
 (To Him)!

160. Not (so do) the Servants
 Of God, sincere and devoted.

[p. 1213]

161. For, verily, neither ye
 Nor those ye worship--

162. Can lead (any)
 Into temptation
 Concerning God,

163. Except such as are
 (Themselves) going to
 The blazing Fire!

164. (Those ranged in ranks say):
 "Not one of us but has
 A place appointed;

165. "And we are verily
 Ranged in ranks (for service);

166. "And we are verily those
 Who declare (God's) glory!"

167. And there were those
 Who said,

168. "If only we had had
 Before us a Message
 From those of old,

169. "We should certainly have
 Been Servants of God,
 Sincere (and devoted)!"

[p. 1214]

170. But (now that the Qur-an
 Has come), they reject it:
 But soon will they know!

171. Already has Our Word
 Been passed before (this)
 To Our Servants sent (by Us),

172. That they would certainly
 Be assisted,

173. And that Our forces,--
 They surely must conquer.

174. So turn thou away
 From them for a little while,

175. And watch them (how
 They fare), and they soon
 Shall see (how thou farest)!

176. Do they wish (indeed)
 To hurry on our Punishment?

177. But when it descends
 Into the open space
 Before them, evil will be
 The morning for those who
 Were warned (and heeded not)!

[p. 1215]

178. So turn thou away
 From them for a little while,

179. And watch (how they fare)
 And they soon shall see
 (How thou farest)!

180. Glory to thy Lord,
 The Lord of Honour
 And Power! (He is free)
 From what they ascribe
 (To Him)!

181. And Peace on the apostles!

182. And Praise to God,
 The Lord and Cherisher
 Of the Worlds.

[p. 1216]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1217]

  

Sura XXXVIII.

  

Sad (being one of the Abbreviated Letters).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Sad:

By the Qur-an,
 Full of Admonition:
 (This is the Truth).

2. But the Unbelievers
 (Are steeped) in Self-glory
 And Separatism.

3. How many generations
 Before them did We destroy?
 In the end they cried
 (For mercy)--when
 There was no longer time
 For being saved!

4. So they wonder
 That a Warner has come

[p. 1218]

To them from among themselves!
 And the Unbelievers say,
 "This is a sorcerer
 Telling lies!

5. "Has he made the gods
 (All) into one God?
 Truly this is
 A wonderful thing!"

6. And the leaders among them
 Go away (impatiently), (saying),
 "Walk ye away, and remain
 Constant to your gods!
 For this is truly
 A thing designed (against you)!

7. "We never heard (the like)
 Of this among the people
 Of these latter days:
 This is nothing but
 A made-up tale!"

8. "What! Has the Message
 Been sent to him--

[p. 1219]

(Of all persons) among us?"...
 But they are in doubt
 Concerning My (own) Message!
 Nay, they have not yet
 Tasted My Punishment!

9. Or have they the Treasures
 Of the Mercy of thy Lord,--
 The Exalted in Power,
 The Grantor of Bounties
 Without measure?

10. Or have they the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth
 And all between? If so,
 Let them mount up
 With the ropes and means
 (To reach that end)!

11. But there--will be
 Put to flight even a host
 Of confederates.

12. Before them (were many
 Who) rejected apostles,--
 The People of Noah,
 And 'Ad, and Pharaoh
 The Lord of Stakes,

[p. 1220]

13. And Thamud, and the People
 Of Lut, and the Companions
 Of the Wood;--such were
 The Confederates.

14. Not one (of them) but
 Rejected the apostles,
 But My Punishment
 Came justly and inevitably
 (On them).

  

SECTION 2.

15. These (to-day) only wait
 For a single mighty Blast,
 Which (when it comes)
 Will brook no delay.

16. They say: "Our Lord!
 Hasten to us our sentence
 (Even) before the Day
 Of Account!"

17. Have patience at what they
 Say, and remember Our Servant
 David, the man of strength:
 For he ever turned (to God).

[p. 1221]

18. It was We that made
 The hills declare,
 In unison with him,
 Our Praises, at eventide
 And at break of day,

19. And the birds gathered
 (In assemblies): all with him
 Did turn (to God).

20. We strengthened his kingdom,
 And gave him wisdom
 And sound judgment
 In speech and decision.

21. Has the Story of
 The Disputants reached thee?
 Behold, they climbed over
 The wall of the private chamber;

22. When they entered
 The presence of David,
 And he was terrified
 Of them, they said:
 "Fear not: we are two
 Disputants, one of whom
 Has wronged the other:
 Decide now between us
 With truth, and treat us not
 With unjustice, but guide us
 To the even Path.

[p. 1222]

23. "This man is my brother:
 He has nine and ninety
 Ewes, and I have (but) one:
 Yet he says, "Commit her
 To my care," and is (moreover)
 Harsh to me in speech."

24. (David) said: "He has
 Undoubtedly wronged thee
 In demanding thy (single) ewe
 To be added to his (flock
 Of) ewes: truly many
 Are the Partners (in business)
 Who wrong each other:
 Not so do those who believe
 And work deeds of righteousness,
 And how few are they?"...
 And David gathered that we
 Had tried him: he asked
 Forgiveness of his Lord,
 Fell down, bowing
 (In prostration), and turned
 (To God in repentance).

25. So We forgave him
 This (lapse): he enjoyed,
 Indeed, a Near Approach to Us,
 And a beautiful Place
 Of (final) Return.

[p. 1223]

26, O David! We did indeed
 Make thee a vicegerent
 On earth: so judge thou
 Between men in truth (and justice):
 Nor follow thou the lusts
 (Of thy heart), for they will
 Mislead thee from the Path
 Of God: for those who
 Wander astray from the Path
 Of God, is a Penalty Grievous,
 For that they forget
 The Day of .

  

SECTION 3.

27. Not without purpose did We
 Create heaven and earth
 And all between! That
 Were the thought of Unbelievers!
 But woe to the Unbelievers
 Because of the Fire (of Hell)!

[p. 1224]

28. Shall We treat those
 Who believe and work deeds
 Of righteousness, the same
 As those who do mischief
 On earth? Shall We treat
 Those who guard against evil,
 The same as those who
 Turn aside from the right?

29. (Here is) a Book which
 We have sent down
 Unto thee, full of blessings,
 That they may meditate
 On its Signs, and that
 Men of understanding may
 Receive admonition.

30. To David We gave
 Solomon (for a son),--
 How excellent in Our service!
 Ever did he turn (to Us)!

31. Behold, there were brought
 Before him, at eventide,
 Coursers of the highest breeding,
 And swift of foot;

[p. 1225]

32. And he said, "Truly
 Do I love the love
 Of Good, with a view
 To the glory of my Lord,"--
 Until (the sun) was hidden
 In the veil (of Night):

33. "Bring them back to me."
 Then began he to pass
 His hand over (their) legs
 And their necks.

34. And We did try
 Solomon: We placed
 On his throne a body
 (Without life): but he did turn
 (To Us in true devotion):

35. He said, "O my Lord!
 Forgive me, and grant me

[p. 1226]

A Kingdom which,
 (It may be), suits not
 Another after me:
 For Thou art the Grantor
 Of Bounties (without measure).

36. Then We subjected the Wind
 To his power, to flow
 Gently to his order,
 Whithersoever he willed,--

37. As also the evil ones,
 (Including) every kind
 Of builder and diver,--

38. As also others bound
 Together in fetters.

39. "Such are Our Bounties:
 Whether thou bestow them
 (On others) or withhold them,
 No account will be asked."

40. And he enjoyed, indeed,
 A Near Approach to Us,
 And a beautiful Place
 Of (final) Return.

  

SECTION 4.

41. Commemorate Our Servant Job.

[p. 1227]

Behold he cried to his Lord:
 "The Evil One has afflicted
 Me with distress and suffering!"

42. (The command was given:)
 "Strike with thy foot:
 Here is (water) wherein
 To wash, coal and refreshing,
 And (water) to drink."

43. And We gave him (back)
 His people, and doubled
 Their number,--as a Grace
 From Ourselves, and a thing
 For commemoration, for all
 Who have Understanding.

44. "And take in thy hand
 A little grass, and strike
 Therewith: and break not
 (Thy oath)." Truly We found
 Him full of patience and constancy.
 How excellent in Our service!
 Ever did he turn (to Us)!

45. And commemorate Our Servants
 Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
 Possessors of Power and Vision.

[p. 1228]

46. Verily We did choose them
 For a special (purpose)--
 Proclaiming the Message
 Of the Hereafter.

47. They were, in Our sight,
 Truly, of the company
 Of the Elect and the Good.

48. And commemorate Isma'il,
 Elisha, and Zul-Kifl:
 Each of them was
 Of the company of the Good.

49. This is a Message
 (Of admonition): and verily,
 For the Righteous,
 Is a beautiful place
 Of (final) Return,--

50. Gardens of Eternity,
 Whose doors will (ever)
 Be open to them;

51. Therein will they
 Recline (at ease);
 Therein can they
 Call (at pleasure)
 For fruit in abundance,
 And (delicious) drink;

[p. 1229]

52. And beside them will be
 Chaste women restraining
 Their glances, (companions)
 Of equal age.

53. Such is the Promise
 Made to you
 For the Day of Account!

54. Truly such will be
 Our Bounty (to you);
 It will never fail;--

55. ''Yea, such! But
 For the wrong-doers
 Will be an evil place
 Of (final) Return!--

56. Hell!--they will burn
 Therein,--an evil bed
 (Indeed, to lie on)!--

57. Yea, such!--Then
 Shall they taste it,
 A boiling fluid, and a fluid
 Dark, murky, intensely cold!--

58. And other Penalties
 Of a similar kind,
 To match them!

[p. 1230]

59. Here is a troop
 Rushing headlong with you!
 No welcome for them!
 Truly, they shall burn
 In the Fire!

60. (The followers shall cry
 To the misleaders:)
 "Nay, ye (too)! No welcome
 For you! It is ye who
 Have brought this upon us!
 Now evil is (this) place
 To stay in!"

61. They will say: "Our Lord!
 Whoever brought this upon us,--
 Add to him a double
 Penalty in the Fire!"

62. And they will say:
 "What has happened to us
 That we see not men
 Whom we used to number
 Among the bad ones?

63. "Did we treat them
 (As such) in ridicule,
 Or have (our) eyes
 Failed to perceive them?"

64. Truly that is just and fitting,--
 The mutual recriminations
 Of the People of the Fire!

[p. 1231]

  

SECTION 5.

65. Say: "Truly am I
 A Warner: no god
 Is there but the One
 God, Supreme and Irresistible,--

66. "The Lord of the heavens
 And the earth, and all
 Between,--Exalted in Might,
 Able to enforce His Will,
 Forgiving again and again."

67. Say: "That is a Message
 Supreme (above all),--

68. "From which ye
 Do turn away!

69. "No knowledge have I
 Of the Chiefs on high,
 When they discuss
 (Matters) among themselves.

[p. 1232]

70. "Only this has been revealed
 To me: that I am
 To give warning
 Plainly and publicly."

71. Behold, thy Lord said
 To the angels: "I am
 About to create man
 From clay:

72. "When I have fashioned him
 (In due proportion) and breathed
 Into him of My spirit,
 Fall ye down in obeisance
 Unto him."

73. So the angels prostrated themselves,
 All of them together:

74. Not so Iblis: he
 Was haughty, and became
 One of those who reject Faith.

75. (God) said: "O Iblis!
 What prevents thee from
 Prostrating thyself to one
 Whom I have created
 With My hands?
 Art thou haughty?

[p. 1233]

Or art thou one
 Of the high (and mighty) ones?"

76. (Iblis) said: "I am better
 Than he: Thou createdst
 Me from fire, and him
 Thou createdst from clay."

77. (God) said: "Then get thee
 Out from here: for thou
 Art rejected, accursed.

78. "And My Curse shall be
 On thee till the Day
 Of Judgment."

79. (Iblis) said: "O my Lord!
 Give me then respite
 Till the Day
 The (dead) are raised."

80. (God) said: "Respite then
 Is granted thee--

81. "Till the Day
 Of the Time Appointed."

82. (Iblis) said: "Then,
 By Thy Power, I will
 Put them all in the wrong,--

[p. 1234]

83. "Except Thy Servants
 Amongst them, sincere
 And purified (by Thy grace)."

84. (God) said: "Then
 It is just and fitting--
 And I say what is
 Just and fitting--

85. "That I will certainly fill
 Hell with thee
 And those that follow thee,--
 Every one."

86. Say: "No reward do I ask
 Of you for this (Qur-an),
 Nor am I a pretender.

87. "This is no less than
 A Message to (all)
 The Worlds.

88. "And ye shall certainly
 Know the truth of it (all)
 After a while."

[p. 1235]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1236]

  

Sura XXXIX.

  

Zumar, or the Crowds.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. The revelation
 Of this Book
 Is from God,
 The Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

2. Verily it is We Who have
 Revealed the Book to thee
 In Truth: so serve God,
 Offering Him sincere devotion.

3. Is it not to God
 That sincere devotion
 Is due? But those who
 Take for protectors others
 Than God (say): "We only
 Serve them in order that
 They may bring us nearer
 To God." Truly God
 Will judge between them
 In that wherein they differ.
 But God guides not
 Such as are false
 And ungrateful.

[p. 1237]

4. Had God wished
 To take to Himself
 A son, He could have
 Chosen whom He pleased
 Out of those whom He
 Doth create: but Glory
 Be to Him! (He is above
 Such things.) He is God,
 The One, the Irresistible.

5. He created the heavens
 And the earth
 In true (proportions):
 He makes the Night
 Overlap the Day, and the Day
 Overlap the Night:
 He has subjected
 The sun and the moon
 (To His law):
 Each one follows a course
 For a time appointed.
 Is not He the Exalted
 In Power--He Who forgives
 Again and again?

6. He created you (all)
 From a single Person:
 Then created, of like nature,
 His mate; and He
 Sent down for you eight head
 Of cattle in pairs:
 He makes you,
 In the wombs

[p. 1238]

Of your mothers,
 In stages, one after another,
 In three veils of darkness.
 Such is God, your Lord
 And Cherisher: to Him belongs
 (All) dominion. There is
 No god but He: then
 How are ye turned away
 (From your true Centre)?

7. If ye reject (God),
 Truly God hath no need
 Of you; but He liketh not
 Ingratitude from His servants:
 If ye are grateful, He
 Is pleased with you.
 No bearer of burdens
 Can bear the burden
 Of another. In the End,
 To your Lord is your Return,
 When He will tell you
 The truth of all
 That ye did (in this life).
 For He knoweth well
 All that is in (men's) hearts.

8. When some trouble toucheth man,
 He crieth unto his Lord,

[p. 1239]

Turning to Him in repentance:
 But when He bestoweth
 A favour upon him
 As from Himself, (man)
 Doth forget what he cried
 And prayed for before,
 And he doth set up
 Rivals unto God,
 Thus misleading others
 From God's Path.
 Say, "Enjoy thy blasphemy
 For a little while:
 Verily thou art (one)
 Of the Companions of the Fire!"

9. Is one who worships devoutly
 During the hours of the night
 Prostrating himself or standing
 (In adoration), who takes heed
 Of the Hereafter, and who
 Places his hope in the Mercy
 Of his Lord--(like one
 Who does not)? Say:
 "Are those equal, those who know
 And those who do not know?
 It is those who are
 Endued with understanding
 That receive admonition.

  

SECTION 2.

10. Say: "O ye
 My servants who believe!
 Fear your Lord.
 Good is (the reward)
 For those who do good
 In this world.

[p. 1240]

Spacious is God's earth!
 Those who patiently persevere
 Will truly receive
 A reward without measure!"

11. Say: "Verily, I am commanded
 To serve God
 With sincere devotion;

12. "And I am commanded
 To be the first
 Of those who bow
 To God in Islam."

13. Say: "I would, if I
 Disobeyed my Lord,
 Indeed have fear
 Of the Penalty
 Of a Mighty Day."

14. Say: "It is God I serve,
 With my sincere
 (And exclusive) devotion:

15. "Serve ye what ye will
 Besides Him." Say:
 "Truly, those in loss
 Are those who lose
 Their own souls
 And their People
 On the Day of Judgment:
 Ah! that is indeed
 The (real and) evident Loss!

[p. 1241]

16. They shall have Layers
 Of Fire above them,
 And Layers (of Fire)
 Below them: with this
 Doth God warn off
 His Servants: "O My Servants!
 Then fear ye Me!"

17. Those who eschew Evil,
 And fall not into
 Its worship,--and turn
 To God (in repentance),--
 For them is Good News:
 So announce the Good News
 To My Servants,--

18. Those who listen
 To the Word,
 And follow
 The best (meaning) in it:
 Those are the ones
 Whom God has guided, and those
 Are the ones endued
 With understanding.

19. Is, then, one against whom
 The decree of Punishment

[p. 1242]

Is justly due (equal
 To one who eschews evil)?
 Wouldst thou, then, deliver
 One (who is) in the Fire?

20. But it is for those
 Who fear their Lord,
 That lofty mansions,
 One above another,
 Have been built:
 Beneath them flow
 Rivers (of delight): (such is)
 The Promise of God:
 Never doth God fail in
 (His) promise.

21. Seest thou not that God
 Sends down rain from
 The sky, and leads it
 Through springs in the earth.?
 Then He causes to grow,
 Therewith, produce of various
 Colours: then it withers;
 Thou wilt see it grow yellow;
 Then He makes it 
 Dry up and crumble away.
 Truly, in this, is
 A Message of remembrance to
 Men of understanding.

[p. 1243]

  

SECTION 3.

22. Is one whose heart
 God has opened to Islam,
 So that he has received
 Enlightenment from God,
 (No better than one hard-hearted)?
 Woe to those whose hearts
 Are hardened against celebrating
 The praises of God! They
 Are manifestly wandering
 (In error)!

23. God has revealed
 (From time to time)
 The most beautiful Message
 In the form of a Book,
 Consistent with itself,
 (Yet) repeating (its teaching

[p. 1244]

In various aspects):
 The skins of those who
 Fear their Lord tremble
 Thereat; then their skins
 And their hearts do soften
 To the celebration of
 God's praises. Such is
 The guidance of God:
 He guides therewith
 Whom He pleases, but such
 As God leaves to stray,
 Can have none to guide.

24. Is, then, one who
 Has to fear the brunt
 Of the Penalty on the Day
 Of Judgment (and receive it)
 On his face, (like one
 Guarded therefrom)? It will

[p. 1245]

Be said to the wrong-doers:
 "Taste ye (the fruits
 Of) what ye earned!

25. Those before them (also)
 Rejected (revelation), and so
 The Punishment came to them
 From directions they did not
 Perceive.

26. So God gave them
 A taste of humiliation
 In the present life,
 But greater is the Punishment
 Of the Hereafter,
 If they only knew!

27. We have put forth
 For men, in this Qur-an
 Every kind of Parable,
 In order that they
 May receive admonition.

28. (It is) a Qur-an
 In Arabic, without any

[p. 1246]

Crookedness (therein):
 In order that they
 May guard against Evil.

29. God puts forth a Parable--
 A man belonging to many
 Partners at variance with each other,
 And a man belonging entirely
 To one master: are those two
 Equal in comparison?
 Praise be to God!
 But most of them
 Have no knowledge.

30. Truly thou wilt die
 (One day), and truly they
 (Too) will die (one day).

31. In the End will ye
 (All), on the Day
 Of Judgment, settle your disputes
 In the presence of your Lord.

[p. 1247]

  

SECTION 4.

32. Who, then, doth more wrong
 Than one who utters
 A lie concerning God,
 And rejects the Truth
 When it comes to him
 Is there not in Hell
 An abode for blasphemers?

33. And he who brings the Truth
 And he who confirms
 (And supports) it--such are
 The men who do right.

34. They shall have all
 That they wish for,
 In the presence of their Lord:
 Such is the reward
 Of those who do good:

35. So that God will
 Turn off from them
 (Even) the worst in their deeds
 And give them their reward
 According to the best
 Of what they have done.

[p. 1248]

36. Is not God enough
 For His servant? But
 They try to frighten thee
 With other (gods) besides Him!
 For such as God leaves
 To stray, there can be
 No guide.

37. And such as God doth
 Guide there can be
 None to lead astray.
 Is not God Exalted
 In Power, (Able to enforce
 His Will), Lord of Retribution?

38. If indeed thou ask them
 Who it is that created
 The heavens and the earth,
 They would be sure to say.
 "God ". Say: "See ye then?
 The things that ye invoke
 Besides God,--can they,
 If God wills some Penalty
 For me, remove His Penalty?--
 Or if He wills some Grace
 For me, can they keep back

[p. 1249]

His Grace?" Say: "Sufficient
 Is God for me!
 In Him trust those
 Who put their trust."

39. Say: "O my people!
 Do whatever ye can:
 I will do (my part):
 But soon will ye know--

40. "Who it is to whom
 Comes a Penalty
 Of ignominy, and on whom
 Descends a Penalty that abides."

41. Verily We have revealed
 The Book to thee
 In Truth, for (instructing)
 mankind.
 He, then, that receives guidance
 Benefits his own soul:
 But he that strays
 Injures his own soul.
 Nor art thou set
 Over them to dispose
 Of their affairs.

  

SECTION 5.

42. It is God that takes
 The souls (of men) at death;

[p. 1250]

And those that die not
 (He takes) during their sleep:
 Those on whom He
 Has passed the decree
 Of death, He keeps back
 (From returning to life),
 But the rest He sends
 (To their bodies)
 For a term appointed.
 Verily in this are Signs
 For those who reflect.

43. What! Do they take
 For intercessors others
 Besides God? Say: "Even if
 They have no power whatever
 And no intelligence?"

44. Say: "To God belongs
 Exclusively (the right

[p. 1251]

To grant) Intercession:
 To Him belongs the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth:
 In the End, it is to Him
 That ye shall be
 Brought back."

45. When God, the One and Only,
 Is mentioned, the hearts
 Of those who believe not
 In the Hereafter are filled
 With disgust and horror;
 But when (gods) other than He
 Are mentioned, behold,
 They are filled with joy!

46. Say: "O God!
 Creator of the heavens
 And the earth!
 Knower of all that is
 Hidden and open!
 It is Thou that wilt
 Judge between Thy Servants
 In those matters about which
 They have differed."

47. Even if the wrong-doers
 Had all that there is
 On earth, and as much more,
 (In vain) would they offer it

[p. 1252]

For ransom from the pain
 Of the Penalty on the Day
 Of Judgment: but something
 Will confront them from God,
 Which they could never
 Have counted upon!

48. For the evils of their Deeds
 Will confront them,
 And they will be (completely)
 Encircled by that which
 They used to mock at!

49. Now, when trouble touches man,
 He cries to Us:
 But when We bestow
 A favour upon him
 As from Ourselves,
 He says, "This has been
 Given to me because of
 A certain knowledge (I have)!"
 Nay, but this is
 But a trial, but most
 Of them understand not!

50. Thus did the (generations)
 Before them say! But
 All that they did
 Was of no profit to them.

51. Nay, the evil results
 Of their deeds overtook them.
 And the wrong-doers
 Of this (generation)
 The evil results of their deeds
 Will soon overtake them (too),

[p. 1253]

And they will never be
 Able to frustrate (Our Plan)!

52. Know they not that
 God enlarges the provision
 Or restricts it, for any
 He pleases? Verily, in this are
 Signs for those who believe!

  

SECTION 6.

53. Say: "O my Servants who
 Have transgressed against their souls
 Despair not of the Mercy
 Of God: for God forgives
 All sins: for He is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

54. "Turn ye to your Lord
 (In repentance) and bow
 To His (Will), before
 The Penalty comes on you:
 After that ye shall not
 Be helped.

[p. 1254]

55. "And follow the Best
 Of (the courses) revealed
 To you from your Lord,
 Before the Penalty comes
 On you--of a sudden,
 While ye perceive not!--

56. "Lest the soul should (then)
 Say: "Ah! woe is me!--
 In that I neglected
 (My Duty) towards God,
 And was but among those
 Who mocked!"--

57. "Or (lest) it should say:
 "If only God had guided
 Me, I should certainly
 Have been among the righteous!"--

58. "Or (lest) it should say
 When it (actually) sees
 The Penalty, "If only
 I had another chance,
 I should certainly be
 Among those who do good!"

59. "(The reply will be:) "Nay,
 But there came to thee

[p. 1255]

My Signs, and thou didst
 Reject them: thou vast
 Haughty, and became one
 Of those who reject Faith!

60. (On the Day of Judgment
 Wilt thou see those
 Who told lies against God;--
 Their faces will be turned
 Black; is there not
 In Hell an abode
 For the Haughty?

61. But God will deliver
 The righteous to their place
 Of salvation: no evil
 Shall touch them,
 Nor shall they grieve.

62. God is the Creator
 Of all things, and He
 Is the Guardian and Disposer
 Of all affairs.

63. To Him belong the keys
 Of the heavens
 And the earth:
 And those who reject
 The Signs of God,--
 It is they who will
 Be in loss.

[p. 1256]

  

SECTION 7.

64. Say: "Is it
 Some one other than God
 That ye order me
 To worship, O ye
 Ignorant ones?"

65. But it has already
 Been revealed to thee,--
 As it was to those
 Before thee,--"If thou
 Wert to join (gods
 With God), truly fruitless
 Will be thy work (in life),
 And thou wilt surely
 Be in the ranks of those
 Who lose (all spiritual good)".

66. Nay, but worship God,
 And be of those who
 Give thanks.

67. No just estimate
 Have they made of God,
 Such as is due to Him:
 On the Day of Judgment
 The whole of the earth
 Will be but His handful,
 And the heavens will be

[p. 1257]

Rolled up in His right hand:
 Glory to Him!
 High is He above
 The Partners they attribute
 To Him!

68. The Trumpet will (just)
 Be sounded, when all
 That are in the heavens
 And on earth will swoon,
 Except such as it will
 Please God (to exempt).
 Then will a second one
 Be sounded, when, behold,
 They will be standing
 And looking on!

69. And the Earth will shine
 With the glory of its Lord:
 The Record (of Deeds)
 Will be placed (open);
 The prophets and the witnesses
 Will be brought forward;
 And a just decision
 Pronounced between them;
 And they will not
 Be wronged (in the least).

70. And to every soul will be
 Paid in full (the fruit)

[p. 1258]

Of its deeds; and (God)
 Knoweth best all that
 They do.

  

SECTION 8.

71. The Unbelievers will be
 Led to Hell in crowd:
 Until, when they arrive there,
 Its gates will be opened.
 And its Keepers will say,
 "Did not apostles come
 To you from among yourselves,
 Rehearsing to you the Signs
 Of your Lord, and warning you
 Of the Meeting of this Day
 Of yours?" The answer
 Will be: "True: but
 The Decree of Punishment
 Has been proved true
 Against the Unbelievers!"

72. (To them) will be said:
 "Enter ye the gates of Hell,
 To dwell therein:
 And evil is (this)
 Abode of the arrogant!"

73. And those who feared
 Their Lord will be led
 To the Garden in crowds:
 Until behold, they arrive there;

[p. 1259]

Its gates will be opened;
 And its Keepers will say:
 "Peace be upon you!
 Well have ye done!"
 Enter ye here,
 To dwell therein."

74. They will say: "Praise be
 To God, Who has
 Truly fulfilled His promise
 To us, and has given us
 (This) land in heritage:
 We can dwell in the Garden
 As we will: how excellent
 A reward for those
 Who work (righteousness)!"

75. And thou wilt see
 The angels surrounding
 The Throne (Divine)
 On all sides, singing Glory
 And Praise to their Lord.
 The Decision between them
 (At Judgment) will be
 In (perfect) justice,
 And the cry (on all sides)
 Will be, "Praise be to God,
 The Lord of the Worlds!"

[p. 1260] [p. 1261]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1262]

  

Sura XL.

  

Mu-min, or The Believer.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ha-Mim.

2. The revelation
 Of this Book
 Is from God,
 Exalted in Power,
 Full of Knowledge,--

3. Who forgiveth Sin,
 Accepteth Repentance,
 Is Strict in Punishment,
 And hath a Long Reach
 (In all things).
 There is no god
 But He: to Him
 Is the Final Goal.

4. None can dispute
 About the Signs of God
 But the Unbelievers.
 Let not, then,
 Their strutting about
 Through the land
 Deceive thee!

[p. 1263]

5. But (there were people) before them,
 Who denied (the Signs),--
 The People of Noah,
 And the Confederates
 (Of Evil) after them;
 And every People plotted
 Against their prophet,
 To seize him, and disputed
 By means of vanities,
 Therewith to condemn
 The Truth: but it was I
 That seized them!
 And how (terrible)
 Was My Requital!

6. Thus was the Decree
 Of thy Lord proved true
 Against the Unbelievers
 That truly they are
 Companions of the Fire!

7. Those who sustain
 The Throne (of God)
 And those around it
 Sing Glory and Praise
 To their Lord; believe
 In Him; and implore Forgiveness
 For those who believe:
 "Our Lord! Thy Reach

[p. 1264]

Is over all things,
 In Mercy and Knowledge.
 Forgive, then, those who
 Turn in Repentance, and follow
 Thy Path; and preserve them
 From the Penalty
 Of the Blazing Fire!

8. "And grant, our Lord!
 That they enter
 The Gardens of Eternity,
 Which Thou hast promised
 To them, and to the righteous
 Among their fathers,
 Their wives, and their posterity!
 For Thou art (He),
 The Exalted in Might,
 Full of Wisdom.

9. "And preserve them
 From (all) ills;
 And any whom Thou
 Dost preserve from ills
 That Day,--on them
 Wilt Thou have bestowed
 Mercy indeed: and that
 Will be truly (for them)
 The highest Achievement".

  

SECTION 2.

10. The Unbelievers will be
 Addressed: "Greater was
 The aversion of God to you
 Than (is), your aversion

[p. 1265]

To yourselves, seeing that ye
 Were called to the Faith
 And ye used to refuse."

11. They will say: "Our Lord!
 Twice hast Thou made us
 Without life, and twice
 Hast Thou given us Life!
 Now have we recognised
 Our sins: is there
 Any way out (of this)?"

12. (The answer will be:)
 "This is because, when
 God was invoked as
 The Only (object of worship),
 Ye did reject Faith,
 But when partners were
 Joined to Him, ye believed!
 The Command is with God,
 Most High, Most Great!"

13. He it is Who showeth
 You His Signs, and sendeth
 Down Sustenance for you
 From the sky: but only
 Those receive admonition
 Who turn (to God).

14. Call ye, then, upon God
 With sincere devotion to Him,

[p. 1266]

Even though the Unbelievers
 May detest it.

15. Raised high above ranks
 (Or degrees),
 (He is) the Lord
 Of the Throne (of authority):
 By His Command doth He
 Send the spirit (of inspiration)
 To any of His servants
 He pleases, that it may
 Warn (men) of the Day
 Of Mutual Meeting,--

16. The Day whereon
 They will (all) come forth:
 Not a single thing
 Concerning them is hidden
 From God. Whose will be
 The Dominion that Day?
 That of God, the One,
 The Irresistible!

17. That Day will every soul
 Be requited for what
 It earned; no injustice
 Will there be that Day,
 For God is Swift
 In taking account.

[p. 1267]

18. Warn them of the Day
 That is (ever) drawing near,
 When the Hearts will
 (Come) right up to the Throats
 To choke (them);
 No intimate friend
 Nor intercessor will the
 wrong-doers
 Have, who could be
 Listened to.

19. (God) knows of (the tricks)
 That deceive with the eyes,
 And all that the hearts
 (Of men) conceal.

20. And God will judge
 With (Justice and) Truth:
 But those whom (men)
 Invoke besides Him, will
 Not (be in a position)
 To judge at all.
 Verily it is God (alone)
 Who hears and sees
 (All things).

[p. 1268]

  

SECTION 3.

21. Do they not travel
 Through the earth and see
 What was the End
 Of those before them
 They were even superior
 To them in strength,
 And in the traces (they
 Have left) in the land:
 But God did call them
 To account for their sins,
 And none had they
 To defend them against God.

22. That was because there came
 To them their apostles
 With Clear (Signs),
 But they rejected them:
 So God called them
 To account: for He is
 Full of Strength,
 Strict in Punishment.

23. Of old We sent Moses,
 With Our Signs
 And an Authority manifest,

[p. 1269]

24. To Pharaoh, Haman,
 And Qarun; but they
 Called (him) "a sorcerer
 Telling lies!"...

25. Now, when he came to them
 In Truth, from Us,
 They said, "Slay the sons
 Of those who believe a
 With him, and keep alive
 Their females," but the plots
 Of Unbelievers (end) in nothing
 But errors (and delusions)!...

26. Said Pharaoh: "Leave me
 To slay Moses; and let him
 Call on his Lord!
 What I fear is lest
 He should change your religion,
 Or lest he should cause
 Mischief to appear
 In the land!"

[p. 1270]

27. Moses said: "I have indeed
 Called upon my Lord
 And your Lord
 (For protection) from every
 Arrogant one who believes not
 In the Day of Account!"

  

SECTION 4.

28. A Believer, a man
 From among the people
 Of Pharaoh, who had concealed
 His faith, said: "Will ye
 Slay a man because he
 Says, "My Lord is God"?--
 When he has indeed come
 To you with Clear (Signs)
 From your Lord? And if
 He be a liar, on him
 Is (the sin of) his lie;
 But, if he is telling
 The Truth, then will
 Fall on you something
 Of the (calamity) of which
 He warns you: truly
 God guides not one
 Who transgresses and lies!

29. "O my People! yours
 Is the dominion this day:

[p. 1271]

Ye have the upper hand
 In the land: but who
 Will help us from
 The Punishment of God,
 Should it befall us?"
 Pharaoh said: "I but
 Point out to you that
 Which I see (myself);
 Nor do I guide you
 But to the Path of Right!"

30. Then said the man
 Who believed: "O my People!
 Truly I do fear 
 For you something like
 The Day (of disaster)
 Of the Confederates (in sin)!--

31. "Something like the fate
 Of the People of Noah,
 The 'Ad, and the Thamud,
 And those who came
 After them: but God
 Never wishes injustice
 To His Servants.

32. "And O my People!
 I fear for you a Day
 When there will be
 Mutual calling (and wailing),--

[p. 1272]

33. "A Day when ye
 Shall turn your backs
 And flee: no defender
 Shall ye have from God:
 Any whom God leaves
 To stray, there is none
 To guide...

34. "And to you there came
 Joseph in times gone by,
 With Clear Signs, but
 Ye ceased not to doubt
 Of the (mission) for which
 He had come: at length,
 When he died, ye said:
 "No apostle will God send
 After him." Thus doth God
 Leave to stray such as
 Transgress and live in doubt,--

35. "(Such) as dispute about
 The Signs of God,
 Without any authority
 That hath reached them.
 Grievous and odious
 (Is such conduct)
 In the sight of God
 And of the Believers.
 Thus doth God seal up
 Every heart--of arrogant
 And obstinate transgressors."

[p. 1273]

36. Pharaoh said: "O Haman!
 Build me a lofty palace,
 That I may attain
 The ways and means--

37. "The ways and means
 Of (reaching) the heavens,
 And that I may mount up
 To the God of Moses:
 But as far as I am concerned,
 I think (Moses) is a liar!"
 Thus was made alluring,
 In Pharaoh's eyes,
 The evil of his deeds,
 And he was hindered
 From the Path; and the plot
 Of Pharaoh led to nothing
 But perdition (for him).

  

SECTION 5.

38. The man who believed said
 Further: "O my People!
 Follow me: I will lead
 You to the Path of Right.

39. "O my People! This life
 Of the present is nothing
 But (temporary) convenience:
 It is the Hereafter

[p. 1274]

That is the Home
 That will last.

40. "He that works evil
 Will not be requited
 But by the like thereof:
 And he that works
 A righteous deed--whether
 Man or woman--and is
 A Believer--such will enter
 The Garden (of Bliss): therein
 Will they have abundance
 Without measure.

41. "And O my People!
 How (strange) it is
 For me to call you
 To Salvation while ye
 Call me to the Fire!

42. "Ye do call upon me
 To blaspheme against God,
 And to join with Him
 Partners of whom I have
 No knowledge; and I
 Call you to the Exalted
 In Power, Who forgives
 Again and again!"

43. "Without doubt ye do call
 Me to one who is not
 Fit to be called to,
 Whether in this world,

[p. 1275]

Or in the Hereafter;
 Our Return will be
 To God; and the Transgressors
 Will be Companions
 Of the Fire!

44. "Soon will ye remember
 What I say to you (now).
 My (own) affair I commit
 To God: for God (ever)
 Watches over His Servants."

45. Then God saved him
 From (every) ill that they
 Plotted (against him),
 But the brunt of the Penalty
 Encompassed on all sides
 The People of Pharaoh.

46. In front of the Fire
 Will they be brought,
 Morning and evening:
 And (the Sentence will be)
 On the Day that
 Judgment will be established:
 "Cast ye the People
 Of Pharaoh into
 The severest Penalty!"

47. Behold, they will dispute
 With each other in the Fire!
 The weak ones (who followed)
 Will say to those who
 Had been arrogant, "We but
 Followed you: can ye then

[p. 1276]

Take (on yourselves) from us
 Some share of the Fire?"

48. Those who had been arrogant
 Will say: "We are all
 In this (Fire)! Truly,
 God has judged
 Between (His) Servants!"

49. Those in the Fire will say
 To the Keepers of Hell:
 "Pray to your Lord
 To lighten us the Penalty
 For a Day (at least)!"

50. They will say: "Did there
 Not come to you
 Your apostles with Clear Signs?"
 They will say, "Yes".
 They will reply, "Then
 Pray (as ye like)! But
 The Prayer of those
 Without Faith is nothing
 But (futile wandering)
 In (mazes of) error!"

[p. 1277]

  

SECTION 6.

51. We will, without doubt,
 Help Our apostles and those
 Who believe, (both)
 In this world's life
 And on the Day
 When the Witnesses
 Will stand forth,--

52. The Day when no profit
 Will it be to Wrong-doers
 To present their excuses,
 But they will (only) have
 The Curse and the Home
 Of Misery.

53. We did aforetime give Moses
 The (Book of) Guidance,
 And We gave the Book
 In inheritance to the Children
 Of Israel,--

54. A Guide and a Message
 To men of understanding.

55. Patiently, then, persevere:
 For the Promise of God
 Is true: and ask forgiveness
 For thy fault, and celebrate

[p. 1278]

The Praises of thy Lord
 In the evening
 And in the morning.

56. Those who dispute
 About the Signs of God
 Without any authority
 Bestowed on them,--there is
 Nothing in their breasts
 But (the quest of) greatness,
 Which they shall never
 Attain to: seek refuge,
 Then, in God: it is He
 Who hears and sees (all things).

57. Assuredly the creation
 Of the heavens
 And the earth
 Is a greater (matter)
 Than the creation of men:
 Yet most men understand not.

58. Not equal are the blind
 And those who (clearly) see:
 Nor are (equal) those
 Who believe and work
 Deeds of righteousness, and
 Those who do evil.
 Little do ye learn
 By admonition!

59. The Hour will certainly come:
 Therein is no doubt:
 Yet most men believe not.

[p. 1279]

60. And your Lord says:
 "Call on Me; I
 Will answer your (Prayer):
 But those who are
 Too arrogant to serve Me
 Will surely find themselves
 In Hell--in humiliation!"

  

SECTION 7.

61. It is God Who has
 Made the Night for you,
 That ye may rest therein,
 And the Day, as that
 Which helps (you) to see.
 Verily God is Full of
 Grace and Bounty to men:
 Yet most men give
 No thanks.

62. Such is God, your Lord,
 The Creator of all things.
 There is no god but He:
 Then how ye are delude
 Away from the Truth!

63. Thus are deluded those
 Who are wont to reject
 The Signs of God.

64. It is God Who has
 Made for you the earth

[p. 1280]

As a resting place,
 And the sky as a canopy,
 And has given you shape--
 And made your shapes
 Beautiful,--and has provided
 For you Sustenance,
 Of things pure and good;--
 Such is God your Lord.
 So Glory to God,
 The Lord of the Worlds!

65. He is the Living (One):
 There is no god but He:
 Call upon Him, giving Him
 Sincere devotion. Praise he
 To God, Lord of the Worlds!

66. Say: "I have been forbidden
 To invoke those whom ye
 Invoke besides God,--seeing that
 The Clear Signs have come
 To me from my Lord;
 And I have been commanded
 To bow (in Islam)
 To the Lord of the Worlds."

67. It is He Who has
 Created you from dust,

[p. 1281]

Then from a sperm-drop,
 Then from a leech-like clot;
 Then does He get you
 Out (into the light)
 As a child: then lets you
 (Grow and) reach your age
 Of full strength; then
 Lets you become old,--
 Though of you there are
 Some who die before;--
 And lets you reach
 A Term appointed;
 In order that ye
 May learn wisdom.

68. It is He Who gives Life
 And Death; and when He
 Decides upon an affair,
 He says to it, "Be",
 And it is.

  

SECTION 8.

69. Seest thou not those
 That dispute concerning
 The Signs of God?
 How are they turned away
 (From Reality)?--

70. Those who reject the Book
 And the (revelations) with which
 We sent Our apostles:
 But soon shall they know,--

[p. 1282]

71. When the yokes (shall be)
 Round their necks,
 And the chains;
 They shall be dragged along--

72. In the boiling fetid fluid
 Then in the Fire
 Shall they be burned;

73. Then shall it be said
 To them: "Where are
 The (deities) to which
 Ye gave part-worship--

74. "In derogation of God?"
 They will reply: "They have
 Left us in the lurch:
 Nay, we invoked not,
 Of old, anything (that had
 Real existence)." Thus
 Does God leave
 The Unbelievers to stray.

75. "That was because
 Ye were wont to rejoice
 On the earth in things
 Other than the Truth,
 And that ye were wont
 To be insolent.

76. "Enter ye the gates
 Of Hell, to dwell therein:
 And evil is (this) abode
 Of the arrogant!"

[p. 1283]

77. So persevere in patience;
 For the Promise of God
 Is true: and whether
 We show thee (in this life)
 Some part of what We
 Promise them,--or We
 Take thy soul (to Our Mercy)
 (Before that),--(in any case)
 It is to Us that
 They shall (all) return.

78. We did aforetime send
 Apostles before thee: of them
 There are some whose story
 We have related to thee,
 And some whose story
 We have not related
 To thee. It was not
 (Possible) for any apostle
 To bring a Sign except
 By the leave of God:
 But when the Command
 Of God issued,
 The matter was decided
 In truth and justice,
 And there perished,
 There and then, those
 Who stood on Falsehoods.

  

SECTION 9.

79. It is God who made
 Cattle for you, that ye

[p. 1284]

May use some for riding
 And some for food;

80. And there are (other) advantages
 In them for you (besides);
 That ye may through them
 Attain to any need
 (There may be) in your hearts;
 And on them and on ships
 Ye are carried.

81. And He shows you (always)
 His Signs: then which
 Of the Signs of God
 Will ye deny?

82. Do they not travel through
 The earth and see what
 Was the End of those
 Before them? They were
 More numerous than these
 And superior in strength
 And in the traces
 (They have left) in the land:
 Yet all that they accomplished
 Was of no profit to them.

83. For when their apostles
 Came to them
 With Clear Signs, they exulted
 In such knowledge (and skill)

[p. 1285]

As they had; but
 That very (Wrath) at which
 They were wont to scoff
 Hemmed them in.

84. But when they saw
 Our Punishment, they said:
 "We believe in God,--
 The One God--and we
 Reject the partners we used
 To join with Him."

85. But their professing the Faith
 When they (actually) saw
 Our Punishment was not going
 To profit them.
 (Such has been) God's way
 Of dealing with His servants
 (From the most ancient times).
 And even thus did
 The rejecters of God
 Perish (utterly)!

[p. 1286]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1287]

  

Sura XLI.

  

Ha-mim (Abbreviated Letters), or Ha-Mim Sajda, or Fussilat

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ha-Mim:

2. A revelation from (God).
 Most Gracious, Most Merciful--

3. A Book, whereof the verses
 Are explained in detail;--
 A Qur-an in Arabic,
 For people who understand;--

4. Giving Good News
 And Admonition: yet most
 Of them turn away
 And so they hear not.

5. They say: "Our hearts are
 Under veils, (concealed)
 From that to which thou
 Dost invite us, and
 In our ears is a deafness,
 And between us and thee
 Is a screen: so do
 Thou (what thou wilt);

[p. 1288]

For us, we shall do
 (What we will!)"

6. Say thou: "I am
 But a man like you:
 It is revealed to me
 By inspiration, that your God
 Is One God: so stand
 True to Him, and ask
 For His forgiveness."
 And woe to those who
 Join gods with God,--

7. Those who practise not
 Regular Charity, and who
 Even deny the Hereafter.

8. For those who believe
 And work deeds of righteousness
 Is a reward that will
 Never fail.

  

SECTION 2.

9. Say: Is it that ye
 Deny Him Who created
 The earth in two Days?
 And do ye join equals
 With Him? He is
 The Lord of (all)
 The Worlds.

[p. 1289]

10. He set on the (earth),
 Mountains standing firm,
 High above it,
 And bestowed blessings on
 The earth, and measured therein
 All things to give them
 Nourishment in due proportion,
 In four Days, in accordance
 With (the needs of)
 Those who seek (sustenance).

11. Moreover He comprehended
 In His design the sky,
 And it had been (as) smoke:
 He said to it
 And to the earth:
 "Come ye together,
 Willingly or unwillingly."
 They said: "We do come
 (Together), in willing obedience."

12. So he completed them
 As seven firmaments

[p. 1290]

In two Days, and He
 Assigned to each heaven
 Its duty and command.
 And We adorned
 The lower heaven
 With lights, and (provided it)
 With guard. Such
 Is the Decree of (Him)
 The Exalted in Might,
 Full of knowledge.

13. But if they turn away,
 Say thou: "I have warned
 You of a stunning Punishment
 (As of thunder and lightning)
 Like that which (overtook)
 The 'Ad and the Thamud!"

14. Behold, the apostles came
 To them, from before them
 And behind them, (preaching):
 "Serve none but God."
 They said, "If our Lord
 Had so pleased, He would

[p. 1291]

Certainly have sent down angels
 (To preach): now we reject
 Your mission (altogether)."

15. Now the 'Ad behaved
 Arrogantly through the land,
 Against (all) truth and reason,
 And said: "Who is superior
 To us in strength?" What!
 Did they not see that
 God, Who created them,
 Was superior to them
 In strength? But they
 Continued to reject Our Signs!

16. So We sent against them
 A furious Wind through days
 Of disaster, that We might
 Give them a taste
 Of a Penalty of humiliation
 In this Life; but the Penalty
 Of a Hereafter will be
 More humiliating still:
 And they will find
 No help.

17. As to the Thamud,
 We gave them guidance,
 But they preferred blindness
 (Of heart) to Guidance:
 So the stunning Punishment
 Of humiliation seized them,
 Because of what they had earned.

[p. 1292]

18. But We delivered those
 Who believed and practised righteousness.

  

SECTION 3.

19. On the Day that
 The enemies of God
 Will be gathered together
 To the Fire, they will
 Be marched in ranks.

20. At length, when they reach
 The (Fire), their hearing,
 Their sight, and their skins
 Will bear witness against them,
 As to (all) their deeds.

21. They will say to their skins:
 "Why bear ye witness
 Against us?" They will say:
 "God hath given us speech,--
 (He) Who giveth speech
 To everything: He created
 You for the first time,
 And unto Him were ye
 To return.

22. "Ye did not seek
 To hide yourselves, lest

[p. 1293]

Your hearing, your sight,
 And your skins should bear
 Witness against you! But
 Ye did think that God
 Knew not many of  things
 That ye used to do!

23. "But this thought of yours
 Which ye did entertain
 Concerning your Lord, hath
 Brought you to destruction,
 And (now) have ye become
 Of those utterly lost!"

24. If, then, they have patience,
 The Fire will be
 A Home for them!
 And if they beg
 To be received into favour,
 Into favour will they not
 (Then) be received.

25. And We have destined
 For them intimate companions
 (Of like nature), who made
 Alluring to them what was
 Before them and behind them;
 And the sentence among
 The previous generations of Jinns
 And men; who have passed away,

[p. 1294]

Is proved against them;
 For they are utterly lost.

  

SECTION 4.

26. The Unbelievers say
 "Listen not to this Qur-an,
 But talk at random
 In the midst
 Of its (reading), that ye
 May gain the upper hand!"

27. But We will certainly
 Give the Unbelievers a taste
 Of a severe Penalty,
 And We will requite them
 For the worst of their deeds.

28. Such is the requital
 Of the enemies of God,--
 The Fire: therein will be
 For them the Eternal Home:
 A (fit) requital, for
 That they were wont
 To reject Our Signs.

29. And the Unbelievers will say:
 "Our Lord! Show us those,
 Among Jinns and men,
 Who misled us: we shall
 Crush them beneath our feet,
 So that they become
 The vilest (before all)."

30. In the case of those
 Who say, "Our Lord

[p. 1295]

Is God", and, further,
 Stand straight and steadfast,
 The angels descend on them.
 (From time to time):
 "Fear ye not!" (they suggest),
 "Nor grieve! But receive
 The Glad Tidings
 Of the Garden (of Bliss),
 The which ye were promised!

31. "We are your protectors
 In this life and
 In the Hereafter:
 Therein shall ye have
 All that your souls
 Shall desire; therein
 Shall ye have all
 That ye ask for!--

32. "A hospitable gift from One
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful!"

[p. 1296]

  

SECTION 5.

33. Who is better in speech
 Than one who calls (men)
 To God, works righteousness,
 And says, "I am of those
 Who bow in Islam"?

34. Nor can Goodness and Evil
 Be equal. Repel (Evil)
 With what is better:
 Then will he between whom
 And thee was hatred
 Become as it were
 Thy friend and intimate!

35. And no one will be
 Granted such goodness
 Except those who exercise
 Patience and self-restraint,--
 None but persons of
 The greatest good fortune.

[p. 1297]

36. And if (at any time)
 An incitement to discord
 Is made to thee
 By the Evil One,
 Seek refuge in God.
 He is the One
 Who hears and knows
 All things.

37. Among His Signs are
 The Night and the Day,
 And the Sun and the Moon.
 Adore not the sun
 And the moon, but adore
 God, Who created them,
 If it is. Him ye wish
 To serve.

38. But if the (Unbelievers)
 Are arrogant, (no matter):
 For in the presence
 Of thy Lord are those
 Who celebrate His praises
 By night and by day.
 And they never flag
 (Nor feel themselves
 Above it).

[p. 1298]

39. And among His Signs
 In this: thou seest
 The earth barren and desolate;
 But when We send down
 Rain to it, it is stirred
 To life and yields increase.
 Truly, He Who gives life
 To the (dead) earth
 Can surely give life
 To (men) who are dead.
 For He has power
 Over all things.

40. Those who pervert
 The Truth in Our Signs
 Are not hidden from Us.
 Which is better?--he that
 Is cast into the Fire,
 Or he that comes safe through,
 On the Day of Judgment?
 Do what ye will:
 Verily He seeth (clearly)
 All that ye do.

41. Those who reject the Message
 When it comes to them

[p. 1299]

(Are not hidden from Us).
 And indeed it is a Book
 Of exalted power.

42. No falsehood can approach it
 From before or behind it:
 It is sent down
 By One Full of Wisdom,
 Worthy of all Praise.

43. Nothing is said to thee
 That was not said
 To the apostles before thee:
 That thy Lord has
 At His command (all) Forgiveness
 As well as a most
 Grievous Penalty.

44. Had We sent this as
 A Qur-an (in a language)
 Other than Arabic, they would
 Have said: "Why are not
 Its verses explained in detail?
 What! (a Book) not in Arabic
 And (a Messenger) an Arab?"
 Say: "It is a guide

[p. 1300]

And a healing to those
 Who believe; and for those
 Who believe not, there is
 A deafness in their ears,
 And it is blindness in their (eyes):
 They are (as it were)
 Being called from a place
 Far distant!"

  

SECTION 6.

45. We certainly gave Moses
 The Book aforetime: but disputes
 Arose therein. Had it not
 Been for a Word
 That went forth before
 From thy Lord, (their differences)
 Would have been settled
 Between them: but they
 Remained in suspicious
 Disquieting doubt thereon.

46. Whoever works righteousness
 Benefits his own soul;
 Whoever works evil, it is
 Against his own soul:
 Nor is thy Lord ever
 Unjust (in the least)
 To His servants.

[p. 1301]

47. To Him is referred
 The Knowledge of the Hour
 (Of Judgment: He knows all):
 No date-fruit comes out
 Of its sheath, nor does
 A female conceive (within
 Her womb) nor bring forth
 (Young), but by His Knowledge.
 The Day that (God) will propound
 To them the (question),
 "Where are the Partners
 (Ye attributed) to Me?"
 They will say, "We do
 Assure Thee not one
 Of us can bear witness!"

48. The (deities) they used to invoke
 Aforetime will leave them
 In the lurch, and they
 Will perceive that they
 Have no way of escape.

49. Man does not weary
 Of asking for good (things),
 But if ill touches him,
 He gives up all hope
 (And) is lost in despair.

50. When We give him a taste
 Of some mercy from Ourselves.

[p. 1302]

After some adversity has
 Touched him, he is sure
 To say, "This is due
 To my (merit): I think not
 That the Hour (of Judgment)
 Will (ever) be established;
 But if I am brought back
 To my Lord, I have
 (Much) good (stored) in His sight!"
 But We will show
 The Unbelievers the truth
 Of all that they did,
 And We shall give them
 The taste of a severe
 Penalty.

51. When We bestow favours
 On man, he turns away,
 And gets himself remote
 On his side (instead of'
 Coming to Us); and when
 Evil seizes him, (he comes)
 Full of prolonged prayer!

52. Say: "See ye if
 The (Revelation) is (really)
 From God, and yet do ye
 Reject it? Who is more
 Astray than one who
 Is in a schism
 Far (from any purpose)?"

53. Soon will We show them
 Our Signs in the (furthest)

[p. 1303]

Regions (of the earth), and
 In their own souls, until
 It becomes manifest to them
 That this is the Truth.
 Is it not enough that
 Thy Lord doth witness
 All things?

54. Ah indeed! are they
 In doubt concerning
 The Meeting with their Lord?
 Ah indeed! it is He
 That doth encompass
 All things!

[p. 1304]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1305]

  

Sura XLII.

  

Shura, or Consultation.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ha-Mim;

2. 'Ain. Sin. Kaf.

3. Thus doth (He) send
 Inspiration to thee
 As (He did) to those before thee,--
 God, Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

4. To Him belongs all
 That is in the heavens
 And on earth: and He
 Is Most High, Most Great.

5. The heavens are almost
 Rent asunder from above them
 (By His Glory):
 And the angels celebrate
 The Praises of their Lord,
 And pray for forgiveness
 For (all) beings on earth:
 Behold! Verily God is He,

[p. 1306]

The Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful.

6. And those who take
 As protectors others besides
 Him,--
 God doth watch over them;
 And thou art not
 The disposer of their affairs.

7. Thus have We sent
 By inspiration to thee
 An Arabic Qur-an:
 That thou mayest warn
 The Mother of Cities
 And all around her,--
 And warn (them) of
 The Day of Assembly,
 Of which there is no doubt:
 (When) some will be
 In the Garden, and some
 In the Blazing Fire.

8. If God had so willed,
 He could have made them
 A single people; but He
 Admits whom He will
 To His Mercy;
 And the wrong-doers
 Will have no protector
 Nor helper.

9. What! Have they taken
 (For worship) protectors

[p. 1307]

Besides Him? But it is
 God,--He is the Protector,
 And it is He Who
 Gives life to the dead:
 It is He Who has power
 Over all things.

  

SECTION 2.

10. Whatever it be wherein
 Ye differ, the decision
 Thereof is with God:
 Such is God my Lord:
 In Him I trust,
 And to Him I turn.

11. (He is) the Creator
 Of the heavens and
 The earth: He has made
 For you pairs
 From among yourselves,
 And pairs among cattle:
 By this means does He
 Multiply you: there is nothing
 Whatever like unto Him,
 And He is the One
 That hears and sees (all things).

12. To Him belong the keys
 Of the heavens and the earth:

[p. 1308]

He enlarges and restricts.
 The Sustenance to whom
 He will: for He knows
 Full well all things.

13. The same religion has He
 Established for you as that
 Which He enjoined on Noah--
 The which We have sent
 By inspiration to thee--
 And that which We enjoined
 On Abraham, Moses, and Jesus:
 Namely, that ye should remain
 Steadfast in Religion, and make
 No divisions therein:
 To those who worship
 Other things than God,
 Hard is the (way)
 To which thou callest them,
 God chooses to Himself
 Those whom He pleases,
 And guides to Himself
 Those who turn (to Him).

14. And they became divided
 Only after knowledge
 Reached them,--through selfish
 Envy as between themselves.
 Had it not been
 For a Word that

[p. 1309]

Went forth before
 From thy Lord,
 (Tending) to a Term appointed,
 The matter would have
 Been settled between them:
 But truly those who have
 Inherited the Book after them
 Are in suspicious (disquieting)
 Doubt concerning it.

15. Now then, for that (reason),
 Call (them to the Faith),
 And stand steadfast
 As thou art commanded,
 Nor follow thou their vain
 Desires; but say: "I believe
 In the Book which
 God has sent down;
 And I am commanded
 To judge justly between you.
 God is our Lord
 And your Lord. For us
 (Is the responsibility for)
 Our deeds, and for you
 For your deeds. There is
 No contention between us
 And you. God will
 Bring us together,
 And to Him is
 (Our) final goal.

[p. 1310]

16. But those who dispute
 Concerning God after He
 Has been accepted,--
 Futile is their dispute
 In the sight of
 Their Lord: on them
 Is Wrath, and for them
 Will be a Penalty
 Terrible.

17. It is God Who has
 Sent down the Book in truth,
 And the Balance
 (By which to weigh conduct).
 And what will make thee
 Realise that perhaps the Hour
 Is close at hand?

18. Only those wish to
 Hasten it who believe not
 In it: those who believe
 Hold it in awe,
 And know that it is
 The Truth. Behold, verily
 Those that dispute concerning
 The Hour are far astray.

19. Gracious is God
 To His servants:

[p. 1311]

He gives Sustenance
 To whom He pleases:
 And He has Power
 And can carry out
 His Will.

  

SECTION 3.

20. To any that desires
 The tilth of the Hereafter,
 We give increase
 In his tilth; and to any
 That desires the tilth
 Of this world, We grant
 Somewhat thereof, but he
 Has no share or lot
 In the Hereafter.

21. What! Have they partners
 (In godhead), who have
 Established for them some
 Religion without the permission
 Of God? Had it not
 Been for the Decree
 Of Judgment, the matter
 Would have been decided
 Between them (at once).
 But verily the wrong-doers
 Will have a grievous Penalty.

22. Thou wilt see the wrong-doers
 In fear on account of what

[p. 1312]

They have earned, and (the burden
 Of) that must (necessarily)
 Fall on them. But those
 Who believe and work
 Righteous deeds will be
 In the luxuriant meads
 Of the Gardens: they shall
 Have, before their Lord,
 All that they wish for.
 That will indeed be
 The magnificent Bounty
 (Of God).

23. That is (the Bounty) whereof
 God gives Glad Tidings
 To His Servants who
 Believe and do righteous deeds.
 Say: "No reward do I
 Ask of you for this
 Except the love
 Of those near of kin."
 And if any one earns
 Any good, We shall give
 Him an increase of good
 In respect thereof: for God
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready
 To appreciate (service).

24. What! Do they say,
 "He has forged a falsehood
 Against God"? But if God
 Willed, He could seal up

[p. 1313]

Thy heart. And God
 Blots out Vanity, and proves
 The Truth by His Words.
 For He knows well
 The secrets of all hearts.

25. He is the One that accepts
 Repentance from His Servants
 And forgives sins:
 And He knows all
 That ye do.

26. And He listens to
 Those who believe and
 Do deeds of righteousness,
 And gives them increase
 Of His Bounty: but
 For the Unbelievers there is
 A terrible Penalty.

27. If God were to enlarge
 The provision for His Servants,
 They would indeed transgress
 Beyond all bounds
 Through the earth;
 But He sends (it) down
 In due measure
 As He pleases.
 For He is with His Servants
 Well-acquainted, Watchful.

28. He is the One that sends down
 Rain (even) after (men) have

[p. 1314]

Given up all hope,
 And scatters His Mercy
 (Far and wide). And He
 Is the Protector, Worthy
 Of all Praise.

29. And among His Signs
 Is the creation of
 The heavens and the earth,
 And the living creatures
 That He has scattered
 Through them: and He
 Has power to gather them
 Together when He wills.

  

SECTION 4.

30. Whatever misfortune
 Happens to you, is because

[p. 1315]

Of the things your hands
 Have wrought, and for many
 (Of them) He grants forgiveness.

31. Nor can ye frustrate (aught),
 (Fleeing) through the earth;
 Nor have ye, besides God,
 Any one to protect
 Or to help.

32. And among His Signs
 Are the ships, smooth-running
 Through the ocean, (tall)
 As mountains.

33. If it be His Will,
 He can still the Wind:
 Then would they become
 Motionless on the back
 Of the (ocean). Verily
 In this are Signs
 For everyone who patiently
 Perseveres and is grateful.

34. Or He can cause them
 To perish because of
 The (evil) which (the men)
 Have earned; but much
 Doth He forgive.

[p. 1316]

35. But let those know, who
 Dispute about Our Signs,
 That there is for them
 No way of escape.

36. Whatever ye are given (here)
 Is (but) a convenience
 Of this Life: but that
 Which is with God
 Is better and more lasting:
 (It is) for those who believe
 And put their trust
 In their Lord;

37. Those who avoid the greater
 Crimes and shameful deeds,
 And, when they are angry
 Even then forgive;

38. Those who hearken
 To their Lord, and establish

[p. 1317]

Regular prayer; who (conduct)
 Their affairs by mutual
 Consultation;
 Who spend out of what
 We bestow on them
 For Sustenance;

39. And those who, when
 An oppressive wrong is inflicted
 On them, (are not cowed
 But) help and defend themselves.

40. The recompense for an injury
 Is an injury equal thereto
 (In degree): but if a person
 Forgives and makes reconciliation,

[p. 1318]

His reward is due
 From God: for (God)
 Loveth not those who
 Do wrong.

41. But indeed if any do help
 And defend themselves
 After a wrong (done)
 To them, against such
 There is no cause
 Of blame.

42. The blame is only
 Against those who oppress
 Men with wrong-doing
 And insolently transgress
 Beyond bounds through the land,
 Defying right and justice:
 For such there will be
 A Penalty grievous.

43. But indeed if any
 Show patience and forgive,
 That would truly be
 An exercise of courageous will
 And resolution in the conduct
 Of affairs.

[p. 1319]

  

SECTION 5.

44. For any whom God
 Leaves astray, there is
 No protector thereafter.
 And thou wilt see
 The wrong-doers, when
 In sight of the Penalty,
 Say: "Is there any way
 (To effect) a return?"

45. And thou wilt see them
 Brought forward to the (Penalty),
 In a humble frame of mind
 Because of (their) disgrace,
 (And) looking with a stealthy
 Glance. And the Believers
 Will say: "Those are indeed.
 In loss. who have given
 To perdition their own selves
 And those belonging to them
 On the Day of Judgment.
 Behold! Truly the wrong-doers
 Are in a lasting Penalty!"

46. And no protectors have they
 To help them,
 Other than God.
 And for any whom God
 Leaves to stray, there is
 No way (to the Goal).

[p. 1320]

47. Hearken ye to your Lord,
 Before there come a Day
 Which there will be
 No putting back, because
 Of (the ordainment of) God!
 That Day there will be
 For you no place of refuge
 Nor will there be for you
 Any room for denial
 (Of your sins)!

48. If then they turn away,
 We have not sent thee
 As a guard over them.
 Thy duty is but to convey
 (The Message). And truly,
 When We give man
 A taste of a Mercy
 From ourselves, he doth
 Exult thereat, but
 When some ill happens
 To him, on account
 Of the deeds which
 His hands have sent forth,
 Truly then is man ungrateful!

49. To God belongs the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth.
 He creates what He wills
 (And plans). He bestows

[p. 1321]

(Children) male or female
 According to His Will (and Plan),

50. Or He bestows both males
 And females, and He leaves
 Barren whom He will:
 For He is full
 Of knowledge and power.

51. It is not fitting
 For a man that God
 Should speak to him
 Except by inspiration,
 Or from behind a veil,
 Or by the sending
 Of a Messenger
 To reveal, with God's permission,
 What God wills: for He
 Is Most High, Most Wise.

52. And thus have We,
 By Our command, sent

[p. 1322]

Inspiration to thee:
 Thou knewest not (before)
 What was Revelation, and
 What was Faith; but We
 Have made the (Qur-an)
 A Light, wherewith We
 Guide such of Our servants
 As We will; and verily
 Thou dost guide (men)
 To the Straight Way,--

53. The Way of God,
 To Whom belongs
 Whatever is in the heavens
 And whatever is on earth.
 Behold (how) all affairs
 Tend towards God!

[p. 1323]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1324]

  

Sura XLIII.

  

Zukhruf, or Gold Adornments.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ha-Mim

2. By the Book that
 Makes things clear,--

3. We have made it
 A Qur-an in: Arabic,
 That ye may be able
 To understand (and learn wisdom).

4. And verily, it is
 In the Mother of the Book,
 In Our Presence, high
 (In dignity), full of wisdom.

5. Shall We then
 Take away the Message
 From you and repel (you),
 For that ye are a people
 Transgressing beyond bounds?

6. But how many were
 The prophets We sent
 Amongst the peoples of old?

[p. 1325]

7. And never came there
 A prophet to them
 But they mocked him.

8. So We destroyed (them)--
 Stronger in power than these;--
 And (thus) has passed on
 The Parable of the peoples
 Of old.

9. If thou wert
 To question them, "Who created
 The heavens and the earth?''
 They would be sure to reply,
 "They were created by (Him),
 The Exalted in Power,
 Full of Knowledge";--

10. (Yea, the same that)
 Has made for you
 The earth (like a carpet)
 Spread out, and has made
 For you roads (and channels)
 Therein, in order that ye
 May find guidance (on the way);

11. That sends down
 (From time to time)

[p. 1326]

Rain from the sky
 In due measure;--
 And We raise to life
 Therewith a land that is
 Dead; even so will ye
 Be raised (from the dead);--

12. That has created pairs
 In all things, and has made
 For you ships and cattle
 On which ye ride,

13. In order that ye may
 Sit firm and square
 On their backs, and when
 So seated, ye may
 Celebrate the (kind) favour
 Of your Lord, and say,
 "Glory to Him Who
 Has subjected these
 To our (use), for we
 Could never have accomplished
 This (by ourselves),

14. "And to our Lord, surely,
 Must we turn back!"

[p. 1327]

15. Yet they attribute
 To some of His servants
 A share with Him
 (In His godhead)!
 Truly is man a blasphemous
 Ingrate avowed!

  

SECTION 2.

16. What! Has He taken
 Daughters out of what He
 Himself creates, and granted
 To you sons for choice?

17. When news is brought
 To one of them of (the birth
 Of) what he sets up
 As a likeness to (God)
 Most Gracious, his face
 Darkens, and he is filled
 With inward grief!

18. Is then one brought up
 Among trinkets, and unable
 To give a clear account
 In a dispute (to be
 Associated with God)?

19. And they make into females
 Angels who themselves serve

[p. 1328]

God. Did they witness
 Their creation? Their evidence
 Will be recorded, and they
 Will be called to account!

20. ("Ah!") they say, "If
 It had been the Will
 Of (God) Most Gracious,
 We should not have
 Worshipped such (deities)!"
 Of that they have
 No knowledge! They
 Do nothing but lie!

21. What! have We given them
 A Book before this,
 To which they are
 Holding fast?

22. Nay! they say: "We found
 Our fathers following
 A certain religion,
 And we do guide ourselves
 By their footsteps."

23. Just in the same way,
 Whenever We sent a Warner
 Before thee to any people,
 The wealthy ones among them
 Said: "We found our fathers
 Following a certain religion,
 And we will certainly
 Follow in their footsteps."

[p. 1329]

24. He said: "What!
 Even if I brought you
 Better guidance than that
 Which ye found
 Your fathers following?"
 They said: "For us,
 We deny that ye (prophets)
 Are sent (on a mission
 At all)."

25. So We exacted retribution
 From them: now see
 What was the end
 Of those who rejected (Truth)!

  

SECTION 3.

26. Behold! Abraham said
 To his father and his people:
 "I do indeed clear myself
 Of what ye worship:

27. "(I worship) only Him
 Who made me, and He
 Will certainly guide me."

[p. 1330]

28. And he left it
 As a Word
 To endure among those
 Who came after him,
 That they may turn back
 (To God).

29. Yea, I have given
 The good things of this life
 To these (men) and
 Their fathers, until the Truth
 Has come to them,
 And an Apostle
 Making things clear.

30. But when the Truth came
 To them, they said:
 "This is sorcery, and we
 Do reject it."

31. Also, they say: "Why
 Is not this Qur-an sent
 Down to some leading man
 In either of the two
 (Chief) cities?"

32. Is it they who would portion out
 The Mercy of thy Lord?
 It is We Who portion out
 Between them their livelihood

[p. 1331]

In the life of this world:
 And We raise some of them
 Above others in ranks,
 So that some may command
 Work from others.
 But the Mercy of thy Lord
 Is better than the (wealth)
 Which they amass.

33. And were it not that
 (All) men might become
 Of one (evil) way of life,
 We would provide,
 For everyone that blasphemes
 Against (God) Most Gracious,
 Silver roofs for their houses,
 And (silver) stair-ways
 On which to go up,

34. And (silver) doors
 To their houses, and thrones
 (Of silver) on which
 They could recline,

35. And also adornments
 Of gold. But all this
 Were nothing but conveniences
 Of the present life:
 The Hereafter, in the sight
 Of thy Lord, is
 For the Righteous.

  

SECTION 4.

36. If anyone withdraws himself
 From remembrance

[p. 1332]

Of (God) Most Gracious,
 We appoint for him
 An evil one, to be
 An intimate companion to him.

37. Such (evil ones) really
 Hinder them from the Path,
 But they think that they
 Are being guided aright!

38. At length, when (such a one)
 Comes to Us, he says
 (To his evil companion):
 "Would that between me
 And thee were the distance
 Of East and West!" Ah!
 Evil is the companion (indeed)!

39. When ye have done wrong,
 It will avail you nothing,
 That day, that ye shall be
 Partners in punishment!

40. Canst thou then make
 The deaf to hear, or give
 Direction to the blind
 Or to such as (wander)
 In manifest error?

[p. 1333]

41. Even if We take thee
 Away, We shall be sure
 To exact retribution from them,

42. Or We shall show thee
 That (accomplished) which We
 Have promised them:
 For verily We shall
 Prevail over them.

43. So hold thou fast
 To the Revelation sent down
 To thee: verily thou
 Art on a Straight Way.

44. The (Qur-an) is indeed
 The Message, for thee
 And for thy people;
 And soon shall ye
 (All) be brought to account.

45. And question thou our apostles
 Whom We sent before thee;
 Did We appoint any deities
 Other than (God) Most Gracious,
 To be worshipped?

  

SECTION 5.

46. We did send Moses
 Aforetime, with Our Signs,

[p. 1334]

To Pharaoh and his Chiefs:
 He said, "I am an apostle
 Of the Lord of the Worlds."

47. But when he came to them
 With Our Signs, behold,
 They ridiculed them.

48. We showed them Sign
 After Sign, each greater
 Than, its fellow, and We
 Seized them with Punishment,
 In order that they
 Might turn (to Us).

49. And they said, "O thou
 Sorcerer! Invoke thy Lord
 For us according to
 His covenant with thee;
 For we shall truly
 Accept guidance."

50. But when We removed
 The Penalty from them,
 Behold, they broke their word.

51. And Pharaoh proclaimed
 Among his people, saying:
 "O my people! Does not
 The dominion of Egypt
 Belong to me, (witness)
 These streams flowing
 Underneath my (palace)? What!
 See ye not then?

[p. 1335]

52. "Am I not better
 Than this (Moses), who
 Is a contemptible wretch
 And can scarcely
 Express himself clearly?

53. "Then why are not
 Gold bracelets bestowed
 On him, or (why)
 Come (not) with him
 Angels accompanying him
 In procession?"

54. Thus did he make
 Fools of his people,
 And they obeyed him:
 Truly were they a people
 Rebellious (against God).

55. When at length they
 Provoked Us, We exacted
 Retribution from them, and
 We drowned them all.

56. And We made them
 (A people) of the Past
 And an Example
 To later ages.

[p. 1336]

  

SECTION 6.

57. When (Jesus) the son
 Of Mary is held up
 As an example, behold,
 Thy people raise a clamour
 Thereat (in ridicule)!

58. And they say, "Are
 Our gods best, or he?"
 This they set forth
 To thee, only by way
 Of disputation: yea, they
 Are a contentious people.

59. He was no more than
 A servant: We granted
 Our favour to him,
 And We made him
 An example to the Children
 Of Israel.

[p. 1337]

60. And if it were Our Will,
 We could make angels
 From amongst you, succeeding
 Each other on the earth.

61. And (Jesus) shall be
 A Sign (for the coming
 Of) the Hour (of Judgment):
 Therefore have no doubt
 About the (Hour), but
 Follow ye Me: this
 Is a Straight Way.

62. Let not the Evil One
 Hinder you: for he is
 To you an enemy avowed.

63. When Jesus came
 With Clear Signs, he said:
 "Now have I come
 To you with Wisdom,
 And in order to make
 Clear to you some
 Of the (points) on which
 Ye dispute: therefore fear God
 And obey me.

64. "For God, He is my Lord
 And your Lord: so worship
 Ye Him: this is
 A Straight Way."

[p. 1338]

65. But sects from among
 Themselves fell into disagreement:
 Then woe to the wrong-doers,
 From the Penalty
 Of a Grievous Day!

66. Do they only wait
 For the Hour--that it
 Should come on them
 All of a sudden,
 While they perceive not?

67. Friends on that Day
 Will be foes, one
 To another,--except
 The Righteous.

  

SECTION 7.

68. My devotees
 No fear shall be
 On you that Day,
 Nor shall ye grieve,--

69. (Being) those who have believed
 In Our Signs and bowed
 (Their wills to Ours) in Islam.

70. Enter ye the Garden,
 Ye and your wives,
 In (beauty and) rejoicing.

[p. 1339]

71. To them will be passed
 Round, dishes and goblets
 Of gold: there will be
 There all that the souls
 Could desire, all that
 The eyes could delight in:
 And ye shall abide
 Therein (for aye).

72. Such will be the Garden
 Of which ye are made
 Heirs for your (good) deeds
 (In life).

73. Ye shall have therein
 Abundance of fruit, from which
 Ye shall have satisfaction.

74. The Sinners will be
 In the Punishment of Hell,
 To dwell therein (for aye):

75. Nowise will the (punishment)
 Be lightened for them,
 And in despair will they
 Be there overwhelmed.

76. Nowise shall We
 Be unjust to them:

[p. 1340]

But it is they who
 Have been unjust themselves.

77. They will cry: "O Malik!
 Would that thy Lord
 Put an end to us!"
 He will say, "Nay, but
 Ye shall abide!"

78. Verily We have brought
 The Truth to you:
 But most of you
 Have a hatred for Truth.

79. What! Have they settled
 Some Plan (among themselves)?
 But it is We Who
 Settle things.

80. Or do they think
 That We hear not
 Their secrets and their
 Private counsels? Indeed
 (We do), and Our Messengers
 Are by them, to record.

81. Say: If (God) Most Gracious
 Had a son, I would
 Be the first to worship."

82. Glory to the Lord
 Of the heavens and the earth,

[p. 1341]

The Lord of the Throne
 (Of Authority)! (He is
 Free) from the things
 They attribute (to Him)!

83. So leave them to babble
 And play (with vanities)
 Until they meet that Day,
 Of theirs, which they
 Have been promised.

84. It is He Who is God
 In heaven and God on earth;
 And He is Full
 Of Wisdom and Knowledge.

85. And blessed is He
 To Whom belongs the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth,
 And all between them:
 With Him is the knowledge
 Of the Hour (of Judgment):
 And to Him shall ye
 Be brought back.

86. And those whom they invoke
 Besides God have no power
 Of intercession;--only he
 Who bears witness to the Truth,
 And they know (him).

[p. 1342]

87. If thou ask them, Who
 Created them, they will
 Certainly say, God: how
 Then are they deluded
 Away (from the Truth)?

88. (God has knowledge)
 Of the (Prophet's) cry,
 "O my Lord! Truly
 These are a people
 Who will not believe!"

89. But turn away from them,
 And say "Peace!"
 But soon shall they know!

[p. 1343]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1344]

  

Sura XLIV.

  

Dukhan, or Smoke (or Mist.)

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ha-Mim.

2. By the Book that
 Makes things clear;--

3. We sent it down
 During a blessed night:
 For We (ever) wish
 To warn (against Evil).

4. In that (night) is made
 Distinct every affair
 Of wisdom,

5. By command, from Our
 Presence. For We (ever)
 Send (revelations),

6. As a Mercy
 From thy Lord:
 For He hears and knows
 (All things);

7. The Lord of the heavens
 And the earth and all

[p. 1345]

Between them, if ye (but)
 Have an assured faith.

8. There is no god but He:
 It is He Who gives life
 And gives death,
 The Lord and Cherisher
 To you and your earliest
 Ancestors.

9. Yet they play about
 In doubt.

10. Then watch thou
 For the Day
 That the sky will
 Bring forth a kind
 Of smoke (or mist)
 Plainly visible,

11. Enveloping the people:
 This will be a Penalty
 Grievous.

[p. 1346]

12. (They will say:)
 "Our Lord! Remove
 The Penalty from us,
 For we do really believe!"

13. How shall the Message
 Be (effectual) for them,
 Seeing that an Apostle
 Explaining things clearly
 Has (already) come to them,--

14. Yet they turn away
 From him and say: "Tutored
 (By others), a man possessed!"

15. We shall indeed remove
 The Penalty for a while,
 (But) truly ye will revert
 (To your ways).

16. One day We shall seize
 You with a mighty onslaught:
 We will indeed (then)
 Exact Retribution!

17. We did, before them,
 Try the people of Pharaoh:

[p. 1347]

There came to them
 An apostle most honourable,

18. Saying: "Restore to me
 The servants of God:
 I am to you an apostle
 Worthy of all trust;

19. "And be not arrogant
 As against God:
 For I come to you
 With authority manifest.

20. "For me, I have sought
 Safety with my Lord
 And your Lord, against
 Your injuring me.

21. "If ye believe me not,
 At least keep yourselves
 Away from me."

22. (But they were aggressive:)
 Then he cried

[p. 1348]

To his Lord:
 "These are indeed
 A people given to sin."

23. (The reply came:)
 "March forth with my servants
 By night: for ye are
 Sure to be pursued.

24. "And leave the sea
 As a furrow (divided):
 For they are a host
 (Destined) to be drowned."

25. How many were the gardens
 And springs they left behind,

26. And corn-fields
 And noble buildings,

27. And wealth (and conveniences
 Of life), wherein they
 Had taken such delight!

28. Thus (was their end)!
 And We made other people
 Inherit (those things)!

29. And neither heaven
 Nor earth shed a tear
 Over them: nor were
 They given a respite (again).

[p. 1349]

  

SECTION 2.

30. We did deliver aforetime
 The Children of Israel
 From humiliating Punishment,

31. Inflicted by Pharaoh, for he
 Was arrogant (even) among
 Inordinate transgressors.

32. And We chose them aforetime
 Above the nations, knowingly,

33. And granted them Signs
 In which there was
 A manifest trial.

34. As to these (Quraish),
 They say forsooth:

[p. 1350]

35. "There is nothing beyond
 Our first death,
 And we shall not
 Be raised again.

36. "Then bring (back)
 Our forefathers, if what
 Ye say is true!"

37. What! are they better
 Than the people of Tubba'
 And those who were
 Before them? We destroyed
 Them because they were
 Guilty of sin.

38. We created not
 The heavens, the earth,
 And all between them,
 Merely in (idle) sport:

39. We created them not
 Except for just ends:
 But most of them
 Do not understand.

40. Verily the Day of
 Sorting Out is the time
 Appointed for all of them,--

[p. 1351]

41. The Day when no protector
 Can avail his client
 In aught, and no help
 Can they receive,

42. Except such as receive
 God's Mercy: for He is
 Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.

  

SECTION 3.

43. Verily the tree
 Of  Zaqqum

44. Will be the food
 Of the Sinful,--

45. Like molten brass;
 It will boil
 In their insides,

46. Like the boiling
 Of scalding water.

47. (A voice will cry:
 "Seize ye him
 And drag him
 Into the midst
 Of the Blazing Fire!

48. "Then pour over his head
 The Penalty of Boiling Water

[p. 1352]

49. "Taste thou (this)!
 Truly wast thou
 Mighty, full of honour!

50. "Truly this is what
 Ye used to doubt!"

51. As to the Righteous
 (They will be) in
 A position of Security,

52. Among Gardens and Springs;

53. Dressed in fine silk
 And in rich brocade,
 They will face each other;

54. So; and We shall
 Join them to Companions
 With beautiful, big,
 And lustrous eyes.

55. There can they call
 For every kind of fruit
 In peace and security;

[p. 1353]

56. Nor will they there
 Taste Death, except the first
 Death; and He will preserve
 Them from the Penalty
 Of the Blazing Fire,--

57. As a Bounty from thy Lord!
 That will be
 The supreme achievement!

58. Verily, We have made
 This (Qur-an) easy,
 In thy tongue,
 In order that they
 May give heed.

59. So wait thou and watch;
 For they (too) are waiting.

[p. 1354]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1355]

  

Sura XLV.

  

Jathiya, or Bowing the Knee.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ha-Mim.

2. The revelation
 Of the Book
 Is from God
 The Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

3. Verily in the heavens
 And the earth, are Signs
 For those who believe.

4. And in the creation
 Of yourselves and the fact
 That animals are scattered
 (Through the earth), are Signs
 For those of assured Faith.

5. And in the alternation
 Of Night and Day,
 And the fact that God
 Sends down Sustenance from
 The sky, and revives therewith
 The earth after its death,

[p. 1356]

And in the change
 Of the winds,--are Signs
 For those that are wise.

6. Such are the Signs
 Of God, which We rehearse to thee
 In truth: then in what
 Exposition will they believe
 After (rejecting) God
 And His Signs?

7. Woe to each sinful
 Dealer in Falsehoods:

8. He hears the Signs
 Of God rehearsed to him,
 Yet is obstinate and lofty,
 As if he had not
 Heard them: then announce
 To him a Penalty Grievous!

9. And when he learns
 Something of Our Signs,
 He takes them in jest:
 For such there will be
 A humiliating Penalty.

10. In front of them is
 Hell: and of no profit
 To them is anything
 They may have earned,
 Nor any protectors they
 May have taken to themselves
 Besides God: for them
 Is a tremendous Penalty.

[p. 1357]

11. This is (true) Guidance:
 And for those who reject
 The Signs of their Lord,
 Is a grievous Penalty
 Of abomination.

  

SECTION 2.

12. It is God Who has
 Subjected the sea to you,
 That ships may sail
 Through it by His command,
 That ye may seek
 Of His Bounty, and that
 Ye may be grateful.

13. And He has subjected
 To you, as from Him,
 All that is in the heavens
 And on earth: behold,
 In that are Signs indeed
 For those who reflect.

14. Tell those who believe,
 To forgive those who
 Do not look forward
 To the Days of God:

[p. 1358]

It is for Him to recompense
 (For good or ill) each People
 According to what
 They have earned.

15. If any one does
 A righteous deed,
 It enures to the benefit
 Of his own soul;
 If he does evil,
 It works against
 (His own soul).
 In the end will ye
 (All) be brought back
 To your Lord.

16. We did aforetime
 Grant to the Children
 Of Israel the Book,
 The Power of Command,
 And Prophethood; We gave
 Them, for Sustenance, things
 Good and pure; and We
 Favoured them above the nations.

17. And We granted them
 Clear Signs in affairs

[p. 1359]

(Of Religion): it was only
 After knowledge had been
 Granted to them that they
 Fell into schisms, through
 Insolent envy among themselves
 Verily thy Lord will judge
 Between them on the Day
 Of Judgment as to those
 Matters in which they
 Set up differences.

18. Then we put thee
 On the (right) Way
 Of Religion: so follow
 Thou that (Way),
 And follow not the desires
 Of those who know not.

19. They will be of no
 Use to thee in the sight
 Of God: it is only
 Wrong-doers (that stand as)
 Protectors, one to another:
 But God is the Protector
 Of the Righteous.

20. These are clear evidences
 To men, and a Guidance
 And Mercy to those
 Of assured Faith.

[p. 1360]

21. What! do those who
 Seek after evil ways
 Think that We shall
 Hold them equal with
 Those who believe and
 Do righteous deeds,--that
 Equal will be their
 Life and their death?
 Ill is the judgment
 That they make.

  

SECTION 3.

22. God created the heavens
 And the earth for
 Just ends, and in order
 That each soul may find
 The recompense of what
 It has earned, and none
 Of them be wronged.

23. Then seest thou such
 A one as takes
 As his god his own
 Vain desire? God has,
 Knowing (him as such),
 Left him astray, and sealed
 His hearing and his heart
 (And understanding), and put

[p. 1361]

A cover on his sight.
 Who, then, will guide him
 After God (has withdrawn
 Guidance)? Will ye not
 Then receive admonition?

24. And they say: "What is
 There but our life
 In this world?
 We shall die and we live,
 And nothing but Time
 Can destroy us." But
 Of that they have no
 Knowledge: they merely conjecture:

25. And when Our Clear
 Signs are rehearsed to them,
 Their argument is nothing
 But this: they say, "Bring
 (Back) our forefathers, if
 What ye say is true!"

26. Say: "It is God Who
 Gives you life, then
 Gives you death; then
 He will gather you together
 For the Day of Judgment
 About which there is
 No doubt": but most
 Men do not understand.

  

SECTION 4.

27. To God belongs
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth, and
 The Day that the Hour

[p. 1362]

Of Judgment is established,--
 That Day will the dealers
 In Falsehood perish!

28. And thou wilt see
 Every sect bowing the knee:
 Every sect will be called
 To its Record: "This Day
 Shall ye be recompensed
 For all that ye did!

29. "This Our Record speaks
 About you with truth:
 For We were wont
 To put on record
 All that ye did."

30. Then, as to those who
 Believed and did righteous
 Deeds, their Lord will
 Admit them to His Mercy:
 That will be the Achievement's
 For all to see.

31. But as to those who
 Rejected God, (to them
 Will be said): "Were not
 Our Signs rehearsed to you?
 But ye were arrogant,
 And were a people
 Given to sin!

[p. 1363]

32. "And when it was said
 That the promise of God
 Was true, and that the Hour--
 There was no doubt
 About its (coming), ye
 Used to say, "We
 Know not what is
 The Hour: we only think
 It is an idea, and we
 Have no firm assurance."

33. Then will appear to them
 The evil (fruits) of what
 They did, and they will be
 Completely encircled by that
 Which they used to mock at!

34. It will also be said:
 "This Day We will forget
 You as ye forgot
 The meeting of this Day
 Of yours! And your
 Abode is the Fire, and
 No helpers have ye!

35. "This, because ye used
 To take the Signs of God
 In jest, and the life
 Of the world deceived you:
 (From) that Day, therefore,
 They shall not be taken out
 Thence, nor shall they be
 Received into Grace.

[p. 1364]

36. Then Praise be to God,
 Lord of the heavens
 And Lord of the earth,--
 Lord and Cherisher
 Of all the worlds!

37. To Him be Glory
 Throughout the heavens
 And the earth: and He
 Is Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom!

[p. 1365]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1366]

  

Sura XLVI.

  

Ahqaf, or Winding Sand-tracts.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Ha-Mim.

2. The revelation
 Of the Book
 Is from God
 The Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

3. We created not
 The heavens and the earth
 And all between them
 But for just ends, and
 For a term appointed:
 But those who reject Faith
 Turn away from that
 Whereof they are warned.

4. Say: "Do ye see
 What it is ye invoke
 Besides God? Show me
 What it is they
 Have created on earth,
 Or have they a share
 In the heavens?
 Bring me a Book

[p. 1367]

(Revealed) before this,
 Or any remnant of knowledge
 (Ye may have), if ye
 Are telling the truth!

5. And who is more astray
 Than one who invokes,
 Besides God, such as will
 Not answer him to the Day
 Of Judgment, and who
 (In fact) are unconscious
 Of their call (to them)?

6. And when mankind
 Are gathered together
 (At the Resurrection),
 They will be hostile
 To them and reject
 Their worship (altogether)!

7. When Our Clear Signs
 Are rehearsed to them,
 The Unbelievers say,
 Of the Truth
 When it comes to them:
 "This is evident sorcery!"

8. Or do they say,
 "He has forged it"?
 Say: "Had I forged it,
 Then can ye obtain
 No single (blessing) for me
 From God. He knows best
 Of that whereof ye talk
 (So glibly)! Enough is He

[p. 1368]

For a witness between me
 And you! And He is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

9. Say: "I am no bringer
 Of new-fangled doctrine
 Among the apostles, nor
 Do I know what will
 Be done with me or
 With you. I follow
 But that which is revealed
 To me by inspiration;
 I am but a Warner
 Open and clear."

10. Say: "See ye?
 If (this teaching) be
 From God, and ye reject it,
 And a witness from among
 The Children of Israel testifies
 To its similarity
 (With earlier scripture),
 And has believed
 While ye are arrogant,
 (How unjust ye are!)
 Truly, God guides not
 A people unjust."

  

SECTION 2.

11. The Unbelievers say
 Of those who believe:

[p. 1369]

"If (this Message) were
 A good thing, (such men)
 Would not have gone
 To it first, before us!"
 And seeing that they
 Guide not themselves thereby,
 They will say, "This is
 An (old,) old falsehood!"

12. And before this, was
 The Book of Moses
 As a guide and a mercy:
 And this Book confirms (it)
 In the Arabic tongue;
 To admonish the unjust,
 And as Glad Tidings.
 To those who do right.

13. Verily those who say,
 "Our Lord is God,"
 And remain firm
 (On that Path),
 On them shall be no fear,
 Nor shall they grieve.

14. Such shall be Companions
 Of the Garden, dwelling
 Therein (for aye): a recompense
 For their (good) deeds.

[p. 1370]

15. We have enjoined on man
 Kindness to his parents:
 In pain did his mother
 Bear him, and in pain
 Did she give him birth.
 The carrying of the (child)
 To his weaning is
 (A period of) thirty months.
 At length, when he reaches
 The age of full strength
 And attains forty years,
 He says, "O my Lord!
 Grant me that I may be
 Grateful for Thy favour
 Which Thou hast bestowed
 Upon me, and upon both
 My parents, and that I
 May work righteousness
 Such as Thou mayest approve;
 And be gracious to me
 In my issue. Truly
 Have I turned to Thee
 And truly do I bow
 (To Thee) in Islam."

16. Such are they from whom
 We shall accept the best
 Of their deeds and pass by
 Their ill deeds: (they shall

[p. 1371]

Be) among the Companions
 Of the Garden: a promise!
 Of truth, which was
 Made to them
 (In this life).

17. But (there is one)
 Who says to his parents,
 "Fie on you! Do ye
 Hold out the promise
 To me that I
 Shall be raised up,
 Even though generations
 Have passed before me
 (Without rising again)?"
 And they two seek
 God's aid, (and rebuke
 The son): "Woe to thee!
 Have Faith! For the promise
 Of God is true."
 But he says, "This is
 Nothing but tales
 Of the ancients!"

18. Such are they against whom
 Is proved the Sentence
 Among the previous generations
 Of Jinns and men, that have
 Passed away; for they will
 Be (utterly) lost.

19. And to all
 Are (assigned) degrees

[p. 1372]

According to the deeds
 Which they (have done),
 And in order that (God)
 May recompense their deeds,
 And no injustice be done
 To them.

20. And on the Day that
 The Unbelievers will be
 Placed before the Fire,
 (It will be said to them):
 "Ye received your good things
 In the life of the world,
 And ye took your pleasure
 Out of them: but to-day
 Shall ye be recompensed
 With a Penalty of humiliation:
 For that ye were arrogant
 On earth without just cause,
 And that ye (ever) transgressed."

  

SECTION 3.

21. Mention (Hud)
 One of 'Ad's (own) brethren:
 Behold, he warned his people
 About the winding Sand-tracts:
 But there have been Warners
 Before him and after him:
 "Worship ye none other
 Than God: truly I fear
 For you the Penalty
 Of a Mighty Day."

22. They said: "Hast thou come
 In order to turn us aside

[p. 1373]

From our gods? Then bring
 Upon us the (calamity)
 With which thou dost
 Threaten us, if thou
 Art telling the truth!"

23. He said: "The Knowledge
 (Of when it will come)
 Is only with God: I
 Proclaim to you the mission
 On which I have been sent:
 But I see that ye
 Are a people in ignorance!"...

24. Then, when they saw
 The (Penalty in the shape of)
 A cloud traversing the sky,
 Corning to meet their valleys,
 They said, "This cloud
 Will give us rain!"
 "Nay, it is the (calamity)
 Ye were asking to be
 Hastened!--a wind
 Wherein is a Grievous Penalty!

25. "Everything will it destroy
 By the command of its Lord!"
 Then by the morning they--
 Nothing was to be seen
 But (the ruins of) their houses!
 Thus do We recompense
 Those given to sin!

[p. 1374]

26. And We had firmly established
 Them in a (prosperity and) power
 Which We have not given
 To you (ye Quraish!)
 And We had endowed them
 With (faculties of)
 Hearing, seeing, heart and intellect
 But of no profit to them
 Were their (faculties of)
 Hearing, sight, and heart
 And intellect, when they
 Went on rejecting the Signs
 Of God; and they were
 (Completely) encircled
 By that which they
 Used to mock at!

  

SECTION 4.

27. We destroyed aforetime
 Populations round about you;
 And We have shown
 The Signs in various ways,
 That they may turn (to Us).

28. Why then was no help
 Forthcoming to them from those
 Whom they worshipped as gods,
 Besides God, as a means
 Of access (to God)? Nay,
 They left them in the lurch:
 But that was their
 Falsehood and their invention.

[p. 1375]

29, Behold, We turned
 Towards thee a company
 Of Jinns (quietly) listening
 To the Qur-an: when they
 Stood in the presence
 Thereof, they said, "Listen
 In silence!" When the (reading)
 Was finished, they returned
 To their people, to warn
 (Them of their sins).

30. They said, "O our people!
 We have heard a Book
 Revealed after Moses,
 Confirming what came
 Before it: it guides (men)
 To the Truth and
 To a Straight Path.

31. "O our people, hearken
 To the one who invites
 (You) to God, and believe
 In him: He will forgive
 You your faults,
 And deliver you from
 A Penalty Grievous.

32. "If any does not hearken
 To the one who invites
 (Us) to God, he cannot
 Frustrate (God's Plan) on earth,
 And no protectors can he have
 Besides God: such men
 (Wander) in manifest error."

[p. 1376]

33. See they not that
 God, Who created the heavens
 And the earth, and never
 Wearied with their creation,
 Is able to give life
 To the dead? Yea, verily
 He has power over all things.

34. And on the Day that
 The Unbelievers will be
 Placed before the Fire,
 (They will be asked,)
 Is this not the Truth?"
 They will say, "Yea,
 By our Lord!"
 (One will say:)
 "Then taste ye
 The Penalty, for that ye
 Were wont to deny (Truth)!"

35. Therefore patiently persevere,
 As did (all) apostles
 Of inflexible purpose;
 And be in no haste
 About the (Unbelievers). On the Day
 That they see the (Punishment)
 Promised them, (it will be)
 As if they had not
 Tarried more than an hour
 In a single day. (Thine
 But) to proclaim the Message:
 But shall any be destroyed
 Except those who transgress?

[p. 1377]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1378]

  

Sura XLVII.

  

Muhammad (the Prophet).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Those who reject God
 And hinder (men) from
 The Path of God,
 Their deeds will God
 Render astray
 (From their mark).

2. But those who believe
 And work deeds of
 Righteousness, and believe
 In the (Revelation) sent down
 To Muhammad--for it is
 The Truth from their Lord,
 He will remove from them
 Their ills and improve
 Their condition.

3. This because those who
 Reject God follow vanities,
 While those who believe follow
 The Truth from their Lord:
 Thus does God set forth
 For men their lessons
 By similitudes.

4. Therefore, when ye meet
 The Unbelievers (in fight),

[p. 1379]

Smite at their necks;
 At length, when ye have
 Thoroughly subdued them,
 Bind a bond
 Firmly (on them): thereafter
 (Is the time for) either
 Generosity or ransom:
 Until the war lays down
 Its burdens. Thus (are ye
 Commanded): but if it
 Had been God's Will,
 He could certainly have exacted
 Retribution from them (Himself);
 But (He lets you fight)
 In order to test you,
 Some with others.
 But those who are slain
 In the way of God,
 He will never let
 Their deeds be lost.

5. Soon will He guide them
 And improve their condition,

6. And admit them to
 The Garden which He
 Has announced for them.

[p. 1380]

7. O ye who believe!
 If ye will aid
 (The cause of) God,
 He will aid you,
 And plant your feet firmly.

8. But those who reject (God),
 For them is destruction,
 And (God) will render
 Their deeds astray
 (From their mark).

9. That is because they
 Hate the Revelation of God;
 So He has made
 Their deeds fruitless.

10. Do they not travel
 Through the earth, and see
 What was the End
 Of those before them
 (Who did evil)?
 God brought utter destruction
 On them, and similar
 (Fates await) those who
 Reject God.

11. That is because God
 Is the Protector of those
 Who believe, but
 Those who reject God
 Have no protector.

  

SECTION 2.

12. Verily God will admit
 Those who believe and do
 Righteous deeds, to Gardens
 Beneath which rivers flow;

[p. 1381]

While those who reject God
 Will enjoy (this world)
 And eat as cattle eat;
 And the Fire will
 Be their abode.

13. And how many cities,
 With more power than
 Thy city which has
 Driven thee out,
 Have We destroyed
 (For their sins)?
 And there was none
 To aid them.

14. Is then one who is
 On a clear (Path)
 From his Lord,
 No better than one
 To whom the evil
 Of his conduct seems pleasing,
 And such as follow
 Their own lusts?

15. (Here is) a Parable
 Of the Garden which
 The righteous are promised:
 In it are rivers
 Of water incorruptible;
 Rivers of milk
 Of which the taste
 Never changes; rivers

[p. 1382]

Of wine, a joy
 To those who drink;
 And rivers of honey
 Pure and clear. In it
 There are for them
 All kinds of fruits;
 And Grace from their Lord.
 (Can those in such Bliss)
 Be compared to such as
 Shall dwell for ever
 In the Fire, and be given,
 To drink, boiling water,
 So that it cuts up
 Their bowels (to pieces)?

16. And among them are men
 Who listen to thee,
 But in the end, when they
 Go out from thee,
 They say to those who
 Have received Knowledge,
 "What is it he said
 Just then?" Such are
 Men whose hearts God
 Has sealed, and who
 Follow their own lusts.

17. But to those who receive
 Guidance, He increases
 The (light of) Guidance,
 And bestows on them
 Their Piety and Restraint
 (From evil).

[p. 1383]

18. Do they then only wait
 For the Hour,--that it
 Should come on them
 Of a sudden? But already
 Have come some tokens
 Thereof, and when it
 (Actually) is on them,
 How can they benefit
 Then by their admonition?

19. Know, therefore, that
 There is no god
 But God, and ask
 Forgiveness for thy fault,
 And for the men
 And women who believe:
 For God knows how ye
 Move about and how
 Ye dwell in your homes.

[p. 1384]

  

SECTION 3.

20. Those who believe say,
 "Why is not a Sura
 Sent down (for us)?"
 But when a Sura
 Of basic or categorical
 Meaning is revealed,
 And fighting is mentioned
 Therein, thou wilt see those
 In whose hearts is a disease
 Looking at thee with a look
 Of one in swoon at
 The approach of death.
 But more fitting for them--

21. Were it to obey
 And say what is just,
 And when a matter
 Is resolved on, it were
 Best for them if they
 Were true to God.

22. Then, is it
 To be expected of you,
 If ye were put in authority,
 That ye will do mischief
 In the land, and break
 Your ties of kith and kin?

[p. 1385]

23, Such are the men
 Whom God has cursed
 For He has made them
 Deaf and blinded their sight.

24. Do they not then
 Earnestly seek to understand
 The Qur-an, or are
 Their hearts locked up
 By them?

25. Those who turn back
 As apostates after Guidance
 Was clearly shown to them,--
 The Evil One has instigated
 Them and buoyed them up
 With false hopes.

26. This, because they said
 To those who hate what
 God has revealed, "We
 Will obey you in part
 Of (this) matter"; but God
 Knows their (inner) secrets.

27. But how (will it be)
 When the angels take
 Their souls at death,
 And smite their faces
 And their backs?

[p. 1386]

28. This because they followed
 That which called forth
 The Wrath of God, and
 They hated God's good pleasure;
 So He made their deeds
 Of no effect.

  

SECTION 4.

29. Or do those in whose
 Hearts is a disease, think
 That God will not bring
 To light all their rancour?

30. Had We so willed,
 We could have shown them
 Up to thee, and thou
 Shouldst have known them
 By their marks: but surely
 Thou wilt know them
 By the tone of their speech!
 And God knows
 All that ye do.

31. And We shall try you
 Until We test those
 Among you who strive
 Their utmost and persevere
 In patience; and We shall
 Try your reported (mettle).

32. Those who reject God,
 Hinder (men) from
 The Path of God, and resist
 The Apostle, after Guidance

[p. 1387]

Has been clearly shown to them,
 Will not injure God
 In the least, but He
 Will make their deeds
 Of no effect.

33. O ye who believe!
 Obey God, and obey
 The Apostle, and make
 Not vain your deeds!

34. Those who reject God,
 And hinder (men) from the Path
 Of God, then die rejecting God,--
 God will not forgive them.

35. Be not weary and
 Faint-hearted, crying for peace,
 When ye should be
 Uppermost: for God is
 With you, and will never
 Put you in loss
 For your (good) deeds.

36. The life of this world
 Is but play and amusement:
 And if ye believe
 And guard against evil,
 He will grant you
 Your recompense, and will not

[p. 1388]

Ask you (to give up)
 Your possessions.

37. If He were to ask you
 For all of them, and
 Press you, ye would
 Covetously withhold, and He would
 Bring out all your ill-feeling.

38. Behold, ye are those
 Invited to spend
 (Of your substance)
 In the Way of God:
 But among you are some
 That are niggardly. But any
 Who are niggardly are so
 At the expense of
 Their own souls.
 But God is free
 Of all wants,
 And it is ye that are needy.
 If ye turn back
 (From the Path), He will
 Substitute in your stead
 Another people; then they
 Would not be like you!

[p. 1389] [p. 1390]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1391]

  

Sura XLVIII.

  

Fat-h or Victory.

In  the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Verily We have granted
 Thee a manifest Victory:

2. That God may forgive thee
 Thy faults of the past
 And those to follow;
 Fulfil His favour to thee;
 And guide thee
 On the Straight Way;

3. And that God may help
 Thee with powerful help.

4. It is He Who sent
 Down Tranquillity
 Into the hearts of
 The Believers, that they may
 Add Faith to their Faith;--
 For to God belong

[p. 1392]

The Forces of the heavens
 And the earth; and God is
 Full of Knowledge and Wisdom;--

5. That He may admit
 The men and women
 Who believe, to Gardens
 Beneath which rivers flow,
 To dwell therein for aye,
 And remove their ills
 From them;--and that is,
 In the sight of God,
 The highest achievement
 (For man),--

6. And that He may punish
 The Hypocrites, men and
 Women, and the Polytheists,
 Men and women, who imagine
 An evil opinion of God.
 On them is a round
 Of Evil: the Wrath of God
 Is on them: He has cursed
 Them and got Hell ready
 For them: and evil
 Is it for a destination.

7. For to God belong
 The Forces of the heavens
 And the earth; and God is
 Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

[p. 1393]

8. We have truly sent thee
 As a witness, as a
 Bringer of Glad Tidings,
 And as a Warner:

9. In order that ye
 (O men) may believe
 In God and His Apostle,
 That ye may assist
 And honour Him,
 And celebrate His praises
 Morning and evening.

10. Verily those who plight
 Their fealty to thee
 Do no less than plight
 Their fealty to God:
 The Hand of God is
 Over their hands:
 Then any one who violates
 His oath, does so
 To the harm of his own
 Soul, and any one who
 Fulfils what he has
 Covenanted with God,--
 God will soon grant him
 A great Reward.

  

SECTION 2.

11. The desert Arabs who
 Lagged behind will

[p. 1394]

Say to thee:
 "We were engaged in
 (Looking after) our flocks
 And herds, and our families:
 Do thou then ask
 Forgiveness for us.
 They say with their tongues
 What is not in their hearts.
 Say: "Who then has
 Any power at all
 (To intervene) on your behalf
 With God, if His Will
 Is to give you some loss
 Or to give you some profit?
 But God is well acquainted
 With all that ye do.

12. "Nay, ye thought that
 The Apostle and the Believers
 Would never return to
 Their families; this seemed
 Pleasing in your hearts, and
 Ye conceived an evil thought,
 For ye are a people
 Lost (in wickedness)."

13. And if any believe not
 In God and His Apostle,
 We have prepared,
 For those who reject God,
 A Blazing Fire!

14. To God belongs the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth:
 He forgives whom He wills,
 And He punishes whom He

[p. 1395]

Wills: but God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

15. Those who lagged behind
 (Will say), when ye (are
 Free to) march and take
 Booty (in war): "Permit us
 To follow you." They wish
 To change God's decree:
 Say: "Not thus
 Will ye follow us:
 God has already declared
 (This) beforehand": then they
 Will say, "But ye are
 Jealous of us." Nay,
 But little do they understand
 (Such things).

16. Say to the desert Arabs
 Who lagged behind: "Ye
 Shall be summoned (to fight)
 Against a people given to
 Vehement war: then shall ye
 Fight, or they shall submit.
 Then if ye show obedience,
 God will grant you
 A goodly reward, but if
 Ye turn back as ye

[p. 1396]

Did before, He will punish
 You with a grievous Penalty."

17. No blame is there
 On the blind, nor is
 There blame on the lame,
 Nor on one ill (if he
 Joins not the war):
 But he that obeys God
 And His Apostle,--(God)
 Will admit him to Gardens
 Beneath which rivers flow;
 And he who turns back,
 (God) will punish him
 With a grievous Penalty.

  

SECTION 3.

18. God's Good Pleasure
 Was on the Believers
 When they swore Fealty
 To thee under the Tree:
 He knew what was
 In their hearts, and He
 Sent down Tranquillity
 To them; and He rewarded
 Them with a speedy Victory;

19. And many gains will they
 Acquire (besides): and God
 Is Exalted in Power,
 Full of Wisdom.

[p. 1397]

20. God has promised you
 Many gains that ye shall
 Acquire, and He has given
 You these beforehand; and
 He has restrained the hands
 Of men from you; that it
 May be a Sign for
 The Believers, and that
 He may guide you
 To a Straight Path;

21. And other gains (there are),
 Which are not within
 Your power, but which
 God has compassed: and God
 Has power over all things.

22. If the Unbelievers
 Should fight you, they would
 Certainly turn their backs;
 Then would they find
 Neither protector nor helper.

23. (Such has been) the practice
 (Approved) of God already
 In the past: no change
 Wilt thou find in
 The practice (approved) of God.

24. And it is He Who
 Has restrained their hands

[p. 1398]

From you and your hands
 From them in the midst
 Of Mecca, after that He
 Gave you the victory
 Over them. And God sees
 Well all that ye do.

25. They are the ones who
 Denied revelation and hindered you
 From the Sacred Mosque
 And the sacrificial animals,
 Detained from reaching their
 Place of sacrifice. Had there
 Not been believing men
 And believing women whom
 Ye did not know that
 Ye were trampling down
 And on whose account
 A crime would have accrued
 To you without (your) knowledge,
 (God would have allowed you
 To force your way, but
 He held back your hands)
 That He may admit
 To His Mercy whom He will.
 If they had been
 Apart, We should

[p. 1399]

Certainly have punished
 The Unbelievers among them
 With a grievous punishment.

26. While the Unbelievers
 Got up in their hearts
 Heat and cant--the heat
 And cant of Ignorance,--
 God sent down His Tranquillity
 To his Apostle and to
 The Believers, and made them
 Stick close to the command
 Of self-restraint; and well
 Were they entitled to it
 And worthy of it.
 And God has full knowledge
 Of all things.

  

SECTION 4.

27. Truly did God fulfil
 The vision for His Apostle:
 Ye shall enter the Sacred
 Mosque, if God wills,
 With minds secure, heads shaved,
 Hair cut short, and without fear.
 For He knew what ye
 Knew not, and He granted,
 Besides this, a speedy victory.

28. It is He Who has sent
 His Apostle with Guidance
 And the Religion of Truth,
 To proclaim it over

[p. 1400]

All religion: and enough
 Is God for a Witness.

29. Muhammad is the Apostle
 Of God; and those who are
 With him are strong
 Against Unbelievers, (but)
 Compassionate amongst each other.
 Thou wilt see them bow
 And prostrate themselves
 (In prayer), seeking Grace
 From God and (His) Good
 Pleasure.
 On their faces are their
 Marks, (being) the traces
 Of their prostration.
 This is their similitude
 In the Taurat;
 And their similitude
 In the Gospel is:
 Like a seed which sends
 Forth its blade, then
 Makes it strong; it then
 Becomes thick, and it stands

[p. 1401]

On its own stem, (filling)
 The sowers with wonder
 And delight. As a result,
 It fills the Unbelievers
 With rage at them.
 God has promised those
 Among them who believe
 And do righteous deeds
 Forgiveness,
 And a great Reward.

[p. 1402]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1403]

  

Sura XLIX.

  

Hujurat, or the Inner Apartments.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. O ye who believe!
 Put not yourselves forward
 Before God and His Apostle;
 But fear God: for God
 Is He Who hears
 And knows all things.

2. O ye who believe!
 Raise not your voices!
 Above the voice of the Prophet,
 Nor speak aloud to him
 In talk, as ye may
 Speak aloud to one another,
 Lest your deeds become!
 Vain and ye perceive not.

3. Those that lower their voice
 In the presence of
 God's Apostle,--their hearts
 Has God tested for piety:
 For them is Forgiveness
 And a great Reward.

4. Those who shout out
 To thee from without

[p. 1404]

The Inner Apartments--
 Most of them lack understanding.

5. If only they had patience
 Until thou couldst
 Come out to them,
 It would be best
 For them: but God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

6. O ye who believe!
 If a wicked person comes
 To you with any news,
 Ascertain the truth, lest
 Ye harm people unwittingly,
 And afterwards become
 Full of repentance for
 What ye have done.

7. And know that among you
 Is God's Apostle: were he,
 In many matters, to follow
 Your (wishes), ye would
 Certainly fall into misfortune:
 But God has endeared
 The Faith to you, and
 Has made it beautiful
 In your hearts, and He
 Has made hateful to you
 Unbelief, wickedness, and
 Rebellion: such indeed are
 Those who walk in righteousness;--

8. A grace and favour
 From God; and God
 Is full of Knowledge
 And Wisdom.

[p. 1405]

9. If two parties among
 The Believers fall into
 A quarrel, make ye peace
 Between them: but if
 One of them transgresses
 Beyond bounds against the other,
 Then fight ye (all) against
 The one that transgresses
 Until it complies with
 The command of God;
 But if it complies, then
 Make peace between them
 With justice, and be fair:
 For God loves those
 Who are fair (and just).

10. The Believers are but
 A single Brotherhood:
 So make peace and
 Reconciliation between your
 Two (contending) brothers;
 And fear God, that ye
 May receive Mercy.

  

SECTION 2.

11. O ye who believe!
 Let not some men
 Among you laugh at others:
 It may be that
 The (latter) are better
 Than the (former):
 Nor let some women
 Laugh at others:

[p. 1406]

It may be that
 The (latter) are better
 Than the (former):
 Nor defame nor be
 Sarcastic to each other,
 Nor call each other
 By (offensive) nicknames:
 Ill-seeming is a name
 Connoting wickedness,
 (To be used of one)
 After he has believed:
 And those who
 Do not desist are
 (Indeed) doing wrong.

12. O ye who believe!
 Avoid suspicion as much
 (As possible): for suspicion
 In some cases is a sin:
 And spy not on each other,
 Nor speak ill of each other
 Behind their backs. Would any
 Of you like to eat
 The flesh of his dead
 Brother? Nay, ye would
 Abhor it... But fear God:
 For God is Oft-Returning,
 Most Merciful.

[p. 1407]

13. O mankind! We created
 You from a single (pair)
 Of a male and a female,
 And made you into
 Nations and tribes, that
 Ye may know each other
 (Not that ye may despise
 (Each other). Verily
 The most honoured of you
 In the sight of God
 Is (he who is) the most
 Righteous of you.
 And God has full knowledge
 And is well acquainted
 (With all things).

14. The desert Arabs say,
 "We believe." Say, ''Ye
 Have no faith; but ye
 (Only) say, "We have submitted
 Our wills to God,"
 For not yet has Faith
 Entered your hearts.
 But if ye obey God
 And His Apostle, He
 Will not belittle aught
 Of your deeds: for God
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

15. Only those are Believers
 Who have believed in God
 And His Apostle, and have
 Never since doubted, but
 Have striven with their
 Belongings and their persons
 In the Cause of God:
 Such are the sincere ones.

[p. 1408]

16. Say: "What! Will ye
 Instruct God about your
 Religion? But God knows
 All that is in the heavens
 And on earth: He has
 Full knowledge of all things.

17. They impress on thee
 As favour that they
 Have embraced Islam.
 Say, "Count not your Islam
 As a favour upon me:
 Nay, God has conferred
 A favour upon you
 That He has guided you
 To the Faith, if ye
 Be true and sincere.

18. "Verily God knows
 The secrets of the heavens
 And the earth: and God
 Sees well all
 That ye do."

[p. 1409]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1410]

  

Sura L.

  

Qaf.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Qaf.

By the Glorious Qur-an
 (Thou art God's Apostle).

2. But they wonder that
 There has come to them
 A Warner from among
 Themselves.
 So the Unbelievers say:
 "This is a wonderful thing!

3. "What! When we die
 And become dust, (shall we
 Live again?) That is
 A (sort of) Return
 Far (from our understanding)."

4. We already know
 How much of them
 The earth takes away:
 With Us is a Record
 Guarding (the full account).

5. But they deny the truth
 When it comes to them:
 So they are in
 A confused state.

[p. 1411]

6. Do they not look
 At the sky above them?--
 How We have made it
 And adorned it,
 And there are no
 Flaws in it?

7. And the earth--
 We have spread it out,
 And set thereon mountains
 Standing firm, and produced
 Therein every kind of
 Beautiful growth (in pairs)--

8. To be observed
 And commemorated
 By every devotee
 Turning (to God).

9. And We send down
 From the sky Rain
 Charged with blessing,
 And We produce therewith
 Gardens and Grain for harvests;

10. And tall (and stately)
 Palm-trees, with shoots
 Of fruit-stalks, piled
 One over another;--

11, As sustenance for
 (God's) Servants;--
 And We give (new) life
 Therewith to land that is
 Dead: thus will be
 The Resurrection.

[p. 1412]

12. Before them was denied
 (The Hereafter) by the People
 Of Noah, the Companions
 Of the Rass, the Thamud,

13. The 'Ad, Pharaoh,
 The Brethren of Lut,

14. The Companions of the Wood,
 And the People of Tubba';
 Each one (of them) rejected
 The apostles, and My warning
 Was duly fulfilled (in them).

15. Were We then weary
 With the first Creation,
 That they should be
 In confused doubt
 About a new Creation?

  

SECTION 2.

16. It was We Who
 Created man, and We know
 What dark suggestions his soul
 Makes to him: for We
 Are nearer to him
 Than (his) jugular vein.

17. Behold, two (guardian angels)
 Appointed to learn (his doings)
 Learn (and note them),
 One sitting on the right
 And one on the left.

[p. 1413]

18. Not a word does he
 Utter but there is
 A sentinel by him,
 Ready (to note it).

19. And the stupor of death
 Will bring truth (before
 His eyes): "This was
 The thing which thou
 Wast trying to escape!"

20. And the Trumpet
 Shall be blown:
 That will be the Day
 Whereof Warning (had been given).

21. And there will come forth
 Every soul: with each
 Will be an (angel) to drive,
 And an (angel) to
 Bear witness.

22. (It will be said:)
 "Thou wast heedless
 Of this; now have We
 Removed thy veil,

[p. 1414]

And sharp is thy sight
 This Day!"

23. And his Companion will say:
 "Here is (his Record) ready
 With me!"

24. (The sentence will be:)
 "Throw, throw into Hell
 Every contumacious Rejecter
 (Of God)!--

25. "Who forbade what was good,
 Transgressed all bounds,
 Cast doubts and suspicions;

26. "Who set up another god
 Beside God: throw him
 Into a severe Penalty."

27. His Companion will say:
 "Our Lord! I did not
 Make him transgress,
 But he was (himself)
 Far astray."

[p. 1415]

28. He will say: "Dispute not
 With each other
 In My Presence:
 I had already in advance
 Sent you Warning.

29. "The Word changes not
 Before Me, and I do not
 The least injustice
 To My Servants."

  

SECTION 3.

30. One Day We will
 Ask Hell, "Art thou
 Filled to the full?"
 It will say, "Are there
 Any more (to come)?"

31. And the Garden
 Will be brought nigh

[p. 1416]

To the Righteous,--no more
 A thing distant.

32. (A voice will say:)
 "This is what was
 Promised for you,
 For every one who turned
 (To God) in sincere repentance,
 Who kept (His Law),

33. "Who feared (God)
 Most Gracious unseen,
 And brought a heart
 Turned in devotion (to Him):

34. "Enter ye therein
 In Peace and Security;
 This is a Day
 Of Eternal Life!"

35. There will be for them
 Therein all that they wish,--
 And more besides
 In Our Presence,

36. But how many
 Generations before them
 Did We destroy (for their
 Sins),--stronger in power
 Than they? Then did they
 Wander through the land:
 Was there any place
 Of escape (for them)?

[p. 1417]

37. Verily in this
 Is a Message
 For any that has
 A heart and understanding
 Or who gives ear and
 Earnestly witnesses (the truth).

38. We created the heavens
 And the earth and all
 Between them in Six Days,
 Nor did any sense
 Of weariness touch Us.

39. Bear, then, with patience,
 All that they say,
 And celebrate the praises
 Of thy Lord, before
 The rising of the sun
 And before (its) setting,

40. And during part
 Of the night, (also,)
 Celebrate His praises,
 And (so likewise)
 After the postures
 Of adoration.

[p. 1418]

41. And listen for the Day
 When the Caller will call
 Out from a place
 Quite near,--

42. The Day when they will
 Hear a (mighty) Blast
 In (very) truth: that
 Will be the Day
 Of Resurrection.

43. Verily it is We Who
 Give Life and Death;
 And to Us is
 The Final Goal--

44. The Day when
 The Earth will be
 Rent asunder, from (men)
 Hurrying out: that will be
 A gathering together,--
 Quite easy for Us.

45. We know best what they
 Say; and thou art not
 One to overawe them
 By force. So admonish
 With the Qur-an such
 As fear My Warning!

[p. 1419]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1420]

  

Sura LI.

  

Zariyat, or the Winds That Scatter.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the (Winds)
 That scatter broadcast;

2. And those that
 Lift and bear away
 Heavy weights;

3. And those that
 Flow with ease
 And gentleness;

4. And those that
 Distribute and apportion
 By Command;--

[p. 1421]

5. Verily that which ye
 Are promised is true;

6. And verily Judgment
 And Justice must
 Indeed come to pass.

7. By the Sky
 With (its) numerous Paths,

8. Truly ye are in
 A doctrine discordant,

9. Through which are deluded (away
 From the Truth) such
 As would be deluded.

10. Woe to the falsehood-mongers,--

11. Those who (flounder) heedless
 In a flood of confusion:

12. They ask, "When will be
 The Day of Judgment
 And Justice?"

[p. 1422]

13. (It will be) a Day
 When they will be tried
 (And tested) over the Fire!

14. "Taste ye your trial!
 This is what ye used
 To ask to be hastened!

15. As to the Righteous,
 They will be in the midst
 Of Gardens and Springs,

16. Taking joy in the things
 Which their Lord gives them,
 Because, before then, they
 Lived a good life.

17. They were in the habit
 Of sleeping but little
 By night,

18. And in the hours
 Of early dawn,

They (were found) praying
 For Forgiveness;

19. And in their wealth
 And possessions (was remembered)
 The right of the (needy,)
 Him who asked, and him
 Who (for some reason) was
 Prevented (from asking).

[p. 1423]

20. On the earth
 Are Signs for those
 Of assured Faith,

21. As also in your, own
 Selves: will ye not
 Then see?

22. And in heaven is
 Your Sustenance, as (also)
 That which ye are promised.

23. Then, by the Lord
 Of heaven and earth,
 This is the very Truth,
 As much as the fact
 That ye can speak
 Intelligently to each other.

  

SECTION 2.

24. Has the story
 Reached thee, of the honoured
 Guests of Abraham?

[p. 1424]

25. Behold, they entered
 His presence, and said:
 "Peace!" He said, "Peace"
 (And thought, "These seem)
 Unusual people."

26. Then he turned quickly
 To his household, brought
 Out a fatted calf,

27. And placed it before them...
 He said, "Will ye not
 Eat?"

28. (When they did not eat),
 He conceived a fear of them.
 They said, "Fear not,"
 And they gave him
 Glad tidings of a son
 Endowed with knowledge.

29. But his wife came forward
 (Laughing) aloud: she smote
 Her forehead and said:
 "A barren old woman!"

30. They said, "Even so
 Has thy Lord spoken:
 And He is full
 Of Wisdom and Knowledge."

[p. 1425]

31. (Abraham) said: "And what,
 O ye Messengers,
 Is your errand (now)?"

32. They said, "We have
 Been sent to a people
 (Deep) in sin;--

33. "To bring on, on them,
 (A shower of) stones
 Of clay (brimstone),

34. "Marked as from thy Lord
 For those who trespass
 Beyond bounds."

35. Then We evacuated
 Those of the Believers
 Who were there,

36. But We found not there
 Any just (Muslim) persons
 Except in one house:

37. And We left there
 A Sign for such as
 Fear the Grievous Penalty.

[p. 1426]

38. And in Moses
 (Was another Sign):
 Behold, We sent him
 To Pharaoh, with authority
 Manifest.

39. But (Pharaoh) turned back
 With his Chiefs, and said,
 "A sorcerer, or
 One possessed!"

40. So We took him
 And his forces, and
 Threw them into the sea;
 And his was the blame:

41. And in the 'Ad (people)
 (Was another Sign):
 Behold, We sent against them
 The devastating Wind:

42. It left nothing whatever
 That it came up against,
 But reduced it to ruin
 And rottenness.

43. And in the Thamud
 (Was another Sign):
 Behold, they were told,
 "Enjoy (your brief day)
 For a little while!"

[p. 1427]

44. But they insolently defied
 The Command of their Lord:
 So the stunning noise
 (Of an earthquake) seized
 Them, even while they
 Were looking on.

45. Then they could not
 Even stand (on their feet),
 Nor could they help themselves.

46. So were the People
 Of Noah before them:
 For they wickedly transgressed.

  

SECTION 3.

47. With power and skill
 Did We construct
 The Firmament:
 For it is We Who create
 The vastness of Space.

[p. 1428]

48. And We have spread out
 The (spacious) earth:
 How excellently
 We do spread out!

49. And of every thing
 We have created pairs
 That ye may receive
 Instruction.

50. Hasten ye then (at once)
 To God: I am from Him
 A Warner to you,
 Clear and open!

51. And make not another
 An object of worship
 With God:
 I am from Him
 A Warner to you,
 Clear and open!

52. Similarly, no apostle came
 To the Peoples before them,
 But they said (of him)
 In like manner,
 "A sorcerer, or
 One possessed"!

53. Is this the legacy
 They have transmitted,

[p. 1429]

One to another
 Nay, they are themselves
 A people transgressing
 Beyond bounds!

54. So turn away
 From them: not thine
 Is the blame.

55. But teach (thy Message):
 For teaching benefits
 The Believers.

56. I have only created
 Jinns and men, that
 They may serve Me.

57. No Sustenance do I require
 Of them, nor do I
 Require that they should
 Feed Me.

58. For God is He Who
 Gives (all) Sustenance,--
 Lord of Power,--
 Steadfast (for ever).

59. For the wrong-doers,
 Their portion is like

[p. 1430]

Unto the portion of their
 Fellows (of earlier generations):
 Then let them not ask Me
 To hasten (that portion)!

60. Woe, then, to the Unbelievers,
 On account of that Day
 Of theirs which they
 Have been promised!

[p. 1431]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1432]

  

Sura LII.

  

Tur, or the Mount.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Mount (of Revelation);

2. By a Decree Inscribed

3. In a Scroll unfolded;

4. By the much-frequented Fane;

5. By the Canopy Raised High;

[p. 1433]

6. And by the Ocean
 Filled with Swell;--

7. Verily, the Doom of thy Lord
 Will indeed come to pass;--

8. There is none
 Can avert it;--

9. On the Day when
 The firmament will be
 In dreadful commotion.

10. And the mountains will fly
 Hither and thither.

11. Then woe that Day
 To those that treat
 (Truth) as Falsehood;--

[p. 1434]

12. That play (and paddle)
 In shallow trifles.

13. That Day shall they be
 Thrust down to the Fire
 Of Hell, irresistibly.

14. "This", it will be said,
 "Is the Fire,--which ye
 Were wont to deny!

15. "Is this then a fake,
 Or is it ye that
 Do not see?

16. "Burn ye therein:
 The same is it to you
 Whether ye bear it
 With patience, or not:
 Ye but receive the recompense
 Of your (own) deeds."

17. As to the Righteous,
 They will be in Gardens,
 And in Happiness,--

18. Enjoying the (Bliss) which
 Their Lord hath bestowed
 On them, and their Lord
 Shall deliver them from
 The Penalty of the Fire.

[p. 1435]

19. (To them will be said:)
 "Eat and drink ye,
 With profit and health,
 Because of your (good) deeds."

20. They will recline (with ease)
 On Thrones (of dignity)
 Arranged in ranks;
 And We shall join them
 To Companions, with beautiful
 Big and lustrous eyes.

21. And those who believe
 And whose families follow
 Them in Faith,-- to them
 Shall We join their families:
 Nor shall We deprive them
 (Of the fruit) of aught
 Of their works:
 (Yet) is each individual
 In pledge for his deeds.

[p. 1436]

22. And We shall bestow
 On them, of fruit and meat,
 Anything they shall desire.

23. They shall there exchange,
 One with another,
 A (loving) cup
 Free of frivolity,
 Free of all taint
 Of ill.

24. Round about them will serve,
 (Devoted) to them,
 Youths (handsome) as Pearls
 Well-guarded.

25. They will advance
 To each other, engaging
 In mutual enquiry.

26. They will say: "Aforetime,
 We were not without fear
 For the sake of our people.

[p. 1437]

27. "But God has been good
 To us, and has delivered us
 From the Penalty
 Of the Scorching Wind.

28. "Truly, we did call
 Unto Him from of old:
 Truly it is He,
 The Beneficent, the Merciful!

  

SECTION 2.

29. Wherefore proclaim thou
 The praises (of thy Lord):
 For by the Grace
 Of thy Lord, thou art
 No (vulgar) soothsayer, nor
 Art thou one possessed.

30. Or do they say:--
 "A Poet! we await
 For him some calamity
 (Hatched) by Time!"

31. Say thou: "Await ye!--
 I too will wait
 Along with you!"

[p. 1438]

32. Is it that their faculties
 Of understanding urge them
 To this, or are they
 But a people transgressing
 Beyond bounds?

33. Or do they say,
 "He fabricated the (Message)"?
 Nay, they have no faith!

34. Let them then produce
 A recital like unto it,--
 If (it be) they speak
 The Truth!

35. Were they created of
 nothing,
 Or were they themselves
 The creators?

36. Or did they create
 The heavens and the earth?
 Nay, they have
 No firm belief.

[p. 1439]

37. Or are the Treasures
 Of thy Lord with them,
 Or are they the managers
 (Of affairs)?

38. Or have they a ladder,
 By which they can (climb
 Up to heaven and) listen
 (To its secrets)? Then let
 (Such a) listener of theirs
 Produce a manifest proof.

39. Or has He only daughters
 And ye have sons?

40. Or is it that thou
 Dost ask for a reward,
 So that they are burdened
 With a load of debt?--

41. Or that the Unseen
 Is in their hands,
 And they write it down?

42. Or do they intend
 A plot (against thee)?
 But those who defy God
 Are themselves involved
 In a Plot!

[p. 1440]

43. Or have they a god
 Other than God?
 Exalted is God
 Far above the things
 They associate with Him!

44. Were they to see
 A piece of the sky
 Falling (on them), they
 Would (only) say: "Clouds
 Gathered in heaps!"

45. So leave them alone
 Until they encounter
 That Day of theirs,
 Wherein they shall (perforce)
 Swoon (with terror),--

46. The Day when their plotting
 Will avail them nothing
 And no help shall be
 Given them.

47. And verily, for those
 Who do wrong, there is
 Another punishment besides this:
 But most of them
 Understand not.

48. Now await in patience
 The command of thy Lord:

[p. 1441]

For verily thou art
 In Our eyes:
 And celebrate the praises
 Of thy Lord the while
 Thou standest forth,

49. And for part of the night
 Also praise thou Him,--
 And at the retreat
 Of the stars!

[p. 1442]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1443]

  

Sura LIII.

  

Najm, or the Star.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Star
 When it goes down,--

2. Your Companion is neither
 Astray nor being misled,

3. Nor does he say (aught)
 Of (his own) Desire.

4. It is no less than
 Inspiration sent down to him:

5. He was taught by one
 Mighty in Power,

6. Endued with Wisdom:
 For he appeared
 (In stately form)

[p. 1444]

7. While he was in
 The highest part
 Of the horizon:

8. Then he approached
 And came closer,

9. And was at a distance
 Of but two bow-lengths
 Or (even) nearer;

10. So did (God) convey
 The inspiration to His Servant--
 (Conveyed) what He (meant)
 To convey.

11. The (Prophet's) (mind and) heart
 In no way falsified
 That which he saw.

12. Will ye then dispute
 With him concerning
 What he saw?

13. For indeed he saw him
 At a second descent,

14. Near the Lote-tree
 Beyond which none may pass:

[p. 1445]

15. Near it is the Garden
 Of Abode.

16. Behold, the Lote-tree
 Was shrouded
 (In mystery unspeakable!)

17. (His) sight never swerved,
 Nor did it go wrong!

18. For truly did he see,
 Of the Signs of his Lord,
 The Greatest!

19. Have ye seen
 Lat, and 'Uzza,

20. And another,
 The third (goddess), Manat?

21. What! For you
 The male sex,
 And for Him, the female?

22. Behold, such would be
 Indeed a division
 Most unfair!

[p. 1446]

23. These are nothing but names
 Which ye have devised,--
 Ye and your fathers,
 For which God has sent
 Down no authority (whatever).
 They follow nothing but
 Conjecture and what
 Their own souls desire!--
 Even though there has already
 Come to them Guidance
 From their Lord!

24. Nay, shall man have (just)
 Anything he hankers after?

25. But it is to God
 That the End and
 The Beginning (of all things)
 Belong.

  

SECTION 2.

26. How many-so-ever be
 The angels in the heavens,
 Their intercession will avail nothing
 Except after God has given
 Leave for whom He pleases
 And that he is acceptable
 To Him.

[p. 1447]

27. Those who believe not
 In the Hereafter, name
 The angels with female names.

28. But they have no knowledge
 Therein. They follow nothing
 But conjecture; and conjecture
 Avails nothing against Truth.

29. Therefore shun those who
 Turn away from Our Message
 And desire nothing but
 The life of this world.

30. That is as far as
 Knowledge will reach them.
 Verily thy Lord knoweth best
 Those who stray from
 His Path, and He knoweth
 Best those who receive guidance.

31. Yea, to God belongs all
 That is in the heavens
 And on earth: so that
 He rewards those who do
 Evil, according to their deeds,
 And He rewards those who
 Do good, with what is best.

32. Those who avoid
 Great sins and shameful deeds,

[p. 1448]

Only (falling into) small faults,
 Verily thy Lord is ample
 In forgiveness. He knows
 You well when He brings
 You out of the earth,
 And when ye are hidden
 In your mothers' wombs.
 Therefore justify not yourselves;
 He knows best who it is
 That guards against evil.

  

SECTION 3.

33. Seest thou one
 Who turns back,

34. Gives a little,
 Then hardens (his heart)?

[p. 1449]

35. What! Has he knowledge
 Of the unseen
 So that he can see?

36. Nay, is he not acquainted
 With what is in the books
 Of Moses--

37. And of Abraham
 Who fulfilled his
 engagements;--

38. Namely, that no bearer
 Of burdens can bear
 The burden of another;

39. That man can have nothing
 But what he strives for;

40. That (the fruit of) his striving
 Will soon come in sight;

41. Then will he be rewarded
 With a reward complete;

42. That to thy Lord
 Is the final Goal;

[p. 1450]

43. That it is He Who
 Granteth Laughter and Tears;

44. That it is He Who
 Granteth Death and Life;

45. That He did create
 In pairs,--male and female,

46. From a seed when lodged
 (In its place);

47. That He hath promised
 A Second Creation
 (Raising of the Dead);

48. That it is He Who
 Giveth wealth and satisfaction;

49. That He is the Lord
 Of Sirius (the Mighty Star);

50. And that it is He
 Who destroyed the (powerful)
 Ancient 'Ad (people),

[p. 1451]

51. And the Thamud,
 Nor gave them a lease
 Of perpetual life.

52. And before them,
 The people of Noah,
 For that they were (all)
 Most unjust
 And most insolent transgressors,

53. And He destroyed
 The Overthrown Cities
 (Of Sodom and Gomorrah),

54. So that (ruins unknown)
 Have covered them up.

55. Then which of the gifts
 Of thy Lord, (O man,)
 Wilt thou dispute about?

56. This is a Warner,
 Of the (series of) Warners
 Of old!

57. The (Judgment) ever approaching
 Draws nigh:

58. No (soul) but God
 Can lay it bare.

59. Do ye then wonder
 At this recital?

[p. 1452]

60. And will ye laugh
 And not weep,--

61. Wasting your time
 In vanities?

62. But fall ye down in prostration
 To God, and adore (Him)!

[p. 1453]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1454]

  

Sura LIV.

  

Qamar, or the Moon.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. The Hour (of Judgment)
 Is nigh, and the moon
 Is cleft asunder.

2. But if they see
 A Sign, they turn away,
 And say, "This is
 (But) transient magic."

3. They reject (the warning)
 And follow their (own) lusts
 But every matter has
 Its appointed time.

4. There have already come
 To them Recitals wherein
 There is (enough) to check (them),

5. Mature wisdom;--but
 (The preaching of) Warners
 Profits them not.

[p. 1455]

6. Therefore, (O Prophet,)
 Turn away from them.
 The Day that the Caller
 Will call (them)
 To a terrible affair,

7. They will come forth,
 Their eyes humbled--
 From (their) graves, (torpid)
 Like locusts scattered abroad,

8. Hastening, with eyes transfixed,
 Towards the Caller!--
 "Hard is this Day!",
 The Unbelievers will say.

9. Before them the People
 Of Noah rejected (their apostle):
 They rejected Our servant,
 And said, "Here is
 One possessed!", and he
 Was driven out.

10. Then he called on his Lord:
 "I am one overcome:
 Do Thou then help (me)!

11. So We opened the gates
 Of heaven, with water
 Pouring forth.

[p. 1456]

12. And We caused the earth
 To gush forth with springs.
 So the waters met (and rose)
 To the extent decreed.

13. But We bore him
 On an (Ark) made of
 Broad planks and caulked
 With palm-fibre:

14. She floats under our eyes
 (And care): a recompense
 To one who had been
 Rejected (with scorn)!

15. And We have left
 This as a Sign
 (For all time): then
 Is there any that will
 Receive admonition?

16. But how (terrible) was
 My Penalty and My Warning?

17. And We have indeed
 Made the Qur-an easy

[p. 1457]

To understand and remember:
 Then is there any that
 Will receive admonition?

18. The 'Ad (people) (too)
 Rejected (Truth): then
 How terrible was
 My Penalty and My Warning?

19. For We sent against them
 A furious wind, on a Day
 Of violent Disaster,

20. Plucking out men as if
 They were roots of palm-trees
 Torn up (from the ground).

21. Yea, how (terrible) was
 My Penalty and My Warning!

22. But We have indeed
 Made the Qur-an easy
 To understand and remember:
 Then is there any that
 Will receive admonition?

  

SECTION 2.

23. The Thamud (also)
 Rejected (their) Warners.

24. For they said: "What!
 A man! a solitary one

[p. 1458]

From among ourselves!
 Shall we follow such a one?
 Truly should we then be
 Straying in mind, and mad!

25. "Is it that the Message
 Is sent to him,
 Of all people amongst us?
 Nay, he is a liar,
 An insolent one!"

26. Ah! they will know
 On the morrow, which is
 The liar, the insolent one!

27. For We will send
 The she-camel
 By way of trial for them.
 So watch them, (O Salih),
 And possess thyself in patience!

28. And tell them that
 The water is to be
 Divided between them:
 Each one's right to drink
 Being brought forward
 (By suitable turns).

29. But they called
 To their companion,
 And he took a sword
 In hand, and hamstrung (her).

30. Ah! how (terrible) was
 My Penalty and My Warning!

[p. 1459]

31. For We sent against them
 A single Mighty Blast,
 And they became
 Like the dry stubble used
 By one who pens cattle.

32. And we have indeed
 Made the Qur-an easy
 To understand and remember:
 Then is there any that
 Will receive admonition?

33. The People of Lut
 Rejected (his) Warning.

34. We sent against them
 A violent tornado
 With showers of stones,
 (Which destroyed them), except
 Lut's household: them We
 Delivered by early Dawn,--

35. As a Grace from Us:
 Thus do We reward
 Those who give thanks.

36. And (Lut) did warn them
 Of Our Punishment, but
 They disputed about the Warning.

[p. 1460]

37. And they even sought
 To snatch away his guests
 From him, but We blinded
 Their eyes. (They heard:)
 "Now taste ye My Wrath
 And My Warning."

38. Early on the morrow
 An abiding Punishment
 Seized them:

39. "So taste ye My Wrath
 And My Warning."

40. And We have indeed
 Made the Qur-an easy
 To understand and remember:
 Then is there any that
 Will receive admonition?

  

SECTION 3.

41. To the People
 Of Pharaoh, too, aforetime,
 Came Warners (from God).

42. The (people) rejected all
 Our Signs; but We
 Seized them with such Penalty
 (As comes) from One
 Exalted in Power,
 Able to carry out His Will.

[p. 1461]

43. Are your Unbelievers,
 (O Quraish), better than they?
 Or have ye an immunity
 In the Sacred Books?

44. Or do they say:
 "We acting together
 Can defend ourselves"?

45. Soon will their multitude
 Be put to flight,
 And they will show
 Their backs.

46. Nay, the Hour (of Judgment)
 Is the time promised them
 (For their full recompense):
 And that Hour will be
 Most grievous and most bitter.

47. Truly those in sin
 Are the ones
 Straying in mind, and mad.

48. The Day they will be
 Dragged through the Fire
 On their faces, (they
 Will hear:) "Taste ye
 The touch of Hell!"

[p. 1462]

49. Verily, all things
 Have We created
 In proportion and measure.

50. And Our Command
 Is but a single (Act),--
 Like the twinkling
 Of an eye.

51. And (oft) in the past,
 Have We destroyed gangs
 Like unto you: then
 Is there any that
 Will receive admonition?

52. All that they do
 Is noted in (their)
 Books (of Deeds):

[p. 1463]

53. Every matter, small and great,
 Is on record.

54. As to the Righteous,
 They will be in the midst
 Of Gardens and Rivers,

55. In an Assembly of Truth,
 In the Presence of
 A Sovereign Omnipotent.

[p. 1464] [p. 1465] [p. 1466] [p. 1467] [p. 1468] [p. 1469] [p. 1470] [p. 1471]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1472]

  

Sura LV.

  

Rahman, or (God) Most Gracious.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. (God) Most Gracious!

2. It is He Who has
 Taught the Qur-an.

3. He has created man:

4. He has taught him speech
 (And Intelligence).

5. The sun and the moon
 Follow courses (exactly) computed;

6. And the herbs and the trees--
 Both (alike) bow in adoration.

7. And the Firmament has He
 Raised high, and He has set up
 The Balance (of Justice),

[p. 1473]

8. In order that ye may
 Not transgress (due) balance.

9. So establish weight with justice
 And fall not short
 In the balance.

10. It is He Who has
 Spread out the earth
 For (His) creatures:

11. Therein is fruit
 And date-palms, producing
 Spathes (enclosing dates);

12. Also corn, with (its)
 Leaves and stalk for fodder,
 And sweet-smelling plants.

13. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

[p. 1474]

14. He created man
 From sounding clay
 Like unto pottery,

15. And He created Jinns
 From fire free of smoke:

16. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

17. (He is) Lord
 Of the two Easts
 And Lord
 Of the two Wests:

18. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

19. He has let free
 The two bodies
 Of flowing water,
 Meeting together:

20. Between them is a Barrier
 Which they do not transgress:

[p. 1475]

21. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

22. Out of them come
 Pearls and Coral:

23. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

24. And His are the Ships
 Sailing smoothly through the seas,
 Lofty as mountains:

25. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

  

SECTION 2.

26. All that is on earth
 Will perish:

27. But will abide (for ever)
 The Face of thy Lord,--

[p. 1476]

Full of Majesty,
 Bounty and Honour.

28. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

29. Of Him seeks (its need)
 Every creature in the heavens
 And on earth:
 Every day in (new) Splendour
 Doth He (shine)!

30. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

31. Soon shall We
 Settle your affairs,
 O both ye worlds!

32. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

33. O ye assembly of Jinns,
 And men! If it be

[p. 1477]

Ye can pass beyond
 The zones of the heavens
 And the earth, pass ye!
 Not without authority
 Shall ye be able to pass!

34. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

35. On you will be sent
 (O ye evil ones twain!)
 A flame of fire (to burn)
 And a smoke (to choke):
 No defence will ye have:

36. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

[p. 1478]

37. When the sky is rent
 Asunder, and it becomes red
 Like ointment:

38. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

39. On that Day
 No question will be asked
 Of man or Jinn
 As to his sin,

40. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

41. (For) the sinners will be
 Known by their Marks:
 And they will be seized
 By their forelocks and
 Their feet.

42. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

43. This is the Hell which
 The Sinners deny:

44. In its midst
 And in the midst
 Of boiling hot water
 Will they wander round!

[p. 1479]

45. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

  

SECTION 3.

46. But for such as fear
 The time when they will
 Stand before (the Judgment Seat
 Of) their Lord,
 There will be two Gardens--

47. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

48. Containing all kinds
 (Of trees and delights);--

49. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

50. In them (each) will be
 Two Springs flowing (free);

51. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

52. In them will be Fruits
 Of every kind, two and two.

53. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

[p. 1480]

54. They will recline on Carpets,
 Whose inner linings will be
 Of rich brocade: the Fruit
 Of the Gardens will be
 Near (and easy of reach).

55. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

56. In them will be (Maidens),
 Chaste, restraining their glances,
 Whom no man or Jinn
 Before them has touched;--

57. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

58. Like unto rubies and coral.

59. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

60. Is there any Reward
 For Good-other than Good?

61. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

62. And besides these two,
 There are two other Gardens,--

[p. 1481]

63. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

64. Dark-green in colour
 (From plentiful watering).

65. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

66. In them (each) will be
 Two Springs pouring forth water
 In continuous abundance:

67. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

68. In them will be Fruits,
 And dates and pomegranates:

69. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

70. In them will be
 Fair (Companions), good,
 beautiful;--

71. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

72. Companions restrained (as to
 Their glances), in (goodly)
 pavilions;--

[p. 1482]

73. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

74. Whom no man or Jinn
 Before them has touched;--

75. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?--

76. Reclining on green Cushions
 And rich Carpets of beauty.

77. Then which of the favours
 Of your Lord will ye deny?

78. Blessed be the name
 Of thy Lord,
 Full of Majesty,
 Bounty and Honour.

[p. 1483]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1484]

  

Sura LVI.

  

Waqi'a, or The Inevitable Event.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. When the Event Inevitable
 Cometh to pass,

2. Then will no (soul)
 Entertain falsehood
 Concerning its coming.

3. (Many) will it bring low;
 (Many) will it exalt;

4. When the earth shall be
 Shaken to its depths,

5. And the mountains shall
 Be crumbled to atoms,

6. Becoming dust scattered abroad,

7. And ye shall be sorted out
 Into three classes.

8. Then (there will be)
 The Companions of
 The Right Hand;--
 What will be
 The Companions of
 The Right Hand?

[p. 1485]

9. And the Companions of
 The Left Hand,--
 What will be
 The Companions of
 The Left Hand?

10. And those Foremost
 (In Faith) will be
 Foremost (in the Hereafter).

11. These will be
 Those Nearest to God:

12. In Gardens of Bliss:

13. A number of people
 From those of old,

14. And a few from those
 Of later times.

15. (They will be) on Thrones
 Encrusted (with gold
 And precious stones),

16. Reclining on them,
 Facing each other.

[p. 1486]

17. Round about them will (serve)
 Youths of perpetual (freshness),

18. With goblets, (shining) beakers,
 And cups (filled) out of
 Clear-flowing fountains:

19. No after-ache will they
 Receive therefrom, nor will they
 Suffer intoxication:

20. And with fruits,
 Any that they may select;

21. And the flesh of fowls,
 Any that they may desire.

22. And (there will be) Companions
 With beautiful, big,
 And lustrous eyes,--

23. Like unto Pearls
 Well-guarded.

24. A Reward for the Deeds
 Of their past (Life).

25. No frivolity will they
 Hear therein, nor any
 Taint of ill,--

[p. 1487]

26. Only the saying,
 "Peace! Peace".

27. The Companions of
 The Right Hand,--
 What will be
 The Companions of
 The Right Hand?

28. (They will be) among
 Lote-trees without thorns,

29. Among Talh trees
 With flowers (or fruits)
 Piled one above another,--

30. In shade long-extended,

31. By water flowing constantly,

32. And fruit in abundance.

33. Whose season is not limited,
 Nor (supply) forbidden,

34. And on Thrones (of Dignity),
 Raised high.

35. We have created
 (their Companions)
 Of special creation.

[p. 1488]

36. And made them
 Virgin-pure (and undefiled),--

37. Beloved (by nature),
 Equal in age,--

38. For the Companions
 Of the Right Hand.

  

SECTION 2.

39. A (goodly) number
 From those of old,

40. And a (goodly) number
 From those of later times.

41. The Companions of
 The Left Hand,--
 What will be
 The Companions of
 The Left Hand?

42. (They will be) in the midst
 Of a fierce Blast of Fire
 And in Boiling Water,

43. And in the shades
 Of Black Smoke:

44. Nothing (will there be)
 To refresh, nor to please:

45. For that they were wont
 To be indulged, before that,

[p. 1489]

In wealth (and luxury),

46. And persisted obstinately
 In wickedness supreme!

47. And they used to say,
 "What! when we die
 And become dust and bones,
 Shall we then indeed
 Be raised up again?--

48. "(We) and our fathers of old?"

49. Say: "Yea, those of old
 And those of later times,

50. "All will certainly be
 Gathered together for the meeting
 Appointed for a Day
 Well-known.

51. "Then will ye truly,--
 O ye that go wrong,
 And treat (Truth) as Falsehood!--

52. "Ye will surely taste
 Of the Tree of Zaqqum.

53. "Then will ye fill
 Your insides therewith,

54. "And drink Boiling Water
 On top of it:

[p. 1490]

55. "Indeed ye shall drink
 Like diseased camels
 Raging with thirst!"

56. Such will be their entertainment
 On the Day of Requital!

57. It is We Who have
 Created you: why will ye
 Not witness the Truth?

58. Do ye then see?--
 The (human Seed) that
 Ye throw out,--

59. Is it ye who create it,
 Or are We the Creators?

60. We have decreed Death
 To be your common lot,
 And We are not
 To be frustrated

[p. 1491]

61. From changing your Forms
 And creating you (again)
 In (Forms) that ye know not.

62. And ye certainly know already
 The first form of creation:
 Why then do ye not
 Celebrate His praises?

63. See ye the seed that
 Ye sow in the ground?

64. Is it ye that cause it
 To grow, or are We
 The Cause?

65. Were it Our Will,
 We could crumble it
 To dry powder, and ye would
 Be left in wonderment,

66. (Saying), "We are indeed
 Left with debts (for nothing):

67. "Indeed are we shut out
 (Of the fruits of our labour)",

68. See ye the water
 Which ye drink?

69. Do ye bring it Down
 (In rain) from the Cloud
 Or do We?

70. Were it Our Will,
 We could make it

[p. 1492]

Salt (and unpalatable):
 Then why do ye not
 Give thanks?

71. See ye the Fire
 Which ye kindle?

72. Is it ye who grow
 The tree which feeds
 The fire, or do We
 Grow it?

73. We have made it
 A memorial (of Our handiwork),
 And an article of comfort
 And convenience for
 The denizens of deserts.

74. Then celebrate with praises,
 The name of thy Lord,
 The Supreme!

[p. 1493]

  

SECTION 3.

75. Furthermore I call
 To witness the setting
 Of the Stars,--

76. And that is indeed
 A mighty adjuration
 If ye but knew,--

77. That this is indeed
 A Qur-an most honourable,

78. In a Book well-guarded,

79. Which none shall touch
 But those who are clean:

80. A Revelation from the Lord
 Of the Worlds.

81. Is it such a Message
 That ye would hold
 In light esteem?

82. And have ye made it
 Your livelihood that ye
 Should declare it false?

[p. 1494]

83. Then why do ye not
 (Intervene) when (the soul
 Of the dying man)
 Reaches the throat,--

84. And ye the while
 (Sit) looking on,--

85. But We are nearer
 To him than ye,
 And yet see not,--

86. Then why do ye not,--
 If you are exempt
 From (future) account,--

87. Call back the soul,
 If ye are true
 (In your claim of Independence)?

88. Thus, then, if he
 Be of those Nearest to God,

89. (There is for him) Rest
 And Satisfaction, and
 A Garden of Delights.

[p. 1495]

90. And if he be
 Of the Companions of
 The Right Hand,

91. (For him is the salutation),
 "Peace be unto thee",
 From the Companions
 Of the Right Hand.

92. And if he be
 Of those who treat
 (Truth) as Falsehood,
 Who go wrong,

93. For him is Entertainment
 With Boiling Water,

94. And burning in Hell-Fire.

95. Verily, this is
 The Very Truth
 And Certainty.

96. So celebrate with praises
 The name of thy Lord,
 The Supreme.

[p. 1496]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1497]

  

Sura LVII.

  

Hadid, or Iron.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Whatever is in
 The heavens and on earth,--
 Let it declare
 The Praises and Glory of God:
 For He is the Exalted
 In Might, the Wise.

2. To Him belongs the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth:
 It is He Who gives
 Life and Death; and He
 Has Power over all things.

3. He is the First
 And the Last,
 The Evident
 And the Immanent:
 And He has full knowledge
 Of all things.

4. He it is Who created
 The heavens and the earth
 In six Days, and is moreover
 Firmly established on the Throne
 (Of authority). He knows
 What enters within the earth

[p. 1498]

And what comes forth out
 Of it, what comes down
 From heaven and what mounts
 Up to it. And He is
 With you wheresoever ye
 May be. And God sees
 Well all that ye do.

5. To Him belongs the dominion
 Of the heavens and the earth:
 And all affairs are
 Referred back to God.

6. He merges Night into Day,
 And He merges Day into Night;
 And He has full knowledge
 Of the secrets of (all) hearts.

7. Believe in God
 And His Apostle,
 And spend (in charity)
 Out of the (substance)
 Whereof He has made you
 Heirs. For, those of you
 Who believe and spend
 (In charity),--for them
 Is a great Reward.

8. What cause have ye
 Why ye should not believe
 In God?--And the Apostle
 Invites you to believe

[p. 1499]

In your Lord, and has
 Indeed taken your Covenant,
 If ye are men of faith.

9. He is the One Who
 Sends to His Servant
 Manifest Signs, that He
 May lead you from
 The depths of Darkness
 Into the Light And verily,
 God is to you
 Most kind and Merciful.

10. And what cause have ye
 Why ye should not spend
 In the cause of God?--
 For to God belongs
 The heritage of the heavens
 And the earth.
 Not equal among you
 Are those who spent (freely)
 And fought, before the Victory,
 (With those who did so later).
 Those are higher in rank
 Than those who spent (freely)
 And fought afterwards.
 But to all has God promised
 A goodly (reward). And God
 Is well acquainted
 With all that ye do.

[p. 1500]

  

SECTION 2.

11. Who is he that will
 Loan to God a beautiful
 Loan? For (God) will
 Increase it manifold
 To his credit,
 And he will have (besides)
 A liberal reward.

12. One Day shalt thou see
 The believing men and
 The believing women--
 How their Light runs
 Forward before them
 And by their right hands:
 (Their greeting will be):
 "Good News for you this Day!
 Gardens beneath which How rivers!
 To dwell therein for aye!
 This is indeed
 The highest Achievement!

13. One Day will the Hypocrites
 Men and women--say
 To the Believers: "Wait
 For us! Let us borrow
 (A light) from your Light!"
 It will be said: "Turn
 Ye back to your rear!
 Then seek a light (where
 Ye can)!" So a wall
 Will be put up betwixt them,

[p. 1501]

With a gate therein.
 Within it will be Mercy
 Throughout, and without it,
 All alongside, will be
 (Wrath and) Punishment!

14. (Those without) will call out,
 "Were we not with you?
 (The others) will reply, "True!
 But ye led yourselves
 Into temptation; ye looked forward
 (To our ruin); ye doubted
 (God's Promise); and (your false)
 Desires deceived you; until
 There issued the Command
 Of God. And the Deceiver
 Deceived you in respect of God.

15. "This Day shall no ransom
 Be accepted of you, nor
 Of those who rejected God.
 Your abode is the Fire:
 That is the proper place .
 To claim you: and an evil
 Refuge it is!"

16. Has not the time arrived
 For the Believers that
 Their hearts in all humility
 Should engage in the remembrance

[p. 1502]

Of God and of the Truth
 Which has been revealed (to them),
 And that they should not
 Become like those to whom
 Was given Revelation aforetime,
 But long ages passed over them
 And their hearts grew hard?
 For many among them
 Are rebellious transgressors.

17. Know ye (all) that
 God giveth life
 To the earth after its death
 Already have We shown
 The Signs plainly to you,
 That ye may learn wisdom.

18. For those who give
 In Charity, men and women,
 And loan to God
 A Beautiful Loan,
 It shall be increased manifold
 (To their credit),
 And they shall have (besides)
 A liberal reward.

19. And those who believe
 In God and His apostles--
 They are the Sincere
 (Lovers of Truth), and

[p. 1503]

The Witnesses (who testify),
 In the eyes of their Lord:
 They shall have their Reward
 And their Light,
 But those who reject God
 And deny Our Signs,--
 They are the Companions
 Of Hell-Fire.

  

SECTION 3.

20. Know ye (all), that
 The life of this world
 Is but play and amusement,
 Pomp and mutual boasting
 And multiplying, (in rivalry)
 Among yourselves, riches
 And children.
 Here is a similitude:
 How rain and the growth
 Which it brings forth, delight
 (The hearts of) the tillers;
 Soon it withers; thou
 Wilt see it grow yellow;
 Then it becomes dry
 And crumbles away.
 But in the Hereafter
 Is a Penalty severe
 (For the devotees of wrong).
 And Forgiveness from God
 And (His) Good Pleasure

[p. 1504]

(For the devotees of God).
 And what is the life
 Of this world, but
 Goods and chattels
 Of deception?

21. Be ye foremost (in seeking)
 Forgiveness from your Lord,
 And a Garden (of Bliss),
 The width whereof is
 As the width of
 Heaven and earth,
 Prepared for those who believe
 In God and His apostles:
 That is the Grace of God,
 Which He bestows on whom
 He pleases: and God is
 The Lord of Grace abounding.

22. No misfortune can happen
 On earth or in your souls
 But is recorded in
 A decree before We bring
 It into existence:
 That is truly easy for God:

23. In order that ye may
 Not despair over matters
 That pass you by,
 Nor exult over favours
 Bestowed upon you.
 For God loveth not

[p. 1505]

Any vainglorious boaster,--

24. Such persons as are
 Covetous and commend
 Covetousness to men.
 And if any turn back
 (From God's Way), verily
 God is free of all needs,
 Worthy of all praise.

25. We sent aforetime
 Our apostles with Clear Signs
 And sent down with them
 The Book and the Balance
 (Of Right and Wrong), that men
 May stand forth in justice;
 And We sent down Iron
 In which is (material for)
 Mighty war, as well as
 Many benefits for mankind,
 That God may test who
 It is that will help,

[p. 1506]

Unseen, Him and His apostles:
 For God is Full of Strength,
 Exalted in Might
 (And able to enforce His Will).

  

SECTION 4.

26. And We sent Noah
 And Abraham, and established
 In their line Prophethood
 And Revelation: and some of them!
 Were on right guidance,
 But many of them
 Became rebellious transgressors.

27. Then, in their wake,
 We followed them up
 With (others of) Our apostles:
 We sent after them
 Jesus the son of Mary,
 And bestowed on him
 The Gospel; and We ordained
 In the hearts of those
 Who followed him
 Compassion and Mercy.

[p. 1507]

But the Monasticism
 Which they invented
 For themselves, We did not
 Prescribe for them:
 (We commanded) only
 The seeking for the Good
 Pleasure of God; but that
 They did not foster
 As they should have done.
 Yet We bestowed, on those
 Among them who believed,
 Their (due) reward, but
 Many of them are
 Rebellious transgressors.

28. O ye that believe!
 Fear God, and believe
 In His Apostle, and He will
 Bestow on you a double
 Portion of His Mercy:
 He will provide for you

[p. 1508]

A Light by which ye
 Shall walk (straight
 In your path), and He
 Will forgive you (your past):
 For God is Oft-Forgiving,
 Most Merciful:

29. That the People of
 The Book may know
 That they have no power
 Whatever over the Grace
 Of God, that (His) Grace
 Is (entirely) in his hand,
 To bestow it on
 Whomsoever He wills.
 For God is the Lord.
 Of Grace abounding.

[p. 1509]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1510]

  

Sura LVIII.

  

Mujadila, or The Woman who Pleads.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. God has indeed
 Heard (and accepted) the statement
 Of the woman who pleads
 With thee concerning her husband
 And carries her complaint
 (In prayer) to God:
 And God (always) hears
 The arguments between both
 Sides among you: for God
 Hears and sees (all things).

2. If any men among you
 Divorce their wives by
 (Calling them mothers),
 They cannot be their mothers:
 None can be their mothers
 Except those who gave them
 Birth. And in fact
 They use words (both) iniquitous
 And false: but truly
 God is One that blots out

[p. 1511]

(Sins), and forgives
 (Again and again).

3. But those who divorce
 Their wives by Zihar,
 Then wish to go back
 On the words they uttered,--
 (It is ordained that
 Such a one)
 Should free a slave
 Before they touch each other:
 This are ye admonished
 To perform: and God is
 Well-acquainted with (all)
 That ye do.

4. And if any has not
 (The wherewithal),
 He should fast for
 Two months consecutively
 Before they touch each other.
 But if any is unable
 To do so, he should feed
 Sixty indigent ones.
 This, that ye may show
 Your faith in God

[p. 1512]

And His Apostle.
 Those are limits (set
 By) God. For those who
 Reject (Him), there is
 A grievous Penalty.

5. Those who resist God
 And His Apostle will be
 Humbled to dust, as were
 Those before them: for We
 Have already sent down
 Clear Signs. And the Unbelievers
 (Will have) a humiliating Penalty,--

6. On the Day that
 God will raise them
 All up (again) and show
 Them the truth (and meaning)
 Of their conduct. God has
 Reckoned its (value), though
 They may have forgotten it,
 For God is Witness
 To all things.

  

SECTION 2.

7. Seest thou not that
 God doth know (all) that is
 In the heavens and
 On earth? There is not
 A secret consultation
 Between three, but He
 Makes the fourth among them,--
 Nor between five but

[p. 1513]

He makes the sixth,--
 Nor between fewer nor more,
 But He is in their midst,
 Wheresoever they be:
 In the end will He
 Tell them the truth
 Of their conduct, on the Day
 Of Judgment. For God
 Has full knowledge
 Of all things.

8. Turnest thou not thy sight
 Towards those who were
 Forbidden secret counsels
 Yet revert to that which
 They were forbidden (to do)?
 And they hold secret counsels
 Among themselves for iniquity
 And hostility, and disobedience
 To the Apostle. And when
 They come to thee,
 They salute thee,
 Not as God salutes thee,
 (But in crooked ways):
 And they say to themselves,
 "Why does not God
 Punish us for our words?"
 Enough for them is Hell:
 In it will they burn,
 And evil is that destination!

9. O ye who believe!
 When ye hold secret counsel,
 Do it not for iniquity
 And hostility, and disobedience

[p. 1514]

To the Prophet; but do it
 For righteousness and self-restraint;
 And fear God, to Whom
 Ye shall be brought back.

10. Secret counsels are only
 (Inspired) by the Evil One,
 In order that he may
 Cause grief to the Believers;
 But he cannot harm them
 In the least, except as
 God permits; and on God
 Let the Believers
 Put their trust.

11. O ye who believe!
 When ye are told
 To make room
 In the assemblies,
 (Spread out and) make room:
 (Ample) room will God provide
 For you. And when
 Ye are told to rise up,
 Rise up: God will
 Raise up, to (suitable) ranks
 (And degrees), those of you
 Who believe and who have

[p. 1515]

Been granted (mystic) Knowledge.
 And God is well-acquainted
 With all ye do.

12. O ye who believe
 When ye consult
 The Apostle in private,
 Spend something in charity
 Before your private consultation.
 That will be best for you,
 And most conducive
 To purity (of conduct).
 But if ye find not
 (The wherewithal), God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

13. Is it that ye are
 Afraid of spending sums
 In charity before your
 Private consultation (with him)

[p. 1516]

If, then, ye do not so,
 And God forgives you,
 Then (at least) establish
 Regular prayer; practise
 Regular charity; and obey
 God and His Apostle.
 And God is well-acquainted
 With all that ye do.

  

SECTION 3.

14. Turnest thou not
 Thy attention to those
 Who turn (in friendship)
 To such as have the Wrath
 Of God upon them?
 They are neither of you
 Nor of them, and they
 Swear to falsehood knowingly.

15. God has prepared for them
 A severe Penalty: evil
 Indeed are their deeds.

16. They have made their oaths
 A screen (for their misdeeds):
 Thus they obstruct (men)
 From the Path of God:
 Therefore shall they have
 A humiliating Penalty.

17. Of no profit whatever
 To them, against God,
 Will be their riches
 Nor their sons:

[p. 1517]

They will be Companions
 Of the Fire, to dwell
 Therein (for aye)!

18. One Day will God
 Raise them all up
 (For Judgment): then
 Will they swear to Him
 As they swear to you:
 And they think that they
 Have something (to stand upon).
 No, indeed! they are
 But liars!

19. The Evil One has
 Got the better of them:
 So he has made them
 Lose the remembrance
 Of God. They are the Party
 Of the Evil One. Truly,
 It is the Party
 Of the Evil One
 That will perish!

20. Those who resist
 God and His Apostle
 Will be among those
 Most humiliated.

21. God has decreed:
 "It is I and My apostles
 Who must prevail":
 For God is One
 Full of strength,
 Able to enforce His Will.

[p. 1518]

22. Thou wilt not find
 Any people who believe
 In God and the Last Day,
 Loving those who resist
 God and His Apostle,
 Even though they were
 Their fathers or their sons,
 Or their brothers, or
 Their kindred. For such
 He has written Faiths
 In their hearts, and strengthened
 Them with a spirit
 From Himself. And He
 Will admit them to Gardens
 Beneath which Rivers flow,
 To dwell therein (for ever).
 God will be well pleased
 With them, and they with Him.
 They are the Party
 Of God. Truly it is
 The Party of God that
 Will achieve Felicity.

[p. 1519]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1520]

  

Sura LIX.

  

Hashr, or The Gathering

  

(or Banishment, lix. 2-3).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Whatever is
 In the heavens and
 On earth, let it declare
 The Praises and Glory
 Of God: for He is
 The Exalted in Might,
 The Wise.

2. It is He Who got out
 The Unbelievers among
 The People of the Book
 From their homes
 At the first gathering
 (Of the forces).
 Little did ye think
 That they would get out:
 And they thought
 That their fortresses
 Would defend them from God!
 But the (Wrath of) God

[p. 1521]

Came to them from quarters
 From which they little
 Expected (it), and cast
 Terror into their hearts,
 So that they destroyed
 Their dwellings by their own
 Hands and the hands
 Of the Believers.
 Take warning, then,
 O ye with eyes (to see)!

3. And had it not been
 That God had decreed
 Banishment for them,
 He would certainly have
 Punished them in this world:
 And in the Hereafter
 They shall (certainly) have
 The Punishment of the Fire.

4. That is because they
 Resisted God and His Apostle:
 And if any one resists God,
 Verily God is severe
 In Punishment.

[p. 1522]

5. Whether ye cut down
 (O ye Muslims!)
 The tender palm-trees,
 Or ye left them standing
 On their roots, it was
 By leave of God, and
 In order that He might
 Cover with shame
 The rebellious transgressors.

6. What God has bestowed
 On His Apostle (and taken
 Away) from them--for this
 Ye made no expedition
 With either cavalry or camelry:
 But God gives power
 To His apostles over
 Any He pleases: and God
 Has power over all things.

7. What God has bestowed
 On His Apostle (and taken
 Away) from the people
 Of the townships,--belongs

[p. 1523]

To God,--to His Apostle
 And to kindred and orphans,
 The needy and the wayfarer;
 In order that it may not
 (Merely) make a circuit
 Between the wealthy among you.
 So take what the Apostle
 Assigns to you, and deny
 Yourselves that which he
 Withholds from you.
 And fear God; for God
 Is strict in Punishment.

8. (Some part is due)
 To the indigent Muhajirs,
 Those who were expelled
 From their homes and their property,
 While seeking Grace from God
 And (His) Good Pleasure,
 And aiding God and His Apostle:
 Such are indeed
 The sincere ones;--

9. But those who
 Before them, had homes
 (In Medina)
 And had adopted the Faith,--
 Show their affection to such
 As came to them for refuge,
 And entertain no desire
 In their hearts for things

[p. 1524]

Given to the (latter),
 But give them preference
 Over themselves, even though
 Poverty was their (own lot).
 And those saved from
 The covetousness of their own
 Souls,--they are the ones
 That achieve prosperity.

10. And those who came
 After them say: "Our Lord!
 Forgive us, and our brethren
 Who came before us
 Into the Faith,
 And leave not,
 In our hearts,
 Rancour (or sense of injury)
 Against those who have believed.
 Our Lord! Thou art
 Indeed Full of Kindness,
 Most Merciful."

  

SECTION 2.

11. Hast thou not observed
 The Hypocrites say
 To their misbelieving brethren
 Among the People of the Book?--
 "If ye are expelled,
 We too will go out
 With you, and we will
 Never hearken, to any one
 In your affair; and if
 Ye are attacked (in fight)

[p. 1525]

We will help you".
 But God is witness
 That they are indeed liars.

12. If they are expelled,
 Never will they go out
 With them; and if they
 Are attacked (in fight),
 They will never help them;
 And if they do help them,
 They will turn their backs;
 So they will receive no help.

13. Of a truth ye are
 Stronger (than they)
 Because of the terror
 In their hearts,
 (Sent) by God.
 This is because they are
 Men devoid of understanding.

14. They will not fight you
 (Even) together, except
 In fortified townships,
 Or from behind walls.
 Strong is their fighting (spirit)
 Amongst themselves:
 Thou wouldst think
 They were united,
 But their hearts are divided:
 That is because they

[p. 1526]

Are a people devoid
 Of wisdom.

15. Like those who lately
 Preceded them, they have
 Tasted the evil result
 Of their conduct; and
 (In the Hereafter there is)
 For them a grievous Penalty;--

16. (Their allies deceived them),
 Like the Evil One,
 When he says to man,
 "Deny God": but when
 (Man) denies God,
 (The Evil One) says,
 "I am free of thee:
 I do fear God,
 The Lord of the Worlds!"

17. The end of both will be
 That they will go
 Into the Fire, dwelling
 Therein for ever.
 Such is the reward
 Of the wrong-doers.

  

SECTION 3.

18. O ye who believe!
 Fear God,

[p. 1527]

And let every soul look
 To what (provision) he has
 Sent forth for the morrow.
 Yea, fear God:
 For God is well-acquainted
 With (all) that ye do.

19. And be ye not like
 Those who forgot God;
 And He made them forget
 Their own souls! Such
 Are the rebellious transgressors!

20. Not equal are
 The Companions of the Fire
 And the Companions
 Of the Garden:
 It is the Companions
 Of the Garden,
 That will achieve Felicity.

21. Had We sent down
 This Qur-an on a mountain,
 Verily, thou wouldst have seen
 It humble itself and cleave

[p. 1528]

Asunder for fear of God.
 Such are the similitudes
 Which We propound to men,
 That they may reflect.

22. God is He, than Whom
 There is no other god;--
 Who knows (all things)
 Both secret and open;
 He, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

23. God is He, than Whom
 There is no other god;--
 The Sovereign, the Holy One,
 The Source of Peace
 (and Perfection),
 The Guardian of Faith,
 The Preserver of Safety,
 The Exalted in Might,
 The Irresistible, the Supreme:

[p. 1529]

Glory to God!
 (High is He)
 Above the partners
 They attribute to Him.

24. He is God, the Creator,
 The Evolver,
 The Bestower of Forms
 (Or Colours).
 To Him belongs
 The Most Beautiful Names:
 Whatever is in
 The heavens and on earth,
 Doth declare
 His Praises and Glory:
 And He is the Exalted
 In Might, the Wise.

[p. 1530]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1531]

  

Sura LX.

  

Mumtahana, or the Woman to be Examined.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most, Merciful.

1. O ye who believe!
 Take not My enemies
 And yours as friends
 (Or protectors),--offering them
 (Your) love, even though
 They have rejected the Truth
 That has come to you,
 And have (on the contrary)
 Driven out the Prophet
 And yourselves (from your homes),
 (Simply) because ye believe
 In God your Lord!
 If ye have come out
 To strive in My Way
 And to seek My Good Pleasure,
 (Take them not as friends),
 Holding secret converse
 Of love (and friendship)
 With them: for I know
 Full well all that ye
 Conceal and all that ye
 Reveal. And any of you
 That does this has strayed
 From the Straight Path.

2. If they were to get
 The better of you,

[p. 1532]

They would behave to you
 As enemies, and stretch forth
 Their hands and their tongues
 Against you for evil;
 And they desire that ye
 Should reject the Truth.

3. Of no profit to you
 Will be your relatives
 And your children
 On the Day of Judgment:
 He will judge between you:
 For God sees well
 All that ye do.

4. There is for you
 An excellent example (to follow)
 In Abraham and those with him,
 When they said
 To their people:
 "We are clear of you
 And of whatever ye worship
 Besides God: we have rejected
 You, and there has arisen,
 Between us and you, enmity
 And hatred for ever,--unless
 Ye believe in God
 And Him alone":
 But not when Abraham
 Said to his father:
 "I will pray for forgiveness

[p. 1533]

For thee, though I have
 No power (to get) aught
 On thy behalf from God."
 (They prayed): "Our Lord!
 In Thee do we trust,
 And to Thee do we turn
 In repentance: to Thee
 Is (our) final Goal.

5. "Our Lord! Make us not
 A (test and) trial
 For the Unbelievers,
 But forgive us, our Lord!
 For Thou art the Exalted
 In Might, the Wise."

6. There was indeed in them
 An excellent example for you
 To follow,--for those
 Whose hope is in God
 And in the Last Day.
 But if any turn away,
 Truly God is Free of all
 Wants, Worthy of all Praise.

  

SECTION 2.

7. It may be that God
 Will grant love (and friendship)
 Between you and those whom
 Ye (now) hold as enemies.
 For God has power
 (Over all things); And God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

[p. 1534]

8. God forbids you not,
 With regard to those who
 Fight you not for (your) Faith
 Nor drive you out
 Of your homes,
 From dealing kindly and justly
 With them: For God loveth
 Those who are just.

9. God only forbids you,
 With regard to those who
 Fight you for (your) Faith,
 And drive you out
 Of your homes, and support
 (Others) in driving you out,
 From turning to them
 (For friendship and protection).
 It is such as turn to them
 (In these circumstances),
 That do wrong.

10. O ye who believe!
 When there come to you
 Believing women refugees,
 Examine (and test) them:
 God knows best as to
 Their Faith: if ye ascertain
 That they are Believers,
 Then send them not back
 To the Unbelievers.
 They are not lawful (wives)

[p. 1535]

For the Unbelievers, nor are
 The (Unbelievers) lawful (husbands)
 For them. But pay
 The Unbelievers what they
 Have spent (on their dower).
 And there will be no blame
 On you if ye marry them
 On payment of their dower
 To them. But hold not
 To the guardianship of
 Unbelieving women: ask
 For what ye have spent
 On their dowers, and let
 The (Unbelievers) ask for
 What they have spent
 (On the dowers of women
 Who come over to you).
 Such is the command
 Of God: He judges
 (With justice) between you.
 And God is Full of
 Knowledge and Wisdom.

11. And if any
 Of your wives deserts you
 To the Unbelievers,
 And ye have an accession
 (By the coming over of
 A woman from the other side),
 Then pay to those
 Whose wives have deserted

[p. 1536]

The equivalent of what they
 Had spent (on their dower).
 And fear God,
 In Whom ye believe.

12. O Prophet!
 When believing women come
 To thee to take the oath
 Of fealty to thee, that they
 Will not associate in worship
 Any other thing whatever
 With God, that they
 Will not steal, that they
 Will not commit adultery
 (Or fornication), that they
 Will not kill their children,
 That they will not utter
 Slander, intentionally forging
 Falsehood, and that they
 Will not disobey thee
 In any just matter,
 Then do thou receive
 Their fealty, and pray to God
 For the forgiveness (of
 Their sins): for God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

13. O ye who believe!
 Turn not (for friendship)
 To people on whom
 Is the Wrath of God.

[p. 1537]

Of the Hereafter they are
 Already in despair, just as
 The Unbelievers are
 In despair about those
 (Buried) in graves.

[p. 1538]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1539]

  

Sura LXI.

  

Saff, or Battle Array.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Whatever is
 In the heavens and
 On earth, let it declare
 The Praises and Glory
 Of God: for He is
 The Exalted in Might,
 The Wise.

2. O ye who believe!
 Why say ye that
 Which ye do not?

3. Grievously odious is it
 In the sight of God
 That ye say that
 Which ye do not.

4. Truly God loves those
 Who fight in His Cause
 In battle array, as if
 They were a solid
 Cemented structure.

5. And remember, Moses said
 To his people: "O my people!

[p. 1540]

Why do ye vex and insult
 Me, though ye know
 That I am the apostle
 Of God (sent) to you?"
 Then when they went wrong,
 God let their hearts go wrong.
 For God guides not those
 Who are rebellious transgressors.

6. And remember, Jesus,
 The son of Mary, said:
 "O Children of Israel!
 I am the apostle of God
 (Sent) to you, confirming
 The Law (which came)
 Before me, and giving
 Glad Tidings of an Apostle
 To come after me,
 Whose name shall be Ahmad."
 But when he came to them
 With Clear Signs,
 They said, "This is
 Evident sorcery!"

7. Who doth greater wrong
 Than one who invents

[p. 1541]

Falsehood against God,
 Even as he is being invited
 To Islam? And God
 Guides not those
 Who do wrong.

8. Their intention is
 To extinguish God's Light
 (By blowing) with their mouths:
 But God will complete
 (The revelation of) His Light,
 Even though the Unbelievers
 May detest (it).

9. It is He Who has sent
 His Apostle with Guidance
 And the Religion of Truth,
 That he may proclaim it
 Over all religion,
 Even though the Pagans
 May detest (it).

  

SECTION 2.

10. O ye who believe!
 Shall I lead you
 To a bargain that will
 Save you from
 A grievous Penalty?--

[p. 1542]

11. That ye believe in God
 And His Apostle, and that
 Ye strive (your utmost)
 In the Cause of God,
 With your property
 And your persons:
 That will be best for you,
 If ye but knew!

12. He will forgive you
 Your sins, and admit you
 To Gardens beneath which
 Rivers flow, and to beautiful
 Mansions in Gardens
 Of Eternity: that is indeed
 The supreme Achievement.

13. And another (favour
 Will He bestow), which ye
 Do love,--help from God
 And a speedy victory.
 So give the Glad Tidings
 To the Believers.

14. O ye who believe!
 Be ye helpers of God:
 As said Jesus the son of Mary
 To the Disciples, "Who will be
 My helpers to (the work
 Of) God?" Said the Disciples,

[p. 1543]

"We are God's helpers!"
 Then a portion of the Children
 Of Israel believed, and
 A portion disbelieved:
 But We gave power
 To those who believed,
 Against their enemies,
 And they became
 The ones that prevailed.

[p. 1544]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1545]

  

Sura LXII.

  

Jumu'a, or the Assembly (Friday) Prayer.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Whatever is
 In the heavens and
 On earth, doth declare
 The Praises and Glory
 Of God,--the Sovereign,
 The Holy One, the Exalted
 In Might, the Wise.

2. It is He Who has sent
 Amongst the Unlettered
 An apostle from among
 Themselves, to rehearse
 To them His Signs,
 To sanctify them, and
 To instruct them in Scripture
 And Wisdom,--although

[p. 1546]

They had been, before,
 In manifest error;--

3. As well as (to confer
 All these benefits upon)
 Others of them, who
 Have not already joined them:
 And He is Exalted
 In Might, Wise.

4. Such is the Bounty of God,
 Which He bestows
 On whom He will:
 And God is the Lord
 Of the highest bounty.

5. The similitude of those
 Who were charged
 With the (obligations
 Of the) Mosaic Law,
 But who subsequently failed
 In those (obligations), is
 That of a donkey
 Which carries huge tomes
 (But understands them not).
 Evil is the similitude
 Of people who falsify
 The Signs of God:
 And God guides not
 People who do wrong.

6. Say: "O ye that
 Stand on Judaism!

[p. 1547]

If ye think that ye
 Are friends to God,
 To the exclusion of
 (Other) men, then express
 Your desire for Death,
 If ye are truthful!"

7. But never will they
 Express their desire
 (For Death), because of
 The (deeds) their hands
 Have sent on before them!
 And God knows well
 Those that do wrong!

8. Say: "The Death from which
 Ye flee will truly
 Overtake you: then will
 Ye be sent back
 To the Knower of things
 Secret and open: and He
 Will tell you (the truth
 Of) the things that ye did!"

  

SECTION 2.

9. O ye who believe!
 When the call is proclaimed
 To prayer on Friday
 (The Day of Assembly),

[p. 1548]

Hasten earnestly to the
 Remembrance
 Of God, and leave off
 Business (and traffic):
 That is best for you
 If ye but knew!

10. And when the Prayer
 Is finished, then may ye
 Disperse through the land,
 And seek of the Bounty
 Of God: and celebrate
 The Praises of God
 Often (and without stint):
 That ye may prosper.

11. But when they see
 Some bargain or some
 Amusement, they disperse
 Headlong to it, and leave
 Thee standing. Say:
 "The (blessing) from the Presence
 Of God is better than
 Any amusement or bargain!
 And God is the Best
 To provide (for all needs)."

[p. 1549]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1550]

  

Sura LXIII.

  

Munafiqun, or the Hypocrites.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. When the Hypocrites
 Come to thee, they say,
 "We bear witness that thou
 Art indeed the Apostle
 Of God." Yea, God
 Knoweth that thou art
 Indeed His Apostle,
 And God beareth witness
 That the Hypocrites are
 Indeed liars.

2. They have made their oaths
 A screen (for their misdeeds):
 Thus they obstruct (men)
 From the Path of God:
 Truly evil are their deeds.

3. That is because they believed,
 Then they rejected Faith:
 So a seal was set
 On their hearts: therefore
 They understand not.

4. When thou lookest
 At them, their exteriors

[p. 1551]

Please thee; and when
 They speak, thou listenest
 To their words. They are
 As (worthless as hollow)
 Pieces of timber propped up,
 (Unable to stand on their own).
 They think that every
 Cry is against them.
 They are the enemies;
 So beware of them.
 The curse of God be
 On them! How are they
 Deluded (away from the Truth)!

5. And when it is said
 To them, "Come, the Apostle
 Of God will pray for your
 Forgiveness" they turn aside
 Their heads, and thou wouldst
 See them turning away
 Their faces in arrogance.

6. It is equal to them
 Whether thou pray for
 Their forgiveness or not.
 God will not forgive them.
 Truly God guides not
 Rebellious transgressors.

7. They are the ones who say,
 "Spend nothing on those
 Who are with God's Apostle,
 To the end that they

[p. 1552]

May disperse (and quit Medina)."
 But to God belong
 The treasures of the heavens
 And the earth; but
 The Hypocrites understand not.

8. They say, "If we
 Return to Medina, surely
 The more honourable (element)
 Will expel therefrom the meaner".
 But honour belongs to God
 And His Apostle, and
 To the Believers; but
 The Hypocrites know not.

  

SECTION 2.

9. O ye who believe!
 Let not your riches
 Or your children divert you
 From the remembrance of God.
 If any act thus,
 The loss is their own.

10. And spend something (in charity)
 Out of the substance
 Which We have bestowed
 On you, before Death
 Should come to any of you
 And he should say,
 "O my Lord! Why didst
 Thou not give me
 Respite for a little while?
 I should then have given

[p. 1553]

(Largely) in charity, and I
 Should have been one
 Of the doers of good".

11. But to no soul
 Will God grant respite
 When the time appointed
 (For it) has come; and God
 Is well acquainted
 With (all) that ye do.

[p. 1554]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1555]

  

Sura LXIV.

  

Tagabun, or Mutual Loss and Gain.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Whatever is
 In the heavens and
 On earth, doth declare
 The Praises and Glory
 Of God: to Him belongs
 Dominion, and to Him belongs
 Praise: and He has power
 Over all things.

2. It is He Who has
 Created you; and of you
 Are some that are
 Unbelievers, and some
 That are Believers:
 And God sees well
 All that ye do.

3. He has created the heavens
 And the earth
 In just proportions,
 And has given you shape,
 And made your shapes
 Beautiful: and to Him
 Is the final Goal.

[p. 1556]

4. He knows what is
 In the heavens
 And on earth;
 And He knows what
 Ye conceal and what
 Ye reveal: yea, God
 Knows well the (secrets)
 Of (all) hearts.

5. Has not the story
 Reached you, of those
 Who rejected Faith aforetime?
 So they tasted the evil
 Result of their conduct;
 And they had
 A grievous Penalty.

6. That was because there
 Came to them apostles
 With Clear Signs,
 But they said:
 "Shall (mere) human beings
 Direct us?" So they rejected
 (The Message) and turned away.
 But God can do without (them):
 And God is
 Free of all needs,
 Worthy of all praise.

7. The Unbelievers think
 That they will not be

[p. 1557]

Raised up (for Judgment).
 Say: "Yea, by my Lord,
 Ye shall surely be
 Raised up: then shall ye
 Be told (the truth) of
 All that ye did.
 And that is easy for God."

8. Believe, therefore, in God
 And His Apostle, and
 In the Light which We
 Have sent down. And God
 Is well acquainted
 With all that ye do.

9. The Day that He assembles
 You (all) for a Day
 Of Assembly,--that will be
 A day of mutual loss
 And gain (among you).
 And those who believe
 In God and work righteousness,--
 He will remove from them
 Their ills, and He will admit
 Them to gardens beneath which

[p. 1558]

Rivers flow, to dwell therein
 For ever: that will be
 The Supreme Achievement.

10. But those who reject Faith
 And treat Our Signs
 As falsehoods, they will be
 Companions of the Fire,
 To dwell therein for aye:
 And evil is that Goal.

  

SECTION 2.

11. No kind of calamity
 Can occur, except
 By the leave of God:
 And if any one believes
 In God, (God) guides his
 Heart (aright): for God
 Knows all things.

12. So obey God, and obey
 His Apostle: but if
 Ye turn back, the duty
 Of Our Apostle is but
 To proclaim (the Message)
 Clearly and openly.

13. God! There is no god
 But He: and on God,
 Therefore, let the Believers
 Put their trust.

14. O ye who believe!
 Truly, among your wives

[p. 1559]

And your children are (some
 That are) enemies to
 Yourselves: so beware
 Of them! But if ye
 Forgive and overlook,
 And cover up (their faults),
 Verily God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

15. Your riches and your children
 May be but a trial:
 But in the Presence of God,
 Is the highest Reward.

16. So fear God
 As much as ye can;
 Listen and obey;
 And spend in charity
 For the benefit of
 Your own souls.
 And those saved from
 The covetousness of their own

[p. 1560]

Souls,--they are the ones
 That achieve prosperity.

17. If ye loan to God
 A beautiful loan, He
 Will double it to
 Your (credit), and He
 Will grant you Forgiveness:
 For God is most Ready
 To appreciate (service)
 Most Forbearing,--

18. Knower of what is hidden
 And what is open,
 Exalted in Might,
 Full of Wisdom.

[p. 1561]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1562]

  

Sura LXV.

  

Talaq, or Divorce.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. O Prophet! When ye
 Do divorce women,
 Divorce them at their
 Prescribed periods,
 And count (accurately)
 Their prescribed periods:
 And fear God your Lord:
 And turn them not out
 Of their houses, nor shall
 They (themselves) leave,
 Except in case they are
 Guilty of some open lewdness,
 Those are limits
 Set by God: and any
 Who transgresses the limits
 Of God, does verily
 Wrong his (own) soul:
 Thou knowest not if

[p. 1563]

Perchance God will
 Bring about thereafter
 Some new situation.

2. Thus when they fulfil
 Their term appointed,
 Either take them back
 On equitable terms
 Or part with them
 On equitable terms;
 And take for witness
 Two persons from among you,
 Endued with justice,
 And establish the evidence
 (As) before God. Such
 Is the admonition given
 To him who believes
 In God and the Last Day.
 And for those who fear
 God, He (ever) prepares
 A way out,

3. And He provides for him
 From (sources) he never
 Could imagine. And if
 Any one puts his trust
 In God, sufficient is (God)
 For him. For God will

[p. 1564]

Surely accomplish His purpose:
 Verily, for all things
 Has God appointed
 A due proportion.

4. Such of your women
 As have passed the age
 Of monthly courses, for them
 The prescribed period, if ye
 Have any doubts, is
 Three months, and for those
 Who have no courses
 (It is the same):
 For those who carry
 (Life within their wombs),
 Their period is until
 They deliver their burdens:
 And for those who
 Fear God, He will
 Make their path easy.

5. That is the Command
 Of God, which He
 Has sent down to you:
 And if any one fears God,
 He will remove his ills
 From him, and will enlarge
 His reward.

6. Let the women live
 (In 'iddat) in the same

[p. 1565]

Style as ye live,
 According to your means:
 Annoy them not, so as
 To restrict them.
 And if they carry (life
 In their wombs), then
 Spend (your substance) on them
 Until they deliver
 Their burden: and if
 They suckle your (offspring),
 Give them their recompense:
 And take mutual counsel
 Together, according to
 What is just and reasonable.
 And if ye find yourselves
 In difficulties, let another
 Woman suckle (the child)
 On the (father's) behalf.

7. Let the man of means
 Spend according to
 His means: and the man
 Whose resources are restricted,
 Let him spend according
 To what God has given him.
 God puts no burden
 On any person beyond
 What He has given him.
 After a difficulty, God
 Will soon grant relief.

[p. 1566]

  

SECTION 2.

8. How many populations
 That insolently opposed
 The command of their Lord
 And of His apostles,
 Did We not then
 Call to account,
 To severe account?
 And We imposed on them
 An exemplary Punishment.

9. Then did they taste
 The evil result of
 Their conduct, and the End
 Of their conduct
 Was Perdition.

10. God has prepared for them
 A severe Punishment
 (In the Hereafter).
 Therefore fear God,
 O ye men of understanding--
 Who have believed!
 For God hath indeed
 Sent down to you
 A Message,--

11. An Apostle, who rehearses
 To you the Signs of God
 Containing clear explanations,
 That he may lead forth
 Those who believe
 And do righteous deeds

[p. 1567]

From the depths of Darkness
 Into Light. And those who
 Believe in God and work
 Righteousness, He will admit
 To Gardens beneath which rivers
 Flow, to dwell therein
 For ever: God has indeed
 Granted for them
 A most excellent provision.

12. God is He Who
 Created seven Firmaments
 And of the earth
 A similar number.
 Through the midst
 Of them (all) descends
 His Command: that ye may
 Know that God has power
 Over all things, and that
 God comprehends all things
 In (His) Knowledge.

[p. 1568]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1569]

  

Sura LXVI.

  

Tahrim, or Holding (something) to be Forbidden.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. O Prophet! Why
 Holdest thou to be forbidden
 That which God has
 Made lawful to thee?
 Thou seekest to please
 Thy consorts. But God
 Is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

2. God has already ordained
 For you, (O men),
 The dissolution of your oaths
 (In some cases): and God
 Is your Protector, and He
 Is Full of Knowledge
 And Wisdom.

3. When the Prophet disclosed
 A matter in confidence

[p. 1570]

To one of his consorts,
 And she then divulged it
 (To another), and God made it
 Known to him, he confirmed
 Part thereof and repudiated
 A part. Then when he
 Told her thereof, she said,
 "Who told thee this?"
 He said, "He told me
 Who knows and is well-acquainted
 (With all things)"

4. If ye two turn in repentance
 To Him, your hearts
 Are indeed so inclined;
 But if ye back up
 Each other against him,
 Truly God is his Protector,
 And Gabriel, and (every)
 Righteous one among those
 Who believe,--and furthermore,
 The angels--will back (him) up.

5. It may be, if he
 Divorced you (all)

[p. 1571]

That God will give him
 In exchange Consorts
 Better than you,
 Who submit (their wills),
 Who believe, who are devout,
 Who turn to God in repentance,
 Who worship (in humility),
 Who travel (for Faith) and fast,--
 Previously married or virgins.

6. O ye who believe!
 Save yourselves and your
 Families from a Fire
 Whose fuel is Men
 And Stones, over which
 Are (appointed) angels
 Stern (and) severe,
 Who flinch not (from
 Executing) the Commands
 They receive from God,
 But do (precisely) what
 They are commanded.

7. (They will say),
 "O ye Unbelievers!
 Make no excuses
 This Day! Ye are being

[p. 1572]

But requited for
 All that ye did!"

  

SECTION 2.

8. O ye who believe!
 Turn to God
 With sincere repentance:
 In the hope that
 Your Lord will remove
 From you your ills
 And admit you to Gardens
 Beneath which Rivers flow,--
 The Day that God
 Will not permit
 To be humiliated
 The Prophet and those
 Who believe with him.
 Their Light will run
 Forward before them
 And by their right hands,
 While they say, "Our Lord!
 Perfect our Light for us,
 And grant us Forgiveness:
 For Thou hast power
 Over all things."

9. O Prophet! Strive hard
 Against the Unbelievers
 And the Hypocrites,
 And be firm against them.

[p. 1573]

Their abode is Hell,--
 An evil refuge (indeed).

10. God sets forth,
 For an example
 To the Unbelievers,
 The wife of Noah
 And the wife of Lut:
 They were (respectively)
 Under two of our righteous
 Servants, but they were
 False to their (husbands),
 And they profited nothing
 Before God on their account,
 But were told: "Enter ye
 The Fire along with
 (Others) that enter!"

11. And God sets forth,
 As an example
 To those who believe,
 The wife of Pharaoh:

[p. 1574]

Behold she said:
 "O my Lord! build
 For me, in nearness
 To Thee, a mansion
 In the Garden,
 And save me from Pharaoh
 And his doings,
 And save me from
 Those that do wrong";

12. And Mary the daughter
 Of 'Imran, who guarded
 Her chastity; and We
 Breathed into (her body)
 Of Our spirit; and she
 Testified to the truth
 Of the words of her Lord
 And of his Revelations,
 And was one of the
 Devout (servants).

[p. 1575]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1576]

  

Sura LXVII.

  

Mulk, or Dominion.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Blessed be He
 In Whose hands
 Is Dominion;
 And He over all things
 Hath Power;--

2. He Who created Death
 And Life, that He
 May try which of you
 Is best in deed:
 And He is the Exalted
 In Might, Oft-Forgiving;--

[p. 1577]

3. He Who created
 The seven heavens
 One above another:
 No want of proportion
 Wilt thou see
 In the Creation
 Of (God) Most Gracious.
 So turn thy vision again:
 Seest thou any flaw?

4. Again turn thy vision
 A second time: (thy) vision
 Will come back to thee
 Dull and discomfited,
 In a state worn out.

5. And We have,
 (From of old),
 Adorned the lowest heaven
 With Lamps, and We
 Have made such (Lamps)
 (As) missiles to drive
 Away the Evil Ones,
 And have prepared for them
 The Penalty
 Of the Blazing Fire.

6. For those who reject
 Their Lord (and Cherisher)

[p. 1578]

Is the Penalty of Hell:
 And evil is (such) destination.

7. When they are cast therein,
 They will hear
 The (terrible) drawing in
 Of its breath
 Even as it blazes forth,

8. Almost bursting with fury:
 Every time a Group
 Is cast therein, its Keepers
 Will ask, "Did no Warner
 Come to you?"

9. They will say: "Yes indeed;
 A Warner did come to us,
 But we rejected him
 And said, "God never
 Sent down any (Message):
 Ye are innothing but
 An egregious delusion!"

10. They will further say:
 "Had we but listened
 Or used our intelligence,
 We should not (now)

[p. 1579]

Be among the Companions
 Of the Blazing Fire!"

11. They will then confess
 Their sins: but far
 Will be (Forgiveness)
 From the Companions
 Of the Blazing Fire!

12. As for those who
 Fear their Lord unseen,
 For them is Forgiveness
 And a great Reward.

13. And whether ye hide
 Your word or publish it,
 He certainly has (full) knowledge,
 Of the secrets of (all) hearts.

14. Should He not know,--
 He that created?
 And He is the One
 That understands the finest
 Mysteries (and) is
 Well-acquainted (with them).

  

SECTION 2.

15. It is He Who has
 Made the earth manageable

[p. 1580]

For you, so traverse
 Ye through its tracts
 And enjoy of the Sustenance
 Which He furnishes: but
 Unto Him is the Resurrection.

16. Do ye feel secure that
 He Who is in Heaven
 Will not cause you
 To be swallowed up
 By the earth when it
 Shakes (as in an earthquake)?

17. Or do ye feel secure
 That He Who is in Heaven
 Will not send against you
 A violent tornado
 (With showers of stones),
 So that ye shall
 Know how (terrible)
 Was My warning?

18. But indeed men before them
 Rejected (My warning):
 Then how (terrible) was
 My rejection (of them)?

19. Do they not observe
 The birds above them,

[p. 1581]

Spreading their wings
 And folding them in?
 None can uphold them
 Except (God) Most Gracious:
 Truly it is He
 That watches over all things.

20. Nay, who is there
 That can help you,
 (Even as) an army,
 Besides (God) Most Merciful?
 In nothing but delusion
 Are the Unbelievers.

21. Or who is there
 That can provide you
 With Sustenance if He
 Were to withhold His provision?
 Nay, they obstinately persist
 In insolent impiety
 And flight (from the Truth).

22. Is then one who
 Walks headlong, with his face
 Grovelling, better guided,--
 Or one who walks
 Evenly on a Straight Way?

[p. 1582]

23. Say: "It is He Who
 Has created you (and made
 You grow), and made
 For you the faculties
 Of hearing, seeing,
 Feeling and understanding:
 Little thanks it is ye give.

24. Say: "It is He Who
 Has multiplied you
 Through the earth,
 And to Him shall ye
 Be gathered together."

25. They ask: When will
 This promise be (fulfilled)?--
 If ye are telling
 The truth.

26. Say: "As to the knowledge
 Of the time, it is
 With God alone:
 I am (sent) only
 To warn plainly in public."

27. At length, when they
 See it close at hand,
 Grieved will be the faces
 Of the Unbelievers,

[p. 1583]

And it will be said
 (To them): "This is
 (The promise fulfilled),
 Which ye were calling for!"

28. Say: "See ye?--
 If God were
 To destroy me,
 And those with me,
 Or if He bestows
 His Mercy on us,--
 Yet who can deliver
 The Unbelievers from
 A grievous Penalty?"

29. Say: "He is (God)
 Most Gracious: we have
 Believed in Him,
 And on Him have we
 Put our trust:
 So, soon will ye know
 Which (of us) it is
 That is in manifest error."

30. Say: "See ye?--
 If your stream be
 Some morning lost
 (In the underground earth),
 Who then can supply you
 With clear-flowing water?"

[p. 1584]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1585]

  

Sura LXVIII.

  

Qalam, or the Pen, or Nun.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Nun. By the Pen
 And by the (Record)
 Which (men) write,--

2. Thou art not,
 By the grace of thy Lord,
 Mad or possessed.

3. Nay, verily for thee
 Is a Reward unfailing:

4. And thou (standest)
 On an exalted standard
 Of character.

[p. 1586]

5. Soon wilt thou see,
 And they will see,

6. Which of you is
 Afflicted with madness.

7. Verily it is thy Lord
 That knoweth best,
 Which (among men)
 Hath strayed from His Path:
 And He knoweth best
 Those who receive
 (True) Guidance.

8. So hearken not
 To those who
 Deny (the Truth),

9. Their desire is that
 Thou shouldst be pliant:
 So would they be pliant.

10. Heed not the type
 Of despicable man,--
 Ready with oaths,

[p. 1587]

11. A slanderer, going about
 With calumnies,

12. (Habitually) hindering (all) good,
 Transgressing beyond bounds,
 Deep in sin,

13. Violent (and cruel),--
 With all that, base-born,--

14. Because he possesses
 Wealth and (numerous) sons.

15. When to him are rehearsed
 Our Signs,
 "Tales of the Ancients",
 He cries!

16. Soon shall We brand
 (The beast) on the snout!

17. Verily We have tried them
 As We tried the People

[p. 1588]

Of the Garden,
 When they resolved to gather
 The fruits of the (garden)
 In the morning,

18. But made no reservation,
 ("If it be God's Will").

19. Then there came
 On the (garden)
 A visitation from thy Lord,
 (Which swept away) all around,
 While they were asleep.

20. So the (garden) became,
 By the morning, like
 A dark and desolate spot,
 (Whose fruit had been gathered).

21. As the morning broke,
 They called out,
 One to another,--

22. "Go ye to your tilth
 (Betimes) in the morning,

[p. 1589]

If ye would gather
 The fruits."

23. So they departed, conversing
 In secret low tones, (saying)--

24. "Let not a single indigent
 Person break in upon you
 Into the (garden) this day."

25. And they opened the morning,
 Strong in an (unjust) resolve.

26. But when they saw
 The (garden), they said:
 "We have surely lost our way:

27. "Indeed we are shut out
 (Of the fruits of our labour)!"

28. Said one of them,
 More just (than the rest):
 "Did I not say to you,
 "Why not glorify (God)?"

29. They said: "Glory
 To our Lord! Verily we
 Have been doing wrong!"

[p. 1590]

30. Then they turned, one
 Against another, in reproach.

31. They said: "Alas for us!
 We have indeed transgressed!

32. "It may be that our Lord
 Will give us in exchange
 A better (garden) than this:
 For we do turn to Him
 (In repentance)!"

33. Such is the Punishment
 (In this life); but greater
 Is the Punishment
 In the Hereafter,--
 If only they knew!

[p. 1591]

  

SECTION 2.

34. Verily, for the Righteous,
 Are Gardens of Delight,
 In the Presence
 Of their Lord.

35. Shall We then treat
 The People of Faith
 Like the People of Sin?

36. What is the matter
 With you? How judge ye?

37. Or have ye a Book
 Through which ye learn--

38. That ye shall have,
 Through it whatever
 Ye choose?

39. Or have ye Covenants
 With Us on oath,
 Reaching to the Day
 Of Judgment, (providing)
 That ye shall have
 Whatever ye shall demand?

[p. 1592]

40. Ask thou of them,
 Which of them will stand
 Surety for that!

41. Or have they some
 "Partners" (in Godhead)?
 Then let them produce
 Their "partners",
 If they are truthful!

42. The Day that the Shin
 Shall be laid bare,
 And they shall be summoned
 To bow in adoration,
 But they shall not be able,--

43. Their eyes will be
 Cast down,--ignominy will
 Cover them; seeing that
 They had been summoned
 Aforetime to bow in adoration,
 While they were whole,
 (And had refused).

44. Then leave Me alone
 With such as reject
 This Message: by degrees
 Shall We punish them

[p. 1593]

From directions they perceive not.

45. A (long) respite will I
 Grant them: truly
 Powerful is My Plan.

46. Or is it that thou dost
 Ask them for a reward,
 So that they are burdened
 With a load of debt?--

47. Or that the Unseen
 Is in their hands, so that
 They can write it down?

48. So wait with patience
 For the Command
 Of thy Lord, and be not
 Like the Companion
 Of the Fish,--when he
 Cried out in agony.

49. Had not Grace
 From His Lord
 Reached him, he
 Would indeed have been

[p. 1594]

Cast off on the naked
 Shore, in disgrace.

50. Thus did his Lord
 Choose him and make him
 Of the company
 Of the Righteous.

51. And the Unbelievers
 Would almost trip thee up
 With their eyes when they
 Hear the Message; and they
 Say: "Surely he is possessed!"

52. But it is nothing less
 Than a Message
 To all the worlds.

[p. 1595]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1596]

  

Sura LXIX.

  

Haqqa, or the Sure Reality.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. The Sure Reality!

2. What is the Sure Reality?

3. And what will make
 Thee realise what
 The Sure Reality is?

4. The Thamud
 And the 'Ad people
 (Branded) as false
 The Stunning Calamity!

5. But the Thamud,--
 They were destroyed
 By a terrible Storm
 Of thunder and lightning!

6. And the 'Ad,--
 They were destroyed
 By a furious Wind,
 Exceedingly violent;

[p. 1597]

7. He made it rage
 Against them seven nights
 And eight days in succession:
 So that thou couldst see
 The (whole) people lying
 Prostrate in its (path),
 As if they had been
 Roots of hollow palm-trees
 Tumbled down!

8. Then seest thou any
 Of them left surviving?

9. And Pharaoh,
 And those before him,
 And the Cities Overthrown,
 Committed habitual Sin,

10. And disobeyed (each)
 The apostle of their Lord;
 So He punished them
 With an abundant Penalty.

11. We, when the water
 (Of Noah's Flood) overflowed
 Beyond its limits,
 Carried you (mankind),
 In the floating (Ark),

[p. 1598]

12. That We might
 Make it a Message
 Unto you, and that ears
 (That should hear the tale
 And) retain its memory
 Should bear its (lessons)
 In remembrance.

13. Then, when one
 Blast is sounded
 On the Trumpet,

14. And the earth is moved,
 And its mountains,
 And they are crushed to powder
 At one stroke,--

15. On that Day
 Shall the (Great) Event
 Come to pass,

16. And the sky will be
 Rent asunder, for it will
 That Day be flimsy,

17. And the angels will be
 On its sides,

[p. 1599]

And eight will, that Day,
 Bear the Throne
 Of thy Lord above them.

18. That Day shall ye be
 Brought to Judgment:
 Not an act of yours
 That ye hide will be hidden.

19. Then he that will be
 Given his Record
 In his right hand
 Will say: "Ah here!
 Read ye my Record!

20. "I did really understand
 That my Account would
 (One Day) reach me!"

21. And he will be
 In a life of Bliss,

22. In a Garden on high,

23. The Fruits whereof
 (Will hang in bunches)
 Low and near.

24. "Eat ye and drink ye,
 With full satisfaction;

[p. 1600]

Because of the (good)
 That ye sent before you,
 In the days that are gone!"

25. And he that will
 Be given his Record
 In his left hand,
 Will say: "Ah! would
 That my record had not
 Been given to me!

26. "And that I had never
 Realised how
 My account (stood)!

27. "Ah! would that (Death)
 Had made an end of me!

28. "Of no profit to me
 Has been my wealth!

29. "My power has
 Perished from me!"...

30. (The stern command will say):
 "Seize ye him,
 And bind ye him,

[p. 1601]

31. "And burn ye him
 In the Blazing Fire.

32. "Further, make him march
 In a chain, whereof
 The length is seventy cubits!

33. "This was he that
 Would not believe
 In God Most High,

34. "And would not encourage
 The feeding of the indigent!

35. "So no friend hath he
 Here this Day.

36. "Nor hath he any food
 Except the corruption
 From the washing of wounds,

37. "Which none do eat
 But those in sin."

[p. 1602]

  

SECTION 2.

38. So I do
 Call to witness
 What ye see

39. And what ye see not,

40. That this is
 Verily the word
 Of an honoured apostle;

41. It is not the word
 Of a poet:
 Little it is
 Ye believe!

42. Nor is it the word
 Of a soothsayer:
 Little admonition it is
 Ye receive.

43. (This is) a Message
 Sent down from the Lord
 Of the Worlds.

44. And if the apostle
 Were to invent
 Any sayings in Our name,

[p. 1603]

45. We should certainly seize him
 By his right hand,

46. And We should certainly
 Then cut off the artery
 Of his heart:

47. Nor could any of you
 Withhold him
 (From Our wrath).

48. But verily this
 Is a Message for
 The God-fearing.

49. And We certainly know
 That there are amongst you
 Those that reject (it).

50. But truly (Revelation)
 Is a cause of sorrow
 For the Unbelievers.

51. But verily it is Truth
 Of assured certainty.

52. So glorify the name
 Of thy Lord Most High.

[p. 1604]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1605]

  

Sura LXX.

  

Ma'arij, or the Ways of Ascent.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. A questioner asked
 About a Penalty
 To befall--

2. The Unbelievers,
 The which there is none
 To ward off,--

3. (A Penalty) from God,
 Lord of the Ways
 Of Ascent.

4. The angels and
 The Spirit ascend
 Unto Him in a Day
 The measure whereof
 Is (as) fifty thousand years:

[p. 1606]

5. Therefore do thou hold
 Patience,--a Patience
 Of beautiful (contentment).

6. They see the (Day) indeed
 As a far-off (event):

7. But We see it
 (Quite) near.

8. The Day that
 The sky will be like
 Molten brass,

9. And the mountains will be
 Like wool,

10. And no friend will ask
 After a friend,

11. Though they will be put
 In sight of each other,--
 The sinner's desire will be:
 Would that he could

[p. 1607]

Redeem himself from
 The Penalty of that Day
 By (sacrificing) his children,

12. His wife and his brother,

13. His kindred who sheltered him,

14. And all, all that is
 On earth,--so it could
 Deliver him:

15. By no means!
 For it would be
 The Fire of Hell!--

16. Plucking out (his being)
 Right to the skull!--

17. Inviting (all) such
 As turn their backs
 And turn away their faces
 (From the Right),

18. And collect (wealth)
 And hide it (from use)!

[p. 1608]

19. Truly man was created
 Very impatient;--

20. Fretful when evil
 Touches him;

21. And niggardly when
 Good reaches him;--

22. Not so those devoted
 To Prayer;--

23. Those who remain steadfast
 To their prayer;

24. And those in whose wealth
 Is a recognised right

25. For the (needy) who asks
 And him who is prevented
 (For some reason from asking);

26. And those who hold
 To the truth of the Day
 Of Judgment;

[p. 1609]

27. And those who fear
 The displeasure of their Lord,--

28. For their Lord's displeasure
 Is the opposite of Peace
 And Tranquillity;--

29. And those who guard
 Their chastity,

30. Except with their wives
 And the (captives) whom
 Their right hands possess,--
 For (then) they are not
 To be blamed,

31. But those who trespass
 Beyond this are transgressors;--

32. And those who respect
 Their trusts and covenants;

33. And those who stand firm
 In their testimonies;

[p. 1610]

34. And those who guard
 (The sacredness) of their
 worship;--

35. Such will be
 The honoured ones
 In the Gardens (of Bliss).

  

SECTION 2.

36. Now what is
 The matter with the Unbelievers
 That they rush madly
 Before thee--

37. From the right
 And from the left,
 In crowds?

38. Does every man of them
 Long to enter
 The Garden of Bliss?

39. By no means!
 For We have created them
 Out of the (base matter)
 They know!

40. Now I do
 Call to witness

[p. 1611]

The Lord of all points
 In the East and the West
 That We can certainly--

41. Substitute for them
 Better (men) than they;
 And We are not
 To be defeated
 (In Our Plan).

42. So leave them
 To plunge in vain talk
 And play about,
 Until they encounter
 That Day of theirs which
 They have been promised!--

43. The Day whereon
 They will issue
 From their sepulchres
 In sudden haste
 As if they were
 Rushing to a goal-post
 (Fixed for them),--

44. Their eyes lowered
 In dejection,
 Ignominy covering them
 (All over)!
 Such is the Day
 The which they
 Are promised!

[p. 1612]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1613]

  

Sura LXXI.

  

Nuh, or Noah.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. We sent Noah
 To his People
 (With the Command):
 "Do thou warn thy People
 Before there comes to them
 A grievous Penalty."

2. He said: "O my People!
 I am to you
 A Warner, clear and open:

3. "That ye should worship
 God, fear Him,
 And obey me:

4. "So He may forgive you
 Your sins and give you
 Respite for a stated Term:
 For when the Term given
 By God is accomplished,
 It cannot be put forward:
 If ye only knew."

5. He, said: "O my Lord!
 I have called to my People
 Night and day:

[p. 1614]

6. "But my call only
 Increases (their) flight
 (From the Right).

7. "And every time I have
 Called to them, that Thou
 Mightest forgive them,
 They have (only) thrust
 Their fingers into their ears,
 Covered themselves up with
 Their garments, grown obstinate,
 And given themselves up
 To arrogance.

8. "So I have called to them
 Aloud;

9. "Further I have spoken
 To them in public
 And secretly in private,

10. "Saying, "Ask forgiveness
 From your Lord;
 For He is Oft-Forgiving;

11. "He will send rain
 To you in abundance;

[p. 1615]

12. Give you increase
 In wealth and sons;
 And bestow on you
 Gardens and bestow on you
 Rivers (of flowing water).

13. "What is the matter
 With you, that ye
 Place not your hope
 For kindness and long-suffering
 In God,--

14. "Seeing that it is He
 That has created you
 In diverse stages?

15. "See ye not
 How God has created
 The seven heavens
 One above another,

16. "And made the moon
 A light in their midst,
 And made the sun
 As a (Glorious) Lamp?

17. "And God has produced
 You from the earth,
 Growing (gradually),

[p. 1616]

18. "And in the End
 He will return you
 Into the (earth),
 And raise you forth
 (Again at the Resurrection)?

19. "And God has made
 The earth for you
 As a carpet (spread out),

20. "That ye may go about
 Therein, in spacious roads."

  

SECTION 2.

21. Noah said: "O my Lord!
 They have disobeyed me,
 But they follow (men)
 Whose wealth and children
 Give them no Increase
 But only Loss.

22. "And they have devised
 A tremendous Plot.

23. "And they have said
 (To each other),
 "Abandon not your gods:
 Abandon neither Wadd
 Nor Suwa', neither
 Yaguth nor Ya'uq,
 Nor Nasr';--

[p. 1617]

24. "They have already
 Misled many; and
 Grant Thou no increase
 To the wrong-doers but in
 Straying (from their mark)."

25. Because of their sins
 They were drowned
 (In the flood),
 And were made to enter
 The Fire (of Punishment):
 And they found
 In lieu of God
 None to help them.

26. And Noah said:
 "O my Lord! Leave not
 Of the Unbelievers,
 A single one on earth!

27. "For, if Thou dost leave
 (Any of) them, they will
 But mislead Thy devotees,
 And they will breed none
 But wicked ungrateful ones.

28. "O my Lord! Forgive me,
 My parents, all who
 Enter my house in Faith,
 And (all) believing men

[p. 1618]

And believing women:
 And to the wrong-doers
 Grant Thou no increase
 But in Perdition!"

[p. 1619] [p. 1620] [p. 1621] [p. 1622] [p. 1623] [p. 1624]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1625]

  

Sura LXXII.

  

Jinn, or the Spirits.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Say: It has been
 Revealed to me that
 A company of Jinns
 Listened (to the Qur-an).
 They said, 'We have
 Really heard a wonderful Recital!

2. 'It gives guidance
 To the Right,
 And we have believed therein:
 We shall not join (in worship)
 Any (gods) with our Lord.

3. 'And exalted is the Majesty
 Of our Lord: He has
 Taken neither a wife
 Nor a son.

4. 'There were some foolish ones
 Among us, who used
 To utter extravagant lies
 Against God;

5. 'But we do think
 That no man or spirit

[p. 1626]

Should say aught that is
 Untrue against God.

6. 'True, there were persons
 Among mankind who took shelter
 With persons among the Jinns,
 But they increased them
 In folly.

7. 'And they (came to) think
 As ye thought, that God
 Would not raise up
 Any one (to Judgment).

8. 'And we pried into
 The secrets of heaven;
 But we found it filled
 With stern guards
 And flaming fires.

9. 'We used, indeed, to sit there
 In (hidden) stations, to (steal)
 A hearing; but any
 Who listens now
 Will find a flaming fire
 Watching him in ambush.

[p. 1627]

10. 'And we understand not
 Whether ill is intended
 To those on earth,
 Or whether their Lord
 (Really) intends to guide
 Them to right conduct.

11. 'There are among us
 Some that are righteous,
 And some the contrary:
 We follow divergent paths.

12. 'But we think that we
 Can by no means frustrate
 God throughout the earth,
 Nor can we frustrate Him
 By flight.

13. 'And as for us,
 Since we have listened
 To the Guidance, we have
 Accepted it: and any
 Who believes in his Lord
 Has no fear, either
 Of a short (account)
 Or of any injustice.

14. 'Amongst us are some
 That submit their wills
 (To God), and some
 That swerve from justice.
 Now those who submit
 Their wills--they have

[p. 1628]

Sought out (the path)
 Of right conduct:

15. 'But those who swerve,--
 They are (but) fuel
 For Hell-fire'--

16. (And God's Message is):
 "If they (the Pagans)
 Had (only) remained
 On the (right) Way,
 We should certainly have
 Bestowed on them Rain
 In abundance.

17. "That We might try them
 By that (means).
 But if any turns away
 From the remembrance
 Of his Lord, He will
 Cause him to undergo
 A severe Penalty.

18. "And the places of worship
 Are for God (alone):
 So invoke not any one
 Along with God;

[p. 1629]

19. "Yet when the Devotee
 Of God stands forth
 To invoke Him, they just
 Make round him a dense crowd."

  

SECTION 2.

20. Say: "I do
 No more than invoke
 My Lord, and I join not
 With Him any (false god)."

21. Say: "It is not
 In my power to cause
 You harm, or to bring
 You to right conduct."

22. Say: "No one can
 Deliver me from God
 (If I were to disobey Him),
 Nor should I find refuge
 Except in Him,

23. "Unless I proclaim what
 I receive from God
 And His Messages:
 For any that disobey God
 And His Apostle,--for them
 Is Hell: they shall dwell
 Therein for ever."

[p. 1630]

24. At length, when they
 See (with their own eyes)
 That which they are promised,--
 Then will they know
 Who it is that is
 Weakest in (his) helper
 And least important
 In point of numbers.

25. Say: "I know not whether
 The (Punishment) which ye
 Are promised is near,
 Or whether my Lord
 Will appoint for it
 A distant term.

26. "He (alone) knows the Unseen,
 Nor does He make any one
 Acquainted with his Mysteries,--

27. "Except an apostle
 Whom He has chosen:

[p. 1631]

And then He makes
 A band of watchers
 March before him
 And behind him,

28. "That he may know
 That they have (truly)
 Brought and delivered
 The Messages of their Lord:
 And He surrounds
 (All the mysteries) that are
 With them, and takes account
 Of every single thing."

[p. 1632]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1633]

  

Sura LXXIII.

  

Muzzammil, or Folded in Garments.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. O thou folded
 In garments!

2. Stand (to prayer) by night,
 But not all night,--

3. Half of it,--
 Or a little less,

4. Or a little more;
 And recite the Qur-an
 In slow, measured rhythmic tones.

5. Soon shall We send down
 To thee a weighty Message.

6. Truly the rising by night
 Is most potent for governing
 (The soul), and most suitable
 For (framing) the Word
 (Of Prayer and Praise).

[p. 1634]

7. True, there is for thee
 By day prolonged occupation
 With ordinary duties:

8. But keep in remembrance
 The name of thy Lord
 And devote thyself
 To Him whole-heartedly.

9. (He is) Lord of the East
 And the West: there is
 No god but He:
 Take Him therefore
 For (thy) Disposer of Affairs.

10. And have patience with what
 They say, and leave them
 With noble (dignity).

11. And leave Me
 (Alone to deal with)
 Those in possession of
 The good things of life,
 Who (yet) deny the Truth;
 And bear with them
 For a little while.

12. With Us are Fetters

[p. 1635]

(To bind them), and a Fire
 (To burn them),

13. And a Food that chokes,
 And a Penalty Grievous.

14. One Day the earth
 And the mountains
 Will be in violent commotion.
 And the mountains will be
 As a heap of sand
 Poured out and flowing down.

15. We have sent to you,
 (O men!) an apostle,
 To be a witness concerning you,
 Even as We sent
 An apostle to Pharaoh.

[p. 1636]

16. But Pharaoh disobeyed
 The apostle; so We
 Seized him with
 A heavy Punishment.

17. Then how shall ye,
 If ye deny (God),
 Guard yourselves against
 A Day that will make
 Children hoary-headed?--

18. Whereon the sky will be
 Cleft asunder?
 His Promise needs must
 Be accomplished.

19. Verily this is an Admonition:
 Therefore, whoso will, let him
 Take a (straight) path
 To his Lord!

  

SECTION 2.

20. Thy Lord doth know
 That thou standest forth
 (To prayer) nigh two-thirds
 Of the night, or half

[p. 1637]

The night, or a third
 Of the night, and so doth
 A party of those with thee.
 But God doth appoint Night
 And Day in due measure.
 He knoweth that ye are
 Unable to keep count thereof.
 So He hath turned to you
 (In mercy): read ye,
 Therefore, of the Qur-an
 As much as may be
 Easy for you. He knoweth
 That there may be (some)
 Among you in ill-health;
 Others travelling through the land,
 Seeking of God's bounty;
 Yet others fighting
 In God's Cause. Read ye,
 Therefore, as much of the Qur-an
 As may be easy (for you);
 And establish regular Prayer
 And give regular Charity;
 And loan to God
 A Beautiful Loan.

[p. 1638]

And whatever good
 Ye send forth
 For your souls,
 Ye shall find it
 In God's Presence,--
 Yea, better and
 Greater, in Reward.
 And seek ye the Grace
 Of God: for God is
 Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

[p. 1639]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1640]

  

Sura LXXIV.

  

Muddaththir, or One Wrapped Up.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. O thou wrapped up
 (In a mantle)!

2. Arise and deliver thy warning!

3. And thy Lord
 Do thou magnify!

4. And thy garments
 Keep free from stain!

5. And all abomination shun!

6. Nor expect, in giving,
 Any increase (for thyself)!

[p. 1641]

7. But, for thy Lord's (Cause),
 Be patient and constant!

8. Finally, when the trumpet
 Is sounded,

9. That will be--that Day--
 A Day of Distress,--

10. Far from easy
 For those without Faith.

11. Leave Me alone, (to deal)
 With the (creature) whom
 I created (bare and) alone!--

12. To whom I granted
 Resources in abundance,

13. And sons to be
 By his side!--

14. To whom I made
 (Life) smooth and comfortable!

15. Yet is he greedy--
 That I should add
 (Yet more);--

[p. 1642]

16. By no means!
 For to Our Signs
 He has been refractory!

17. Soon will I visit him
 With a mount of calamities!

18. For he thought
 And he plotted;--

19. And woe to him!
 How he plotted!--

20. Yea, woe to him:
 How he plotted!--

21. Then he looked round;

22. Then he frowned
 And he scowled;

23. Then he turned back
 And was haughty;

24. Then said he:
 "This is nothing but magic,
 Derived from of old;

25. "This is nothing but
 The word of a mortal!"

26. Soon will I
 Cast him into Hell-Fire!

[p. 1643]

27. And what will explain
 To thee what Hell-Fire is?

28. Naught doth it permit
 To endure, and naught
 Doth it leave alone!--

29. Darkening and changing
 The colour of man!

30. Over it are Nineteen.

31. And We have set none
 But angels as guardians
 Of the Fire; and We
 Have fixed their number

[p. 1644]

Only as a trial
 For Unbelievers,--in order
 That the People of the Book
 May arrive at certainty,
 And the Believers may increase
 In Faith,--and that no doubts
 May be left for the People
 Of the Book and the Believers,
 And that those in whose hearts
 Is a disease and the Unbelievers
 May say, "What symbol
 Doth God intend by this?
 Thus doth God leave to stray
 Whom He pleaseth, and guide
 Whom He pleaseth: and none
 Can know the forces
 Of thy Lord, except He.
 And this is no other than
 A warning to mankind.

  

SECTION 2.

32. Nay, verily:
 By the Moon,

[p. 1645]

33. And by the Night
 As it retreateth,

34. And by the Dawn
 As it shineth forth,--

35. This is but one
 Of the mighty (portents),

36. A warning to mankind,--

37. To any of you that
 Chooses to press forward,
 Or to follow behind;--

38. Every soul will be (held)
 In pledge for its deeds.

39. Except the Companions
 Of the Right Hand.

[p. 1646]

40. (They will be) in Gardens
 (Of Delight): they will
 Question each other,

41. And (ask) of the Sinners:

42. "What led you
 Into Hell-Fire?"

43. They will say:
 "We were not of those
 Who prayed;

44. "Nor were we of those
 Who fed the indigent;

45. "But we used to talk
 Vanities with vain talkers;

46. "And we used to deny
 The Day of Judgment,

47. "Until there came to us
 (The Hour) that is certain."

48. Then will no intercession
 Of (any) intercessors
 Profit them.

49. When what is
 The matter with them
 That they turn away
 From admonition?

50. As if they were
 Affrighted asses,

[p. 1647]

51. Fleeing from a lion!

52. Forsooth, each one of them
 Wants to be given
 Scrolls (of revelation) spread out!

53. By no means! But
 They fear not the Hereafter.

54. Nay, this surely
 Is an admonition:

55. Let any who will,
 Keep it in remembrance!

56. But none will keep it
 In remembrance except
 As God wills: He
 Is the Lord of Righteousness,
 And the Lord of Forgiveness.

[p. 1648]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1649]

  

Sura LXXV.

  

Qiyamat, or the Resurrection.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. I do call to witness
 The Resurrection Day;

2. And I do call to witness
 The self-reproaching spirit:
 (Eschew Evil).

3. Does man think that We
 Cannot assemble his bones?

4. Nay, We are able to put
 Together in perfect order
 The very tips of his fingers.

5. But man wishes to do
 Wrong (even) in the time
 In front of him.

6. He questions: "When
 Is the Day of Resurrection?"

[p. 1650]

7. At length, when
 The Sight is dazed,

8. And the moon is
 Buried in darkness.

9. And the sun and moon
 Are joined together,--

10. That Day will Man say:
 "Where is the refuge?"

11. By no means!
 No place of safety!

12. Before thy Lord (alone),
 That Day will be
 The place of rest.

13. That Day will Man
 Be told (all) that he
 Put forward, and all
 That he put back.

14. Nay, man will be
 Evidence against himself,

15. Even though he were
 To put up his excuses.

[p. 1651]

16. Move not thy tongue
 Concerning the (Qur-an)
 To make haste therewith,

17. It is for Us to collect it
 And to promulgate it:

18. But when We have
 Promulgated it, follow thou
 Its recital (as promulgated):

19. Nay more, it is
 For us to explain it
 (And make it clear):

20. Nay, (ye men!)
 But ye love
 The fleeting life,

21. And leave alone
 The Hereafter.

22. Some faces, that Day,
 Will beam (in brightness
 And beauty);--

23. Looking towards their Lord;

[p. 1652]

24. And some faces, that Day,
 Will be sad and dismal,

25. In the thought that some
 Back-breaking calamity was about
 To be indicted on them;

26. Yea, when (the soul)
 Reaches to the collar-bone
 (In its exit),

27. And there will be a cry,
 "Who is a magician
 (To restore him)?"

28. And he will conclude
 That it was (the Time)
 Of Parting;

29. And one leg will be
 Joined with another:

30. That Day the Drive
 Will be (all) to thy Lord!

  

SECTION 2.

31. So he gave nothing
 In charity, nor
 Did he pray!--

[p. 1653]

32. But on the contrary,
 He rejected Truth
 And turned away!

33. Then did he stalk
 To his family
 In full conceit!

34. Woe to thee,
 (O man!, yea, woe!

35. Again, woe to thee,
 (O man!), yea, woe!

36. Does Man think
 That he will be left
 Uncontrolled, (without purpose)?

37. Was he not a drop
 Of sperm emitted
 (In lowly form)?

38. Then did he become
 A leech-like clot;
 Then did (God) make
 And fashion (him)
 In due proportion.

39. And of him He made
 Two sexes, male
 And female.

40. Has not He, (the same),
 The power to give life
 To the dead?

[p. 1654]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1655]

  

Sura LXXVI.

  

Dahr, or Time, or Insan, or Man.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Has there not been
 Over Man a long period
 Of Time, when he was
 Nothing--(not even) mentioned?

2. Verily We created
 Man from a drop
 Of mingled sperm,
 In order to try him:
 So We gave him (the gifts).
 Of Hearing and Sight.

3. We showed him, the Way:
 Whether he be grateful
 Or ungrateful (rests
 On his will).

4. For the Rejecters
 We have prepared

[p. 1656]

Chains, Yokes, and
 A Blazing Fire.

5. As to the Righteous,
 They shall drink
 Of a Cup (of Wine)
 Mixed with Kafur,--

6. A Fountain where
 The Devotees of God
 Do drink, making it
 Flow in unstinted abundance.

7. They perform (their) vows,
 And they fear a Day
 Whose evil flies far and wide.

8. And they feed, for the love
 Of God, the indigent,
 The orphan, and the captive,--

[p. 1657]

9. (Saying), "We feed you
 For the sake of God alone:
 No reward do we desire
 From you, nor thanks.

10. "We only fear a Day
 Of distressful Wrath
 From the side of our Lord."

11. But God will deliver
 Them from the evil
 Of that Day, and will
 Shed over them a Light
 Of Beauty and
 A (blissful) Joy.

12. And because they were
 Patient and constant, He will
 Reward them with a Garden
 And (garments of) silk.

13. Reclining in the (Garden)
 On raised thrones,
 They will see there neither
 The sun's (excessive heat)
 Nor (the moon's) excessive cold.

14. And the shades of the (Garden)
 Will come low over them,
 And the bunches (of fruit),
 There, will hang low
 In humility.

[p. 1658]

15. And amongst them will be
 Passed round vessels of silver
 And goblets of crystal,--

16. Crystal-clear, made of silver:
 They will determine
 The measure thereof
 (According to their wishes).

17. And they will be given
 To drink there of a Cup
 (Of Wine) mixed 
 With Zanjabil,--

18. A fountain there,
 Called Salsabil.

19. And round about them
 Will (serve) youths
 Of perpetual (freshness):
 If thou seest them,
 Thou wouldst think them
 Scattered Pearls.

20. And when thou lookest,
 It is there thou wilt see

[p. 1659]

A Bliss and
 A Realm Magnificent.

21. Upon them will be
 Green Garments of fine silk
 And heavy brocade,
 And they will be adorned
 With Bracelets of silver;
 And their Lord will
 Give to them to drink
 Of a Wine
 Pure and Holy.

22. "Verily this is a Reward
 For you, and your Endeavour
 Is accepted and recognised."

  

SECTION 2.

23. It is We Who
 Have sent down the Qur-an
 To thee by stages.

24. Therefore be patient
 With constancy to the Command
 Of thy Lord, and hearken not
 To the sinner or the ingrate
 Among them.

25. And celebrate the name

[p. 1660]

Of thy Lord morning
 And evening,

26. And part of the night,
 Prostrate thyself to Him;
 And glorify Him
 A long night through.

27. As to these, they love
 The fleeting life,
 And put away behind them
 A Day (that will be) hard.

28. It is We Who created
 Them, and We have made
 Their joints strong;
 But, when We will,
 We can substitute
 The like of them
 By a complete change.

29. This is an admonition:
 Whosoever will, let him
 Take a (straight) Path
 To his Lord.

30. But ye will not,
 Except as God wills;

[p. 1661]

For God is full of
 Knowledge and Wisdom.

31. He will admit
 To His Mercy Whom He will;
 But the wrong-doers,--
 For them has He prepared
 A grievous Penalty.

[p. 1662]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1663]

  

Sura LXXVII.

  

Mursalat, or Those Sent Forth.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the (Winds) Sent Forth
 One after another
 (To man's profit);

2. Which then blow violently
 In tempestuous Gusts,

3. And scatter (things)
 Far and wide;

4. Then separate them,
 One from another,

[p. 1664]

5. Then spread abroad
 A Message,

6. Whether of Justification
 Or of Warning;--

7. Assuredly, what ye are
 Promised must come to pass.

8. Then when the stars
 Become dim;

9. When the heaven
 Is cleft asunder;

10. When the mountains are
 Scattered (to the winds) as dust;

11. And when the apostles
 Are (all) appointed a time
 (To collect);--

12. For what Day are these
 (Portents) deferred?

[p. 1665]

13. For the Day of Sorting out.

14. And what will explain
 To thee what is
 The Day of Sorting out?

15. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

16. Did We not destroy
 The men of old
 (For their evil)?

17. So shall We make
 Later (generations)
 Follow them.

18. Thus do We deal
 With men of sin.

19. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

20. Have We not created
 You from a fluid
 (Held) despicable?--

21. The which We placed
 In a place of rest,
 Firmly fixed,

[p. 1666]

22. For a period (of gestation),
 Determined (according to need)?

23. For We do determine
 (According to need); for We
 Are the Best to determine (things).

24. Ah woe, that Day!
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

25. Have We not made
 The earth (as a place)
 To draw together

26. The living and the dead,

27. And made therein
 Mountains standing firm,
 Lofty (in stature);
 And provided for you
 Water sweet (and wholesome)?

28. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

[p. 1667]

29. (It will be said:)
 "Depart ye to that
 Which ye used to reject
 As false!

30. "Depart ye to a Shadow
 (Of smoke ascending)
 In three columns,

31. "(Which yields) no shade
 Of coolness, and is
 Of no use against
 The fierce Blaze.

32. "Indeed it throws about
 Sparks (huge) as Forts,

33. "As if there were
 (A string of) yellow camels
 (Marching swiftly).

34. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

35. That will be a Day
 When they shall not

[p. 1668]

Be able to speak,

36. Nor will it be
 Open to them
 To put forth pleas.

37. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

38. That will be a Day
 Of Sorting out! We shall
 Gather you together
 And those before (you)!

39. Now, if ye have
 A trick (or plot),
 Use it against Me!

40. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

  

SECTION 2.

41. As to the Righteous,
 They shall be amidst
 (Cool) shades and springs
 (Of water),

[p. 1669]

42. And (they shall have)
 Fruits,--all they desire.

43. "Eat ye and drink ye
 To your heart's content:
 For that ye worked
 (Righteousness).

44. Thus do We certainly
 Reward the Doers of Good.

45. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

46. (O ye Unjust!)
 Eat ye and enjoy yourselves
 (But) a little while,
 For that ye are Sinners.

47. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

48. And when it is said
 To them, "Prostrate yourselves!"
 They do not so.

[p. 1670]

49. Ah woe, that Day,
 To the Rejecters of Truth!

50. Then what Message,
 After that,
 Will they believe in?

[p. 1671]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1672]

  

Sura LXXVIII.

  

Nabaa, or The (Great) News.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Concerning what
 Are they disputing?

2. Concerning the Great News,

3. About which they
 Cannot agree.

4. Verily, they shall soon
 (Come to) know!

5. Verily, verily they shall
 Soon (come to) know!

6. Have We not made
 The earth as a wide
 Expanse,

7. And the mountains as pegs?

[p. 1673]

8. And (have We not) created
 You in pairs,

9. And made your sleep
 For rest,

10. And made the night
 As a covering,

11. And made the day
 As a means of subsistence?

12. And (have We not)
 Built over you
 The seven firmaments,

13. And placed (therein)
 A Light of Splendour?

14. And do We not send down
 From the clouds water
 In abundance,

15. That We may produce
 Therewith corn and vegetables,

16. And gardens of luxurious growth?

[p. 1674]

17. Verily the Day
 Of Sorting Out
 Is a thing appointed,--

18. The Day that the Trumpet
 Shall be sounded, and ye
 Shall come forth in crowds;

19. And the heavens
 Shall be opened
 As if there were doors,

20. And the mountains
 Shall vanish, as if
 They were a mirage.

21. Truly Hell is
 As a place of ambush,--

22. For the transgressors
 A place of destination:

23. They will dwell therein
 For ages.

24. Nothing cool shall they taste
 Therein, nor any drink,

25. Save a boiling fluid
 And a fluid, dark, murky,
 Intensely cold,--

[p. 1675]

26. A fitting recompense
 (For them).

27. For that they used not
 To fear any account
 (For their deeds),

28. But they (impudently) treated
 Our Signs as false.

29. And all things have We
 Preserved on record.

30. "So taste ye (the fruits
 Of your deeds);
 For no increase
 Shall We grant you,
 Except in Punishment.

  

SECTION 2.

31. Verily for the Righteous
 There will be
 A fulfilment of
 (The Heart's) desires;

32. Gardens enclosed, and Grapevines;

[p. 1676]

33. Companions of Equal age;

34. And a Cup full
 (To the brim).

35. No Vanity shall they hear
 Therein, nor Untruth;--

36. Recompense from thy Lord,
 A Gift, (amply) sufficient,--

37. (From the Lord
 Of the heavens
 And the earth, and all between,--
 (God) Most Gracious:
 None shall have power
 To argue with Him.

[p. 1677]

38. The Day that
 The Spirit and the angels
 Will stand forth in ranks,
 None shall speak
 Except any who is
 Permitted by (God) Most Gracious,
 And he will say
 What is right.

39. that day will be
 The sure Reality:
 Therefore, whoso will let him
 Take a (straight) Return
 To his Lord!

40. Verily, we have warned you
 Of a Penalty near,--
 The Day when man will
 See (the Deeds) which
 His hands have sent forth,
 And the Unbeliever will say,
 "Woe unto me! Would that
 I were mere dust!"

[p. 1678]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1679]

  

Sara LXXIX.

  

Nazi'at, or Those Who Tear Out.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. By the (angels)
 Who tear out
 (The souls of the wicked)
 With violence;

2. By those who gently
 Draw out (the souls
 Of the blessed);

3. And by those who glide
 Along (on errands of mercy),

4. Then press forward
 As in a race,

5. Then arrange to do
 (The Commands of their Lord),--

[p. 1680]

6. One Day everything that
 Can be in commotion will
 Be in violent commotion,

7. Followed by oft-repeated
 (Commotions):

8. Hearts that Day 
 Will be in agitation;

9. Cast down will be
 (Their owners') eyes.

10. They say (now): "What!
 Shall we indeed be
 Returned to (our) former state?--

11. "What!--when we shall
 Have become rotten bones?"

12. They say: "It would
 In that case, be
 A return with loss!"

13. But verily, it will
 Be but a single

[p. 1681]

(Compelling) Cry,

14. When, behold, they
 Will be in the (full)
 Awakening (to Judgment).

15. Has the story
 Of Moses reached thee?

16. Behold, thy Lord did call
 To him in the sacred valley
 Of Tuwa:--

17. "Go thou to Pharaoh,
 For he has indeed
 Transgressed all bounds:

18. "And say to him,
 "Wouldst thou that thou
 Shouldst he purified
 (From sin)?--

19. "And that I guide thee
 To thy Lord, so thou
 Shouldst fear Him?"

[p. 1682]

20. Then did (Moses) show him
 The Great Sign.

21. But (Pharaoh) rejected it
 And disobeyed (guidance);

22. Further, he turned his back,
 Striving hard (against God).

23. Then he collected (his men)
 And made a proclamation,

24. Saying, "I am your Lord,
 Most High".

25. But God did punish him,
 (And made an) example
 Of him,--in the Hereafter,
 As in this life.

26. Verily in this is
 An instructive warning
 For whosoever feareth (God).

  

SECTION 2.

27. What! Are ye the more
 Difficult to create
 Or the heaven (above)?
 (God) hath constructed it:

[p. 1683]

28. On high hath He raised
 Its canopy, and He hath
 Given it order and perfection.

29. Its night doth He
 Endow with darkness,
 And its splendour doth He
 Bring out (with light).

30. And the earth, moreover,
 Hath He extended
 (To a wide expanse);

31. He draweth out
 Therefrom its moisture
 And its pasture;

32. And the mountains
 Hath He firmly fixed;

33. For use and convenience
 To you and your cattle.

[p. 1684]

34. Therefore, when there comes
 The great, overwhelming (Event),--

35. The Day when Man
 Shall remember (all)
 That he strove for,

36. And Hell-Fire shall be
 Placed in full view
 For (all) to see,--

37. Then, for such as had
 Transgressed all bounds,

38. And had preferred
 The life of this world,

39. The Abode will be
 Hell-Fire;

40. And for such as had
 Entertained the fear
 Of standing before
 Their Lord's (tribunal)
 And had restrained
 (Their) soul from lower Desires,

41. Their Abode will be
 The Garden.

[p. 1685]

42. They ask thee
 About the Hour,--"When
 Will be its appointed time?"

43. Wherein art thou (concerned)
 With the declaration thereof?

44. With thy Lord is
 The Limit fixed therefor.

45. Thou art but a Warner
 For such as fear it.

46. The Day they see it,
 (It will be) as if they
 Had tarried but a single
 Evening, or (at most till)
 The following morn!

[p. 1686]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1687]

  

Sura LXXX.

  

'Abasa, or He Frowned.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. (The Prophet) frowned
 And turned away,

2. Because there came to him
 The blind man (interrupting).

3. But what could tell thee
 But that perchance he might
 Grow (in spiritual understanding)?--

4. Or that he might receive
 Admonition, and the teaching
 Might profit him?

5. As to one who regards
 Himself as self-sufficient,

6. To him dost thou attend;

7. Though it is no blame
 To thee if he grow not
 (In spiritual understanding).

[p. 1688]

8. But as to him who came
 To thee striving earnestly,

9. And with fear
 (In his heart),

10. Of him wast thou unmindful.

11. By no means
 (Should it be so)!
 For it is indeed
 A Message of instruction:

12. Therefore let whoso will,
 Keep it in remembrance.

13. (It is) in Books
 Held (greatly) in honour,

14. Exalted (in dignity),
 Kept pure and holy,

15. (Written) by the hands
 Of scribes--

16. Honourable and
 Pious and Just.

17. Woe to man!
 What hath made him
 Reject God:

[p. 1689]

18. From what stuff
 Hath He created him?

19. From a sperm-drop:
 He hath created him, and then
 Mouldeth him in due proportions;

20. Then doth He make
 His path smooth for him;

21. Then He causeth him to die,
 And putteth him in his Grave;

22. Then, when it is
 His Will, He will
 Raise him up (again).

23. By no means hath he
 Fulfilled what God
 Hath commanded him.

24. Then let man look
 At his Food,
 (And how We provide it):

25. For that We pour forth
 Water in abundance,

[p. 1690]

26. And We split the earth
 In fragments,

27. And produce therein Corn,

28. And Grapes and nutritious Plants,

29. And Olives and Dates,

30. And enclosed Gardens,
 Dense with lofty trees,

31. And Fruits and Fodder,--

32. For use and convenience
 To you and your cattle.

33. At length, when there
 Comes the Deafening Noise,--

34. That Day shall a man
 Flee from his own brother,

35. And from his mother
 And his father,

36. And from his wife
 And his children.

[p. 1691]

37. Each one of them,
 That Day, will have
 Enough concern (of his own)
 To make him indifferent
 To the others,

38. Some Faces that Day
 Will be beaming,

39. Laughing, rejoicing.

40. And other faces that Day
 Will be dust-stained;

41. Blackness will cover them:

42. Such will be
 The Rejecters of God,
 The Doers of Iniquity.

[p. 1692]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1693]

  

Sura LXXXI.

  

Takwir, or the Folding Up.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. When the sun
 (With its spacious light)
 Is folded up;

2. When the stars
 Fall, losing their lustre;

3. When the mountains vanish
 (Like a mirage);

4. When the she-camels,
 Ten months with young,
 Are left untended;

5. When the wild beasts
 Are herded together

[p. 1694]

(In human habitations);

6. When the oceans
 Boil over with a swell;

7. When the souls
 Are sorted out,
 (Being joined, like with like);

8. When the female (infant),
 Buried alive, is questioned--

9. For what crime
 She was killed;

10. When the Scrolls
 Are laid open;

[p. 1695]

11. When the World on High
 Is unveiled;

12. When the Blazing Fire
 Is kindled to fierce heat;

13. And when the Garden
 Is brought near;--

14. (Then) shall each soul know
 What it has put forward.

15. So verily I call
 To witness the Planets--
 That recede,

[p. 1696]

16. Go straight, or hide;

17. And the Night
 As it dissipates;

18. And the Dawn
 As it breathes away
 The darkness;--

19. Verily this is the word
 Of a most honourable Messenger,

20. Endued with Power,
 With rank before
 The Lord of the Throne,

21. With authority there,
 (And) faithful to his trust.

22. And (O people!)
 Your Companion is not
 One possessed;

[p. 1697]

23. And without doubt he saw him
 In the clear horizon.

24. Neither doth he withhold
 Grudgingly a knowledge
 Of the Unseen.

25. Nor is it the word
 Of an evil spirit accursed!

26. When whither go ye?

27. Verily this is no less
 Than a Message
 To (all) the Worlds:

28. (With profit) to whoever
 Among you wills
 To go straight:

29. But ye shall not will
 Except as God wills,--
 The Cherisher of the Worlds.

[p. 1698]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1699]

  

Sura LXXXII.

  

Infitar, or The Cleaving Asunder.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. When the Sky
 Is cleft asunder;

2. When the Stars
 Are scattered;

3. When the Oceans
 Are suffered to burst forth;

4. And when the Graves
 Are turned upside down;--

[p. 1700]

5. (Then) shall each soul know
 What it hath sent forward
 And (what it hath) kept back.

6. O man! what has
 Seduced thee from
 Thy Lord Most Beneficent?--

7. Him Who created thee.
 Fashioned thee in due proportion
 And gave thee a just bias;

8. In whatever Form He wills,
 Does He put thee together.

9. Nay! but ye do
 Reject Right and Judgment!

10. But verily over you
 (Are appointed angels)
 To protect you,--

11. Kind and honourable,--
 Writing down (your deeds):

[p. 1701]

12. They know (and understand)
 All that ye do.

13. As for the Righteous,
 They will be in Bliss;

14. And the Wicked--
 They will be in the Fire,

15. Which they will enter
 On the Day of Judgment,

16. And they will not be
 Able to keep away therefrom.

17. And what will explain
 To thee what the Day
 Of Judgment is?

18. Again, what will explain
 To thee what the Day
 Of Judgment is?

19. (It will be) the Day
 When no soul shall have
 Power (to do) aught
 For another 
 For the Command, that Day,
 Will be (wholly) with God.

[p. 1702]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1703]

  

Sura LXXXIII.

  

Tatfif, or Dealing in Fraud.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Woe to those
 That deal in fraud,--

2. Those who, when they
 Have to receive by measure
 From men, exact full measure,

3. But when they have
 To give by measure
 Or weight to men,
 Give less than due.

4. Do they not think
 That they will be called
 To account?--

5. On a Mighty Day,

6. A Day when (all) mankind
 Will stand before
 The Lord of the Worlds?

7. Nay! Surely the Record
 Of the Wicked is

[p. 1704]

(Preserved) in Sijjin.

8. And what will explain
 To thee what Sijjin is?

9. (There is) a Register
 (Fully) inscribed.

10. Woe, that Day, to those
 That deny--

11. Those that deny
 The Day of Judgment.

12. And none can deny it
 But the Transgressor
 Beyond bounds,
 The Sinner!

13. When Our Signs are rehearsed
 To him, he says,
 "Tales of the Ancients!"

14. By no means!
 But on their hearts
 Is the stain of the (ill)
 Which they do!

[p. 1705]

15. Verily, from (the Light
 Of) their Lord, that Day,
 Will they be veiled.

16. Further, they will enter
 The Fire of Hell.

17. Further, it will be said
 To them: "This is
 The (reality) which ye
 Rejected as false!

18. Nay, verily the Record
 Of the Righteous is
 (Preserved) in 'Illiyin.

19. And what will explain
 To thee what 'Illiyin is?

20. (There is) a Register
 (Fully) inscribed,

21. To which bear witness
 Those Nearest (to God),

22. Truly the Righteous
 Will be in Bliss:

[p. 1706]

23. On Thrones (of Dignity)
 Will they command a sight
 (Of all things):

24. Thou wilt recognise
 In their Faces
 The beaming brightness of Bliss.

25. Their thirst will be slaked
 With Pure Wine sealed:

26. The seal thereof will be
 Musk: and for this
 Let those aspire,
 Who have aspirations:

27. With it will be (given)
 A mixture of Tasnim:

28. A spring, from (the waters)
 Whereof drink
 Those Nearest to God.

29. Those in sin used
 To laugh at those
 Who believed,

30. And whenever they passed
 By them, used to wink
 At each other (in mockery);

[p. 1707]

31. And when they returned
 To their own people,
 They would return jesting;

32. And whenever they saw them,
 They would say, "Behold!
 These are the people
 Truly astray!"

33. But they had not been
 Sent as Keepers over them!

34. But on this Day
 The Believers will laugh
 At the Unbelievers:

35. On Thrones (of Dignity)
 They will command (a sight)
 (Of all things),

36. Will not the Unbelievers
 Have been paid back
 For what they did?

[p. 1708]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1709]

  

Sura LXXXIV.

  

Inshiqaq, or The Rending Asunder.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. When the Sky is
 Rent asunder,

2. And hearkens to
 (The Command of) its Lord,--
 And it must needs
 (Do so);--

3. And when the Earth
 Is flattened out,

4. And casts forth
 What is within it
 And becomes (clean) empty,

5. And hearkens to
 (The Command of) its Lord,--
 And it must needs
 (Do so);--(then will come
 Home the full Reality)

[p. 1710]

6. O thou man!
 Verily thou art ever
 Toiling on towards thy Lord--
 Painfully toiling,--but thou
 Shalt meet Him.

7. Then he who is given
 His Record in his
 Right hand,

8. Soon will his account
 Be taken by an easy reckoning,

9. And he will turn
 To his people, rejoicing!

10. But he who is given
 His Record behind his back,--

11. Soon will he cry
 For Perdition,

12. And he will enter
 A Blazing Fire.

13. Truly, did he go about
 Among his people, rejoicing!

[p. 1711]

14. Truly, did he think
 That he would not
 Have to return (to Us)!

15. Nay, nay! for his Lord
 Was (ever) watchful of him!

16. So I do call
 To witness the ruddy glow
 Of Sunset;

17. The Night and its Homing;

18. And the Moon
 In her Fulness:

19. Ye shall surely travel
 From stage to stage

[p. 1712]

20. What then is the matter
 With them, that they
 Believe not?--

21. And when the Qur-an
 Is read to them, they
 Fall not prostrate,

22. But on the contrary
 The Unbelievers reject (it).

23. But God has full Knowledge
 Of what they secrete
 (In their breasts).

24. So announce to them
 A Penalty Grievous,

25. Except to those who believe
 And work righteous deeds:
 For them is a Reward
 That will never fail.

[p. 1713]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1714]

  

Sura LXXXV.

  

Buruj, or The Zodiacal Signs.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Sky, (displaying)
 The Zodiacal Signs;

2. By the promised Day
 (Of Judgment);

3. By one that witnesses,
 And the subject of the witness;--

4. Woe to the makers
 Of the pit (of fire),

[p. 1715]

5. Fire supplied (abundantly)
 With Fuel:

6. Behold! they sat
 Over against the (fire),

7. And they witnessed
 (All) that they were doing
 Against the Believers.

8. And they ill-treated them
 For no other reason than
 That they believed in God,
 Exalted in Power,
 Worthy of all Praise!--

9 Him to Whom belongs
 The dominion of the heavens
 And the earth!
 And God is Witness
 To all things.

10. Those who persecute (or draw
 into temptation)
 The Believers, men and women,
 And do not turn
 In repentance, will have
 The Penalty of Hell:
 They will have the Penalty
 Of the Burning Fire.

11. For those who believe
 And do righteous deeds,
 Will be Gardens,
 Beneath which Rivers flow:
 That is the great Salvation,
 (The fulfilment of all desires),

[p. 1716]

12. Truly strong is the Grip
 (And Power) of thy Lord.

13. It is He Who creates
 From the very beginning,
 And He can restore (life).

14. And He is the Oft-Forgiving,
 Full of loving-kindness,

15. Lord of the Throne of Glory,

16. Doer (without let)
 Of all that He intends.

17. Has the story
 Reached thee,
 Of the Forces--

18. Of Pharaoh
 And the Thamud?

19. And yet the Unbelievers
 (Persist) in rejecting
 (The Truth)!

20. But God doth
 Encompass them
 From behind!

[p. 1717]

21. Nay, this is
 A Glorious Qur-an,

22. (Inscribed) in
 A Tablet Preserved!

[p. 1718]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1719]

  

Sura LXXXVI.

  

Tariq, or The Night-Visitant.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Sky
 And the Night-Visitant
 (Therein);--

2. And what will explain to thee
 What the Night-Visitant is?--

3. (It is) the Star
 Of piercing brightness;--

4. There is no soul but has
 A protector over it.

5. Now let man but think
 From what he is created!

6. He is created from
 A drop emitted--

7. Proceeding from between
 The backbone and the ribs:

[p. 1720]

8. Surely (God) is able
 To bring him back
 (To life)!

9. The Day that
 (All) things secret
 Will be tested,

10. (Man) will have
 No power,
 And no helper.

11. By the Firmament
 Which returns (in its round),

12. And by the Earth
 Which opens out
 (For the gushing of springs
 Or the sprouting of vegetation),--

13. Behold this is the Word
 That distinguishes (Good
 From Evil):

14. It is not a thing
 For amusement.

[p. 1721]

15. As for them, they
 Are but plotting a scheme,

16. And I am planning
 A scheme.

17. Therefore grant a delay
 To the unbelievers:
 Give respite to them
 Gently (for awhile).

[p. 1722]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1723]

  

Sura LXXXVII.

  

A'la, or The Most High.

In the name of God, Most Gracious.
 Most Merciful

1. Glorify the name
 Of' thy Guardian-Lord
 Most High,

2. Who hath created,
 And further, given
 Order and proportion;

3. Who hath ordained laws.
 And granted guidance;

4. And Who bringeth out
 The (green and luscious) pasture,

5. And then doth make it
 (But) swarthy stubble.

6. By degrees shall We
 Teach thee to declare

[p. 1724]

(The Message), so thou
 Shalt not forget,

7. Except as God wills:
 For He knoweth
 What is manifest
 And what is hidden.

8. And We will make it
 Easy for thee (to follow)
 The simple (Path).

9. Therefore give admonition
 In case the admonition
 Profits (the hearer).

10. The admonition will be received
 By those who fear (God):

11. But it will be avoided
 By those most unfortunate ones,

12. Who will enter
 The Great Fire,

[p. 1725]

13. In which they will then
 Neither die nor live.

14. But those will prosper
 Who purify themselves,

15. And glorify the name
 Of their Guardian-Lord,
 And (lift their hearts)
 In Prayer.

16. Nay (behold), ye prefer
 The life of this world;

17. But the Hereafter
 Is better and more enduring.

18. And this is
 In the Books
 Of the earliest (Revelations),--

19. The Books of
 Abraham and Moses.

[p. 1726]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1727]

  

Sura LXXXVIII.

  

Gashiya, or The Overwhelming Event.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Has the story
 Reached thee, of
 The Overwhelming (Event)?

2. Some faces, that Day,
 Will be humiliated,

3. Labouring (hard), weary,--

4. The while they enter
 The Blazing Fire,--

5. The while they are given,
 To drink, of a bailing hot spring,

6. No food will there be
 For them but a bitter Dhari'

7. Which will neither nourish
 Nor satisfy hunger.

8. (Other) faces that Day
 Will be joyful,

[p. 1728]

9. Pleased with their Striving,--

10. In a Garden on high,

11. Where they shall hear
 No (word) of vanity:

12. Therein will be
 A bubbling spring:

13. Therein will be Thrones
 (Of dignity), raised on high,

14. Goblets placed (ready),

15. And Cushions set in rows,

16. And rich carpets
 (All) spread out.

17. Do they not look
 At the Camels,
 How they are made?--

[p. 1729]

18. And at the Sky,
 How it is raised high?--

19. And at the Mountains,
 How they are fixed firm?--

20. And at the Earth,
 How it is spread out?

21. Wherefore do thou give
 Admonition, for thou art
 One to admonish.

22. Thou art not one
 To manage (men's) affairs.

23. But if any turn away
 And reject God,--

24. God will punish him
 With a mighty Punishment,

25. For to Us will be
 Their Return;

26. Then it will be for Us
 To call them to account.

[p. 1730]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1731]

  

Sura LXXXIX.

  

Fajr, or The Break of Day.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. By the Break of Day;

2. By the Nights twice five;

3. By the Even
 And Odd (contrasted);

4. And by the Night
 When it passeth away;--

[p. 1732]

5. Is there (not) in these
 An adjuration (or evidence)
 For those who understand?

6. Seest thou not
 How thy Lord dealt
 With the 'Ad (people),--

7. Of the (city of) Iram,
 With lofty pillars,

8. The like of which
 Were not produced
 In (all) the land?

9. And with the Thamud
 (People), who cut out
 (Huge) rocks in the-valley?--

10. And with Pharaoh,
 Lord of Stakes?

[p. 1733]

11. (All) these transgressed
 Beyond bounds in the lands.

12. And heaped therein
 Mischief (on mischief).

13. Therefore did thy Lord
 Pour on them a scourge
 Of diverse chastisements:

14. For thy Lord is
 (As a Guardian)
 On a watch-tower.

15. Now, as for man,
 When his Lord trieth him,
 Giving him honour and gifts,
 Then saith he, (puffed up),
 "My Lord hath honoured me"

16. But when he trieth him,
 Restricting his subsistence
 For him, then saith he
 (In despair), "My Lord
 Hath humiliated me I."

17. Nay, nay! But ye
 Honour not the orphans!

[p. 1734]

18. Nor do ye encourage
 One another
 To feed the poor!--

19. And ye devour Inheritance--
 All with greed,

20. And ye love wealth
 With inordinate love!

21. Nay! When the earth
 Is pounded to powder,

22. And thy Lord cometh,
 And His angels,
 Rank upon rank,

23. And Hell, that Day,
 Is brought (face to face),--
 On that Day will man
 Remember, but how will
 That remembrance profit him?

24. He will say: "Ah!
 Would that I had
 Sent forth (Good Deeds)
 For (this) my (Future) Life!"

25. For, that Day,
 His Chastisement will be

[p. 1735]

Such as none (else)
 Can inflict,

26. And His bonds
 Will be such as
 None (other) can bind.

27. (To the righteous soul
 Will be said:)
 "O (thou) soul,
 In (complete) rest
 And satisfaction!

28. "Come back thou
 To thy Lord,--
 Well pleased (thyself),
 And well-pleasing
 Unto Him!

29. "Enter thou, then,
 Among my Devotees!

30. "Yea, enter thou
 My Heaven!

[p. 1736]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1737]

  

Sura XC.

  

Balad, or The City.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. I do call to witness
 This City;--

2. And thou art a freeman
 Of this City;--

3. And (the mystic ties
 of) Parent and Child;--

4. Verily We have created
 Man into toil and struggle.

5. Thinketh he, that none
 Hath power over him?

[p. 1738]

6. He may say (boastfully):
 "Wealth have I squandered
 In abundance!"

7. Thinketh he that none
 Beholdeth him?

8. Have We not made
 For him a pair of eyes?--

9. And a tongue,
 And a pair of lips?--

10. And shown him
 The two highways?

11. But he hath made no haste
 On the path that is steep.

12. And what will explain
 To thee the path that is steep?--

[p. 1739]

13. (It is:) freeing the bondman;

14. Or the giving of food
 In a day of privation

15. To the orphan
 With claims of relationship,

16. Or to the indigent
 (Down) in the dust.

17. Then will he be
 Of those who believe,
 And enjoin patience, (constancy,
 And self-restraint), and enjoin
 Deeds of kindness and compassion.

18. Such are the Companions
 Of the Right Hand.

[p. 1740]

19. But those who reject
 Our Signs, they are
 The (unhappy) Companions
 Of the Left Hand.

20. On them will be Fire
 Vaulted over (all round).

[p. 1741]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1742]

  

Sura XCI.

  

Shams, or The Sun.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Sun
 And his (glorious) splendour;

2. By the Moon
 As she follows him;

3. By the Day as it
 Shows up (the Sun's) glory;

4. By the Night as it
 Conceals it;

5. By the Firmament
 And its (wonderful) structure;

[p. 1743]

6. By the Earth
 And its (wide) expanse;

7. By the Soul,
 And the proportion and order
 Given to it;

8. And its enlightenment
 As to its wrong
 And its right;--

9. Truly he succeeds
 That purifies it,

10. And he fails
 That corrupts it!

11. The Thamud (people)
 Rejected (their prophet)
 Through their inordinate
 Wrong-doing.

12. Behold, the most wicked
 Man among them was
 Deputed (for impiety).

13. But the apostle of God
 Said to them: "It is

[p. 1744]

A She-camel of God!
 And (bar her not
 From) having her drink!"

14. Then they rejected him
 (As a false prophet),
 And they hamstrung her.
 So their Lord, on account
 Of their crime, obliterated
 Their traces and made them
 Equal (in destruction,
 High and low)!

15. And for Him
 Is no fear
 Of its consequences.

[p. 1745]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1746]

  

Sura XCII.

  

Lail, or The Night.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Night as it
 Conceals (the light);

2. By the Day as it
 Appears in glory;

3. By (the mystery of)
 The creation of male
 And female;--

4. Verily, (the ends) ye
 Strive for are diverse.

5. So he who gives
 (In charity) and fears (God),

6. And (in all sincerity)
 Testifies to the Best,--

[p. 1747]

7. We will indeed
 Make smooth for him
 The path to Bliss,

8. But he who is
 A greedy miser
 And thinks himself
 Self-sufficient,

9. And gives the lie
 To the Best,--

10. We will indeed
 Make smooth for him
 The Path to Misery;

11. Nor will his wealth
 Profit him when he
 Falls headlong (into the Pit).

12. Verily We take
 Upon Ourselves to guide,

13. And verily unto Us
 (Belong) the End
 And the Beginning,

[p. 1748]

14. Therefore do I warn you
 Of a Fire blazing fiercely;

15. None shall reach it
 But those most unfortunate ones

16. Who give the lie to Truth
 And turn their backs.

17. But those most devoted
 To God shall be
 Removed far from it,--

18. Those who spend their wealth
 For increase in self-purification,

19. And have in their minds
 No favour from anyone
 For which a reward
 Is expected in return,

[p. 1749]

20. But only the desire
 To seek for the Countenance
 Of their Lord Most High;

21. And soon will they
 Attain (complete) satisfaction.

[p. 1750]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1751]

  

Sura XCIII.

  

Dhuha, or The Glorious Morning Light.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Glorious
 Morning Light,

2. And by the Night
 When it is still,--

3. Thy Guardian-Lord
 Hath not forsaken thee,
 Nor is He displeased,

4. And verily the hereafter
 Will be better for thee
 Than the present.

[p. 1752]

5. And soon will thy
 Guardian-Lord give thee
 (That wherewith) thou
 Shalt be well-pleased.

6. Did He not find thee
 An orphan and give thee
 Shelter (and care)?

7. And He found thee
 Wandering, and He gave
 Thee guidance.

8. And He found thee
 In need, and made
 Thee independent.

[p. 1753]

9. Therefore, treat not
 The orphan with harshness,

10. Nor repulse the petitioner
 (Unheard);

11. But the Bounty
 Of thy Lord--
 Rehearse and proclaim!

[p. 1754]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1755]

  

Sura XCIV.

  

Inshirah, or The Expansion.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Have We not
 Expanded thee thy breast?--

2. And removed from thee
 Thy burden

3. The which did gall
 Thy back?--

4. And raised high the esteem
 (In which) thou (art held)?

5. So, verily,
 With every difficulty,
 There is relief:

6. Verily, with every difficulty
 There is relief.

[p. 1756]

7. Therefore, when thou art
 Free (from thine immediate task),
 Still labour hard,

8. And to thy Lord
 Turn (all) thy attention.

[p. 1757]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1758]

  

Sura XCV.

  

Tin, or The Fig.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the Fig
 And the Olive,

2. And the Mount
 Of Sinai,

3. And this City
 Of security,--

[p. 1759]

4. We have  created man
 In the best of moulds,

5. Then do We abase him
 (To be) the lowest
 Of the low,--

6. Except such as believe
 And do righteous deeds:
 For they shall have
 A reward unfailing.

7. Then what can,
 After this, contradict thee
 As to the Judgment
 (To come)?

8. Is not God
 The wisest of Judges?

[p. 1760]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1761]

  

Sura XCVI.

  

Iqraa, or Read! or Proclaim!

  

Or 'Alaq, or The Clot of Congealed Blood.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Proclaim! (or Read!)
 In the name
 Of thy Lord and Cherisher,
 Who created--

2. Created man, out of
 A (mere) clot
 Of congealed blood:

3. Proclaim! And thy Lord
 Is Most Bountiful,--

4. He Who taught
 (The use of) the Pen,--

[p. 1762]

5. Taught man that
 Which he knew not.

6. Nay, but man doth
 Transgress all bounds,

7. In that he looketh
 Upon himself as self-sufficient.

8. Verily, to thy Lord
 Is the return (of all).

9. Seest thou one
 Who forbids--

10. A votary when he
 (Turns) to pray?

11. Seest thou if
 He is on (the road
 Of) Guidance?--

12. Or enjoins Righteousness?

[p. 1763]

13. Seest thou if he
 Denies (Truth) and turns away?

14. Knoweth he not
 That God doth see?

15. Let him beware! If he
 Desist not, We will
 Drag him by the forelock,--

16. A lying, sinful forelock!

17. Then, let him call
 (For help) to his council
 (Of comrades):

18. We will call
 On the angels of punishment
 (To deal with him)!

19. Nay, heed him not:
 But bow down in adoration,
 And bring thyself
 The closer (to God)!

[p. 1764]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1765]

  

Sura XCVII.

  

Qadr, or The Night of Power (or Honour).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. We have indeed revealed
 This (Message)
 In the Night of Power:

2. And what will explain
 To thee what the Night
 Of Power is?

3. The Night of Power
 Is better than
 A thousand Months,

4. Therein come dawn
 The angels and the Spirit
 By God's permission,
 On every errand:

5. Peace!...This
 Until the rise of Morn!

[p. 1766]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1767]

  

Sura XCVIII.

  

Baiyina, or The Clear Evidence.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Those who reject (Truth),
 Among the People of the Book
 And among the Polytheists,
 Were not going to depart
 (From their ways) until
 There should come to them
 Clear Evidence,--

2. An apostle from God,
 Rehearsing scriptures
 Kept pure and holy:

3. Wherein are laws (or decrees)
 Right and straight.

4. Nor did the People
 Of the Book

[p. 1768]

Make schisms,
 Until after there came
 To them Clear Evidence.

5. And they have been commanded
 No more than this:
 To worship God,
 Offering Him sincere devotion,
 Being True (in faith);
 To establish regular Prayer;
 And to practise regular Charity;
 And that is the Religion
 Right and Straight.

6. Those who reject (Truth),
 Among the People of the Book
 And among the Polytheists,
 Will be in hell-fire,
 To dwell therein (for aye).
 They are the worst
 Of creatures.

7. Those who have faith
 And do righteous deeds,--
 They are the best
 Of creatures.

[p. 1769]

8. Their reward is with God:
 Gardens of Eternity,
 Beneath which rivers flow;
 They will dwell therein
 For ever; God well pleased
 With them, and they with Him;
 All this for such as
 Fear their Lord and Cherisher.

[p. 1770]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1771]

  

Sura XCIX.

  

Zilzal, or The Convulsion.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. When the Earth is
 Shaken to her (utmost)
 convulsion,

2. And the Earth throws up
 Her burdens (from within),

3. And man cries (distressed):
 "What is the matter with her?"--

4. On that Day will she
 Declare her tidings:

5. For that thy Lord will
 Have given her inspiration,

6. On that Day will men
 Proceed in companies sorted out,

[p. 1772]

To be shown the Deeds
 That they (had done).

7. Then shall anyone who
 Has done an atom's weight
 Of good, see it!

8. And anyone who
 Has done an atom's weight
 Of evil, shall see it.

[p. 1773]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1774]

  

Sura C.

  

'Adiyat, or Those that run.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By the (Steeds)
 That run, with panting (breath),

2. And strike sparks of fire,

3. And push home the charge
 In the morning,

4. And raise the dust
 In clouds the while,

5. And penetrate forthwith
 Into the midst (of the foe)
 En masse;--

[p. 1775]

6. Truly Man is,
 To his Lord,
 Ungrateful;

7. And to that (fact)
 He bears witness
 (By his deeds);

8. And violent is he
 In his love of wealth.

9. Does he not know,--
 When that which is
 In the graves is
 Scattered abroad

10. And that which is
 (Locked up) in (human) breasts
 Is made manifest--

11. That their Lord had been
 Well-acquainted with them,
 (Even to) that Day?

[p. 1776]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1777]

  

Sura CI.

  

Al-Qari'a, or The Day of Noise and Clamour.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. The (Day) of
 Noise and Clamour:

2. What is the (Day)
 Of Noise and Clamour?

3. And what will explain
 To thee what the (Day)
 Of Noise and Clamour is?

4. (It is) a Day whereon
 Men will be like moths
 Scattered about,

5. And the mountains
 Will be like carded wool.

6. Then, he whose
 Balance (of good deeds)
 Will be (found) heavy,

[p. 1778]

7. Will be in a Life
 Of good pleasure and
 satisfaction.

8. But he whose
 Balance (of good deeds)
 Will be (found) light,--

9. Will have his home
 In a (bottomless) Pit.

10. And what will explain
 To thee what this is?

11. (It is) a Fire
 Blazing fiercely!

[p. 1779]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1780]

  

Sura CII.

  

Takathur or Piling Up.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. The mutual rivalry
 For piling up (the good things
 Of this world) diverts you
 (From the more serious things),

2. Until ye visit the graves.

3. But nay, ye soon shall
 Know (the reality).

4. Again, ye soon shall know!

5. Nay, were ye to know
 With certainty of mind,
 (Ye would beware!)

6. Ye shall certainly see
 Hell-fire!

7. Again, ye shall see it
 With certainty of sight!

[p. 1781]

8. Then, shall ye be
 Questioned that Day
 About the joy
 (Ye indulged in!)

[p. 1782]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1783]

  

Sura CIII.

  

'Asr, or Time through the Ages.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. By (the Token of)
 Time (through the Ages),

2. Verily Man
 Is in loss,

3. Except such as have Faith,
 And do righteous deeds,
 And (join together)
 In the mutual teaching
 Of Truth, and of
 Patience and Constancy.

[p. 1784] [p. 1785] [p. 1786] [p. 1787] [p. 1788]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1789]

  

Sura CIV.

  

Humaza, or the Scandal-monger.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Woe to every
 (Kind of) scandal-monger
 And backbiter,

2. Who pileth up wealth
 And layeth it by,

3. Thinking that his wealth
 Would make him last
 For ever!

4. By no means! He will
 Be sure to be thrown into
 That which Breaks to Pieces.

5. And what will explain
 To thee That which Breaks
 To Pieces?

6. (It is) the Fire
 Of (the Wrath of) God
 Kindled (to a blaze),

7. The which doth mount
 (Right) to the Hearts:

[p. 1790]

8. It shall be made
 Into a vault over them,

9. In columns outstretched.

[p. 1791]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1792]

  

Sura CV.

  

Fil, or The Elephant.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Seest thou not
 How thy Lord dealt
 With the Companions
 Of the Elephant?

2. Did He not make
 Their treacherous plan
 Go astray?

3. And He sent against them
 Flights of Birds,

4. Striking them with stones
 Of baked clay.

5. Then did He make them
 Like an empty field
 Of stalks and straw,
 (Of which the corn)
 Has been eaten up.

[p. 1793]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1794]

  

Sura CVI.

  

Quraish or The Quraish, (Custodians of the Ka'ba).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. For the covenants
 (Of security and safeguard
 Enjoyed) by the Quraish,

2. Their covenants (covering) journeys
 By winter and summer,--

3. Let them adore the Lord
 Of this House

4. Who provides them
 With food against hunger,
 And with security
 Against fear (of danger).

[p. 1795]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1796]

  

Sura CVII.

  

Ma'un, or Neighbourly Needs.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Seest thou one
 Who denies the Judgment
 (To come)?

2. Then such is the (man)
 Who repulses the orphan
 (With harshness),

3. And encourages not
 The feeding of the indigent.

4. So woe to the worshippers

5. Who are neglectful
 Of their Prayers,

6. Those who (want but)
 To be seen (of men),

7. But refuse (to supply)
 (Even) neighbourly needs.

[p. 1797]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1798]

  

Sura CVIII.

  

Kauthar, or Abundance.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. To thee have We
 Granted the Fount
 (of Abundance).

2. Therefore to thy Lord
 Turn in Prayer
 And Sacrifice.

3. For he who hateth thee,--
 He will be cut off
 (From Future Hope).

[p. 1799]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1800]

  

Sura CIX

  

Kafirun, or Those who reject Faith.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful

1. Say: O ye
 That reject Faith!

2. I worship not that
 Which ye worship,

3. Nor will ye worship
 That which I worship.

4. And I will not worship
 That which ye have been
 Wont to worship,

5. Nor will ye worship
 That which I worship.

6. To you be your Way,
 And to me mine.

[p. 1801]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1802]

  

Sura CX.

  

Nasr, or Help.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. When comes the Help
 Of God, and Victory,

2. And thou dust see
 The People enter God's Religion
 In crowds,

3. Celebrate the Praises
 Of thy Lord, and pray
 For His Forgiveness:
 For He is Oft-Returning
 (In Grace and Mercy).

[p. 1803]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1804]

  

Sura CXI.

  

Lahab, or (the Father of) Flame.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Perish the hands
 Of the Father of Flame!
 Perish he!

2. No profit to him
 From all his wealth,
 And all his gains!

3. Burnt soon will he be
 In a Fire
 Of blazing Flame!

4. His wife shall carry
 The (crackling) wood--
 As fuel!--

5. A twisted rope
 Of palm-leaf fibre
 Round her (own) neck!

[p. 1805]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1806]

  

Sura CXII.

  

Ikhlas, or Purity (of Faith).

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Say: He is God,
 The One and Only;

2. God, the Eternal, Absolute;

3. He begetteth not,
 Nor is He begotten;

4. And there is none
 Like unto Him.

[p. 1807]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1808]

  

Sura CXIII

  

Falaq, or The Dawn.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Say: I seek refuge
 With the Lord of the Dawn,

2. From the mischief
 Of created things;

3. From the mischief
 Of Darkness as it overspreads;

4. From the mischief
 Of those who practise
 Secret Arts:

5. And from the mischief
 Of the envious one
 As he practises envy.

[p. 1809]

The Holy Quran, tr. by Yusuf Ali, [1934], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1810]

  

Sura CXIV.

  

Nas, or Mankind.

In the name of God, Most Gracious,
 Most Merciful.

1. Say: I seek refuge
 With the Lord
 And Cherisher of Mankind,

2. The King (or Ruler)
 Of Mankind,

3. The God (or Judge)
 Of Mankind,--

4. From the mischief
 Of the Whisperer
 (Of Evil), who withdraws
 (After his whisper),--

5. (The same) who whispers
 Into the hearts of Mankind,--

6. Among Jinns
 And among Men.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: yat.txt =====


     
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

YANA TEXTS

  

BY

  

EDWARD SAPIR

  

TOGETHER WITH YANA MYTHS COLLECTED BY ROLAND B. DIXON.

  

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PUBLICATIONS

  

IN

  

AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY

  

Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 1-235 February 19, 1910

  

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, September, 2003, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

CONTENTS.

           

       PAGE

     
      INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

        

     
      Key to characters used

       <page 4>

     
      I. CENTRAL DIALECT (Gat'a'?i).

        

     
      Myths.

        

     
      I. Flint Boy

       <page 6>

     
      II. The Theft of Fire and the Burning of the World

       <page 23>

     
      III. The Visit of the Geese People to Mt. Shasta

       <page 35>

     
      IV. Bluejay's Journey to the Land of the Moon

       <page 50>

     
      V. The Creation of the Yana

       <page 74>

     
      VI. Origin of Sex, Hands, and Death

       <page 77>

     
      VII. Coyote and His Sister

       <page 93>

     
      VIII. Coyote and His Mother-in-Law

       <page 109>

     
      IX. The Rolling Skull.

       <page 115>

     
      II. NORTHERN DIALECT (Gari'?i).

        

     
      Myths.

        

     
      X. Coyote, Pine-Marten, and Loon

       <page 129>

     
      XI. The Drowning of Young Buzzard's Wife

       <page 137>

     
      XII. Coyote, Heron, and Lizard

       <page 142>

     
      XIII. The Finding of Fire (from Curtin's "Creation Myths of Primitive   America") 

       <page 160>

     
      Narratives and Customs

        

     
      XIV. Indian Medicine Men

       <page 174>

     
      XV. Marriage

       <page 181>

     
      XVI. A Lovers' Quarrel

       <page 183>

     
      XVII. Childbirth and Death

       <page 185>

     
      XVIII. Death and Burial

       <page 188>

     
      XIX. Betty Brown's Dream

       <page 195>

     
      XX. Spell said by a Girl desirous of Getting a Husband

       <page 197>

     
      XXI. Curse on People that wish one Ill

       <page 198>

     
      XXII. Prayer on Sneezing

       <page 199>

     
      [p. 2]

        

     
      Supplementary Texts, collected by Dr. R. B. Dixon.

        

     
      XXIII. The Rolling Skull

       <page 200>

     
      XXIV. Grizzly Bear and Deer

       <page 20>

     
      III. SUPPLEMENTARY YANA MYTHS, collected by Dr. R. B. Dixon.

        

     
      I. The Creation of Man

       <page 209>

     
      II. The Contest of Fox and Coyote

       <page 210>

     
      III. The Lost Brother

       <page 211>

     
      IV. The Flints and Grizzly Bears

       <page 216>

     
      V. 'I'lhat?aina

       <page 221>

     
      VI. Fixing the Sun

       <page 223>

     
      VII. Woodpecker and Woodrat

       <page 214>

     
      VIII. Rabbit Woman and Her Child

       <page 225>

     
      IX. Coyote and Rabbit Gamble

       <page 226>

     
      X. Gopher and Rabbit Gamble

       <page 227>

     
      XI. Coyote and the Stump

       <page 227>

     
      XII. Loon Woman

       <page 228>

     
      XIII. Pine Marten's Quest for Moon's Daughter

       <page 233>

     
    

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

The following myths were obtained in 1907 as part of the Ethnological and Archaeological Survey of California conducted by the Department of Anthropology of the University of California. Numbers I-IX were obtained in December near Redding, the county seat of Shasta county, numbers X-XXII were obtained in July and August between Round Mountain and Montgomery creek in the same county (see notes 3a and 202 of text). The two sets of texts represent two not very different but clearly distinct dialects, the Northern Yana (gari'?i) and the Central Yana (gat'a'?i), of which the former may be considered more specialized phonetically. The territory formerly occupied by these dialects may be defined as that part of Shasta county, California, that stretches south of Pit river from and including Montgomery creek, a southern affluent of that stream, west to a point on Pit river between Copper City and Woodman, then south to Woodman on Little Cow creek, along the eastern bank of that stream and Cow creek to the Sacramento river, southeast to Battle creek, east along, or some distance north of, Battle creek and North fork of Battle creek to the mountainous country southwest of the headwaters of Hat creek, and northwest back to Montgomery creek in a line that fell short of Crater

[p. 3]

peak and Burney creek. Of this country only that small portion that lies northeast of Bullskin ridge, in other words the region of Montgomery and Cedar creeks, belonged to the Northern Yana or gari'?i dialect. The territory defined above formed roughly the northern half of the country occupied by the whole Yanan stock. A third, now extinct and apparently rather divergent, dialect was spoken in the region bounded by the Sacramento river, a line drawn from opposite Tehama east along Mill creek to and including Lassen peak, a line running northwest to the headwaters of Battle creek, and the valley of Battle creek west to the Sacramento. These boundaries are somewhat uncertain, it remaining doubtful whether the Yanas reached the Sacramento. The Yanas were surrounded by the Achoma'wi (Pit River Indians) to the north; the Achoma'wi, Hat Creek or Atsuge'wi Indians (of Shastan stock), and Northeast Maidu ("Big Meadows Indians") to the east; the Northwest Maidu to the south; and the Wintun to the west.

Nothing has hitherto been published on the Yana language except a few notes in Dixon and Kroeber's "Native Languages of California"; [*1] the authors place Yana in a morphological class by itself, it showing little or no grammatical resemblance to the Central Californian type of languages (such as Maidu or Wintun). Yana mythology has fared better. Pages 281-484 of Jeremiah Curtin's "Creation Myths of Primitive America" (Boston, 1903) consist of thirteen Yana myths, some of which are closely parallel forms of myths published in this volume. Unfortunately Curtin fails to give the names either of his informants or of the places at which the myths were procured; it would have been desirable to have definite information on this point, as the Yana myths undoubtedly appeared in several distinct forms (cf., e.g., Curtin's "Theft of Fire" with Sam Bat'wi's version below). Information secured from my informants, Sam Bat'wi and Betty Brown, indicates that Curtin's material was derived partly at Round Mountain from the now dead chief Round Mountain Jack (Bui'yas*i), partly near Redding from an old Indian, since deceased, known as "The Governor," for whom

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] Sam Bat'wi acted as interpreter. Notes on Yana myths obtained by Dr. Dixon are to be found in his "Northern Maidu." [*2] The published Yana mythologic material is briefly summarized and discussed by Dr. Kroeber in "Myths of South Central California." [*3]

Thanks are due Mrs. Curtin and Little, Brown and Company for permission to reprint in this volume Curtin's myth of "The Theft of Fire" an Indian translation of which was secured from Betty Brown. Thanks are also due to Dr. R. B. Dixon for kindly consenting to have his manuscript Yana material incorporated with my own; this material was collected for the American Museum of Natural History in the late fall and early winter of 1900, partly from Sam Bat'wi and partly from Round Mountain Jack.

KEY TO CHARACTERS USED.

Vowels:

a short as in Ger. Mann,

a long as in Ger. Bahn.

e short and open as in Eng. met.

e long and open as in Fr. fete, approximately as in Eng. there, but without final "r vanish."

i short and open as in Eng. it.

i close as in Eng. eat. Not necessarily long unless accented.

o short and open as in Ger. dort.

o long and open as in Eng. saw.

u short and open as in Eng. put.

u close as in Eng. spoon. Generally long.

e close as in Fr. ete, and o close as in Fr. chapeau, are not true Yana sounds and of very doubtful occurrence.

a as in Eng. hat. Of rare occurrence.

u approximately like short and open Ger. u in Mutze. Rarely occurs as variant of yu.

Superior vowels (a, i, u, rarely e and o) are whispered and accompanied by aspiration of preceding consonant. Less frequently syllables consisting of voiced consonant and vowel are written superior to indicate whispering, e.g.,

Diphthongs:

ai as in Eng. night. Apt to split up into a-i.

au as in Eng. house. Apt to split up into a-u.

oi (of rare occurrence), ui, and ui, are o+i, u+i, and u+i.

[p. 5]

Consonants:

b, d, dj, g with considerably less sonancy than corresponding Eng. consonants (dj = Eng. j in judge); best considered as intermediate between surds and sonants.

p, t, tc (or ts*), k unaspirated surds (tc = Eng. ch in church). These are of secondary origin.

p', t', tc' (or ts*' ), k' distinctly aspirated surds.

p!, t!, tc! (or ts*!), k! "fortis" in articulation. Pronounced with sudden release of tongue and accompanying stricture of glottis. Distinct from, though similar to, p?, t?, ---, k?.

w as in Eng. wine.

w unvoiced w, approximately as in Eng. what. Occurs only as syllabic final.

c, s as in Eng. ship and sip respectively. These are variants of s* acoustically midway between them and which also occurs as second member of affricative ts*.

ts* t with slight s*-affection following. Sometimes heard as variant of t' before dj.

j as in Eng. azure or, better, acoustically midway between z and j (in Fr. jour). It practically never occurs except as second member of affricative dj.

l, m, n as in English.

l, m, n unvoiced l, m, and n. These occur generally before? (glottal stop).

r pronounced with tip of tongue and rather weakly trilled, so as frequently to sound like sonant d.

r unvoiced r with fairly strong aspiration. It goes back etymologically to r (sonant d).

rt?, rt' differing from ordinary t?, t' by peculiar voiceless-r quality of dental surd (rt? seems often to be acoustic variant of r). They are related to ordinary dental surds as r (sonant d) is to ordinary d.

h, x as in Ger. Hand and Dach, except that x is considerably weaker than Ger. guttural spirant ch. They are variants of one sound.

y as in Eng. yes.

x* as in Ger. ich. Rarely heard as variant of whispered y.

? glottal stop, produced by complete stricture of glottis.

' aspiration of preceding consonant or vowel. Before initial vowels it denotes very weak aspiration ('i-, e.g., is apt to be heard now as i-, now as hi-).

w very weak w-attack of initial u, u, o, or o. One often doubts whether he hears, e.g., 'o- or wo-.

n indicates nasalization of preceding vowel. Found only in interjections.

' stressed vowel.

  secondarily stressed vowel.

+ denotes prolongation of preceding consonant or vowel. 

- sometimes placed between vowels to show that they are to be separately pronounced.

( ) enclose words not in Indian text.

NOTE.--Doubled -ll-, -nn-, -mm- should be pronounced as l+l, n+n, m+m; they are in no case equivalent to -l-, -n-, -m-. Distinguish carefully also between -td- and -t'd-, and correspondingly for other stops. Final consonants should be pronounced with vowel of following word; e.g., p'ad a'idja is to be syllabified p'a-da'i-dja.

Footnotes

^3:1 Amer. Anthropologist, N. S., V, 7, 12, 15.

^4:2 Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist., XVII, 339, 340, 342.

^4:3 Univ. Calif. Publ. Am. Arch. Ethn., IV, 148-9.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

I. CENTRAL DIALECT (Gat'a'?i)  [*3a]

  

1. FLINT BOY. [*26]

[p. 17]

I shall commence my myth.

The Flint people were living at Djo'djanu. [*27] The Flint people quarreled with the Grizzly Bear people. All the Flint people dwelling together had a sweat-house. They used to go to hunt deer, but four were always missing when they returned home. The Grizzly Bears lay in wait for the Flint people, the Grizzly

[p. 18]

[paragraph continues] Bears killed the Flint people. All the Flint people living together were very numerous and had a sweat-house. Some were, missing when they returned home, until the Grizzly Bears had, killed all the Flint people. There was just one that returned home. An old woman was sitting inside the sweat-house, Rock Woman, and all the Flint people living together, it is said, were her children. They did not come home from the deer hunt; indeed, they were all killed, the Grizzly Bears killed them all.

Now the old woman was weeping. "Hehe'?! Where can they all have gone?" wept that old woman, waiting for them to come back home. The Grizzly Bears had killed all the Flint people. The old woman, weeping, stayed home by herself, all alone, all her children having been killed. She had quivers hanging, many were the quivers hanging close together, with bows and arrows. Now the old woman was all alone, weeping, being the only Flint, person.

"I shall not die," had said (one of the Flint people), leaving' word behind to her. He hung up a bow, a coarse-sinewed bow up yonder on the south side, while she cried, continuing to weep, sitting inside the sweat-house. The Grizzly Bears were looking into the sweat-house. "I spit out spittle on the ground, on the south side. If I die, pray look at it, grandmother! I shall come to life again from my spittle. Pray look at it! Pray look at it!", She did so in the middle of the night, looking at it. There were no men in the sweat-house, all having been eaten up, the Grizzly Bears having eaten them up. The old woman put pitch on herself as sign of mourning. Suddenly the spittle bawled out. A person came to life again in the middle of the night. "Where is it?" she said. "Who is the child?" "Una'! una'!" it said. It was indeed the spittle that had already come to life again. The old woman arose, took the boy up in her arms, and wrapped him up in a blanket. The old woman washed him, carrying him about in her arms. She washed him in the night. "Grand-mother!" "Keep quiet! There are Grizzly Bears outside."

When it was daylight he who had come back to life was crawling about; when the sun was overhead he was already grown up. "Give me a bow," he said, being already grown up. He

[p. 19]

looked to the south side, looking at the bow. "Grandmother! I shall go outside to play, grandmother." "No," she said, speaking to Flint Boy, "danger lies outside." "What is it, grandmother?" "All of our people were eaten up," she said, speaking to the young man. She would not let him go outside, saying, "Do not go outside! Outside lies danger." "What is it, grandmother?" "Do you not see that our people are not here in the sweat-house?" "I am not afraid, grandmother." He put out his hand for the bow and said, "I shall go outside. Whose bow is this?" he asked. He took down the quiver hanging on the south side. the bow was so long, short, a coarse-sinewed bow, an ugly bow. "I shall shoot arrows in play. I shall not go far off." "Yes, yes, yes," she said. She believed him.

He pulled out a bow from the quiver. He stretched it, and his bow broke. "He!" he said, "that was no man," for he had broken his bow. He took out another bow and stretched it also. He stretched and broke another bow, in this way breaking all the bows. "They were no men. I have broken all their bows." Now he put out his hand for the coarse-sinewed bow. He bent it to himself, it was strong. Again he bent it to himself, it was strong. It did not break, for it was strong. He laughed. "Grandmother, truly it is strong." He laughed, and bent it to himself again, put his feet down on it, pulling at it, so as to break the bow. He put the coarse-sinewed bow down on a rock. "It is strong, grandmother," he said, while the old woman kept on weeping, crying. "This one was a man. Hehe! Why did he die? Grandmother, I am not able to break it." He put the bow on a rock, and lifted up a big rock; he tried to break the bow by throwing the rock down on it. The coarse-sinewed bow bounced up. "Grandmother, I shall go outside. I shall go around to shoot small game outside. I shall take the bow along, grandmother. I shall not go far off." "Yes! Do not start to go far away. Danger lies outside. Grizzly Bears are waiting for you outside." Now he was the only one. "Yes, grandmother, give me three arrows. Look up the smoke-hole of the sweat-house at the jack-rabbit!" He went outside. Now he shot his arrows, went about shooting at jack-rabbits. (When he returned inside

[p. 20]

he said,) "Grandmother! What might that be looking in from above?" "What does he look like? What do his eyes look like?" "His eyes are small; he is small-eyed." "So!" she said. "Perhaps that one is dangerous. Indeed, perhaps that one is a Grizzly Bear, a small-eyed Grizzly Bear." "Grandmother! What is that above?" "What is he like?" "His eyes are big." "So! Perhaps that one is a jack-rabbit, it is jack-rabbits that have big eyes.

Now Flint Boy went out. "Grandmother, I shall go to the south," he said. "I shall go about." "Yes, go about!" "Grandmother, have you any acorn bread?" "Yes." Then she gave him her acorn bread in one round lump. He put his acorn bread [*28] inside his blanket, and held it wrapped up here. Now he went off, far away to the south. He came to a halt, looking down hill to the south. There was smoke and many Grizzly Bear women were building a fire, while it was raining, as it is now. [*29] The Grizzly Bear women were twenty in number and were digging up earth-worms. Flint Boy went to the fire, built by the Grizzly Bear women. There was nobody at the fire now, as the Grizzly Bear women were occupied in digging up earth-worms. The Grizzly Bear women had stuck their teeth in the ground in a circle about the fire. [*30] Flint Boy laughed and said, as he stood near the fire, "He!" The Grizzly Bear women thereupon turned around to look. "Who is it?" they said. "Well! Come on, all of you." Flint Boy seized all the Grizzly Bear teeth that had been stuck out to dry, so that they were deprived of their teeth. Now they came back together. "Well! Give me something to eat. I am hungry," said he, lying. The Grizzly Bear women were afraid, for they did not have their teeth. They whispered among themselves: "Who is it? (aloud:) We have no food. We would give you something to eat, but we have no food." "Yes," Flint Boy said, "you are afraid, are you

[p. 21]

not?" "We are not afraid." "Are you not hungry? I carry ground acorn bread with me." "Yes," said the Grizzly Bear women. Flint Boy intended to kill the Grizzly Bear women; they did not have their teeth. "I have some acorn bread." "Where is it?" said the Grizzly Bear women. Flint Boy put his hand inside the blanket, and drew forth his acorn bread. He gave each one of them to eat, and they ate of it. "I shall go back home," said Flint Boy. Thus he spoke to the Grizzly Bear women, bidding them adieu. Flint Boy went off back home and came back to his grandmother. "Grandmother! I have seen many women." The Grizzly Bear women were all sick now at the fire, for the acorn bread had made them sick. The women fell back and all died, as they had really eaten flint.

"I shall go to get ma'ls*unna roots, I shall go to dig up roots with a stick." She told Flint Boy, "Stay at home!" "Yes," said Flint Boy. Now she went off to dig roots with a stick. It was spring, and the ma'ls*unna roots were sprouting up out of the ground. Now the old woman dug up roots with her stick, while she carried a pack-basket on her back. Flint Boy, now all alone, stayed at home and looked all around inside. The ma'ls*unna roots were sprouting up out of the ground. The old woman saw them and dug them up. "Una'! una'! una'!" said something which was sprouting up. Indeed it was anew-born babe. The old woman was frightened and dug the child up with a stick. "Heh!" said the old woman, looking at it. "Hehe'! What am I going to do with it?" She took it up in her arms and put the child that she had found down into her pack-basket. The old woman went off home. "Grandmother! Have you come back home already?" "Yes." "Una'! una'! una'!" it said outside. "Grandmother, what is that that is coming?" "I found that one." "Where was it?" "I was digging up roots, when suddenly it cried." "Indeed, grandmother, wash it, maybe that one is a person." She did so, washing him. He also did not grow as people generally do; he grew up quickly.

Now Flint Boy went off, went outside. "Grandmother, I should like to take him along." "Yes," said the old woman, "Please do not go far away. Take care! Stay right around

[p. 22]

here, a little ways to the east." "What is your name?" Flint Boy asked the child. "My name is Little Gray Squirrel," [*31] "Grandmother, what do you say to it? I shall take him along." "Go off to a great distance." "Grandmother, I wish to make a dog. We have no dog. What do you say to that!" "Do so! Make it, make it, make it!" "I shall go to hunt deer," said Flint Boy, asking her. She assented. Now they went off to a great distance to the east, going to hunt deer. Flint Boy sat down on a mountain. "You! What would you do?" he asked the boy. "I want to make a dog of you. What, pray, would you say if you should bark?" He did not talk. "Oh, I should talk in any way at all." "I want to hear it," said Flint Boy. "Bark!" "Hu', hu! hu!" Flint Boy was frightened as the dog barked. The earth shook while the dog barked. The sound went from there to the north, it went from there to the south, it went from there to the east, it went from there to the west. [*32] Flint Boy looked at him and said, "It is good now."

Now Flint Boy went off with his dog as far as up on the mountain here to the west. [*33] "I want a woman," said Flint Boy, talking within his heart; so he took a wife. When it was daybreak he went up on the mountain to the west, taking the woman and his dog with him. The dog lay curled up beside the house. "Listen," he said to his wife, "I shall go out to hunt deer. I think this is a good place, here on the south, is it not?" "Yes," she answered. "I shall not take the dog along with me. Tie him down to the ground, for he might run off after me.

"Pray do not play with the dog," she said to the people there, tying the dog down to the ground. "He might run off after him," said his wife, speaking to his people. "Yes, yes, we shall not play with the dog." (Before he went off) Flint. Boy played

[p. 23]

with him. "Bark!" he said, and the dog barked "Hu', hu', hu', hu'!" The earth shook; the people were afraid while the dog barked. They in the north heard the dog barking, they in the east heard the dog barking, the south people heard it, they to the west over the mountains heard it.

Now Flint Boy went off to hunt deer to the south. He went off leaving two women behind him in the house. (When he had gone) they whispered to one another, "What do you think? Let us turn the dog loose." They did so and began to play with him. One of the women spoke to the dog, saying, "Bark!" While Flint Boy was away, the dog barked as he had done before, and his speech was like thunder. Flint Boy heard his dog barking. Now the dog ran away, looking for Flint Boy's footsteps. The women called to the dog to come back, but he kept on barking after Flint Boy. "Hu', hu'!" said the dog, crying. All at once there appeared a fog. It did not rain, but the fog just moved about. "Hu', hu'!" he kept on saying, while he ran off. The two women cried, but the dog kept on barking, "Hu', hu'!" up above; he was now heard to bark, running off up to the sky. The dog melted away into the fog, rising up; indeed he was now flying up to the sky. People hear the dog barking in the sky. [*34]

Footnotes

^6:3a The nine gat'a'?i myths here given were obtained in December, 1907, just north of and across the Sacramento river from Redding, Shasta County. The informant was Sam Bat'wi, one of the four or five Indians still left that have a speaking knowledge of this dialect and probably the only one that is at all acquainted with the mythology. His original dialect was the now extinct Southern Yana, spoken south of Battle creek, but having early in life moved north to the Cow creek country in the neighborhood of the present hamlet of Millville, he learned to use the Central or gat'a'?i dialect (called gat'a'?a by the Northern Yana of Montgomery creek and Round Mountain) and seems now unable to make fluent use of his former dialect.

The Central and Northern Yana texts not only supplement each other in regard to dialect, but also serve to illustrate the differences between the men's and women's forms of the language (except that of course in conversational passages the use of sex forms depends upon the circumstances of the case--women under all circumstances and men in speaking to women use the female, men in speaking to men use the male forms). However, Sam had a tendency to slip into the use of female forms, probably owing to the fact that he had been for a long time accustomed to use his language chiefly in talking to his wife, who had died but a short time before these texts were dictated. When his attention was called to these lapses, he admitted the charge, and jocosely explained them as due to a too frequent dreaming and thinking about women.

^6:26 This myth corresponds to that of "The Hakas and the Tennas" (i.e., "The Flints and the Grizzly Bears") in Curtin's Creation Myths of Primitive America," pp. 297-310 (notes on p. 521). Curtin's Haka and Hakaya'mchiwi correspond to ha'ga and hagaya'mtc!iwi; Tenna is t'en?na (t'e'nna in gari'?i); Tsuwalkai is djuwa'lk!ai(na); Dari Jowa', probably incorrectly translated as "eagle," is doubtless da'ridjuwa, "gray squirrel," in this version Thunder's own name; Teptewi (p. 304) is t'e'p!diwi. Curtin's explanation of the myth (p. 521) as a nature allegory representing the struggle of fire or lightning, with which he identifies flint, and the clouds, which for unknown reasons the grizzly bears are supposed to represent, is altogether unwarranted. On the whole the two versions correspond satisfactorily; the latter portion of both, pp. 309-10 of Curtin and pp. <page 21>-22 of this volume, is an apparently quite unconnected account of the origin of thunder, a child dug up from the ground.

^17:27 A mountain east of Buzzard's Roost (or Round Mountain) near the headwaters of Montgomery creek, at which Terry's sawmill is now situated.

^20:28 This "acorn bread" was really made of ground flint.

^20:29 It happened to be raining when this story was dictated. Sam Bat'wi was fond of illustrating his narratives by gestures, references to which are to be found here and there in the texts.

^20:30 In Curtin's version (p. 305) the teeth are hung up on a tree near the fire.

^22:31 Sam Bat'wi found it at least curious that the newly-dug-up child should have known its own name, though none had been bestowed upon it. He suggested no explanation.

^22:32 This sort of emphasis on the cardinal points seems characteristic of northern California. The Yana texts give numerous examples of the formulaic rigmarole. In this passage there is the implied conclusion that the incident explains why nowadays dogs are found to bark in every direction.

^22:33 The reference is to Bally Mountain, about 14 miles west of Redding, where the myth was told. Bally Mountain is in Wintun territory.

^23:34 As thunder.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. THE THEFT OF FIRE AND THE BURNING OF THE WORLD.  [*47]

[p. 31]

There was no fire. It is true that people had a kind of fire, but it was not hot. The people went to hunt and kill deer, they went to get salmon, and the women went to get sunflower seeds. The people roasted deer meat, but it was never done. People fetched home salmon and cooked it over the fire, but it was never done. They ate salmon and deer meat raw. The women just slightly browned the sunflower seeds; they were never done. "Hehe'?!" said the men, "I do not like this fire. I am tired now of eating deer meat raw. Hehe'?! there must be fire somewhere around here. There may be fire off to the east, east over the mountains; there may be fire in the south; there may be fire off to the west; there may be fire in the north." The people came together to talk together in council. "Let us look for fire," they said. "Every night, when the sun has already set and it is dark, go up to the north and stay on top of the mountain," one man was told. "Yes," he said.

Every night when it was dark this one man sat there. He stayed and looked to the east. There was no fire in the east, no fire was to be seen. He looked to the north; there was no fire in

[p. 32]

the north. He looked to the west, there was no fire, he did not see any fire. He looked to the south. There there was indeed some fire. There was a light in the south, the fire was seen coming up in sparks. Down in the south they had good fire. This one man now returned home. Many were the people gathered together. "I have seen fire," he said. "Indeed! Where is it? Where is the fire?" "In the south. It is faraway from here." "Let us go and steal it," they said. "Yes, who is the good runner?" (said the chief). "I" (said Fox). "It is I who know how to run." "Who else is a good runner?" "I" (said another). There were two who knew how to run well. "What is your name?" (asked the chief of the first). "Fox." "What is your name?" he asked of the second). "'A'iwi?auna." [*48] "Yes, it is good now."

Behold! The men went off, five of them. They walked in a circle around the village. "Where shall we go?" (they asked one another). "Let us go to the south under the ground." The five men proceeded south under the ground, went off south in the night-time. Arriving in the south, they came up from the ground at K!u'wiha. [*49] Coyote was sleeping; (on their arrival) he arose and said, "Well, where are the people all going to?" "I do not know," said the people there, talking to Coyote. Coyote talked to the rocks, talked to the cooking-basket, talked to the house. "You, tell me, Rock! where are they all going to?" "I do not know," said the rock, said the house. "Where are they all going to?" (he asked the) brush for cleaning acorn flour. "They have all gone out to hunt deer." "He!" (exclaimed Coyote), "Why didn't they tell me that?" Now Coyote went to the east, but the five men had already gone a great distance to the south. Coyote ran around the village in a circle, but did not find any tracks. Coyote asked the acorn mortar, "Mortar Woman! Where have the five men all gone to?" "They have all gone to the south." "Indeed!" "Yes." Now Coyote ran,

[p. 33]

running off to the south after them. Coyote found their tracks as he ran after them. The five men had already traveled a great distance, but Coyote caught up with the five men. "Ha!" Coyote shouted in a whisper, "do you wait for me!" The five men looked back (and said in displeasure to one another), "Oh! Coyote has been coming after us." The five men went off to the south day and night, while Coyote came after them. "Huh!" Coyote panted, "I am tired. "Heh!" said Coyote, "Why didn't you tell me about it!" The five men did not talk, for they were angry.

They reached the fire village, arrived in the middle of the night. The light from the fire came up out of the sweat-house. They stole the fire while the people that owned it were all lying asleep on the ground. They went up on a hill to the south of the sweat-house. There lay a chunk of burning coal inside of the sweat-house. It was two of the men, Fox and 'A'iwi?auna, who stole the fire. "How are we going to manage it? You go inside," he said to Fox. He looked inside in the night, and climbed down through the smoke-hole. The people that had the fire were all asleep. Fox put his hand out for the fire, picked it up, and jumped quickly out of the sweat-house. He carried the fire out with him, having stolen it. They ran to the north. "Run! run, all of you!" (said 'A'iwi?auna). "When you are tired out, throw the fire to me." They kept running to the north, while Coyote kept running back after them. When they had run back as far as Bale'ha, [*50] Coyote said, asking Fox, "Well! Give me the fire. I shall carry the fire in my hand," said Coyote. "Look out!" said Fox, "you might drop it down on the ground, you might burn your hand." "What did I go off to the south for? I shall tell the people when I return home, I shall say that I carried fire. 'I have carried fire!' I shall tell them." They ran back home from the south, they ran back as far as K!u'wiha. "Give me the fire," said Coyote. Coyote was given the fire (as Fox called out to him), "Hold out your hand." Coyote held out his hand as he was told. Fox was still carrying his fire in

[p. 34]

his hand. "Here it is, take it to yourself," (he said. and) gave it to him. Coyote took the fire, while Fox and 'A'iwi?auna rushed off. They have thrown their fire to Coyote, as they come running back home from the south.

Coyote burned his hand and dropped his fire. The chunk of coal burst apart into several pieces. "M'! du' du du du' du du! [*50a] said Coyote, for he had burned his hand. Everything burned all around, when the fire had been dropped. The fire burned in the south, the fire burned in the east, the fire burned off to the west, the fire burned in the north. It came burning up to this place here. The rocks burst from the heat, the water burned up. The mountain was all covered with smoke, it burned right across the Sacramento river, the people burned up. The two people (that had stolen the fire) rushed off, while the fire came burning after them. It burned and reached up to Eagles village at Ci'p!a. [*51]

"Hurry up, everybody! This place is burning, the people are burning. Whither shall we go? We can't move into the rocks, we can't move down into the round. Hurry up, all of you!" Spider was living with them. Hurry up, everybody! (Eagle said). "Have you strong rope?" (said Eagle to Spider). "Yes," said Spider. "Do you all go into my big tule basket. Stretch out!" (he said to the basket). They all went inside now, and Spider tied the tule basket on to the sky. Coyote lay down on his belly in the bottom of the tule basket. "Go ahead!" said Eagle. "Hurry up, everybody! This place is burning already." Now Spider pulled the rope up to the sky, pulled the people up. The people filled the tule basket; everybody had gone in to save themselves in the tule basket, together with their children. "Go ahead!" Spider was told. Now there was nobody left in the sweat-house. He pulled up the basket, pulled it up, way up to

[p. 35]

the sky. The fire was crackling all over this place. He had almost pulled the people who were running away from danger clear up to the sky when Coyote said, "Well! I am going to look down, my friends. I am going to see the fire, my friends." "Look out!" (said Eagle). "I shall just tear out a little hole in the basket. I want to see how the fire is burning down there. I shall look down to the ground through a tiny little hole," (said) Coyote, desiring to see the fire. He made a little rent in the tule basket, while Spider kept pulling at his rope. Coyote looked down, the fire was seen. He enlarged the rent in the tule basket. He looked down through the hole and said, "He! I see the fire. There is much fire." "Look out! you might fall down through the hole," (said Eagle). The hole spread out a little more so that the basket was now torn a good bit. Coyote fell down through the hole, fell right back down to the ground.

Fire-Drill Woman [*52] was standing below and looked around. She looked up, saw the people falling down back to the ground. The people all burned up, burned up completely. Black Bear's eyes popped out way to the east, they popped way to the west, the eyes popped way to the north, his eyes popped to the south. He burned up, but his eyes popped off. [*53] Spider remained in the sky.

Footnotes

^23:47 The scene of this myth is laid at Ba'djiyu, an Indian village said to have been located above P'a'wi, a village on Clover creek at a distance of about eight miles from Millville. Curtin's myth of "The Finding of Fire" (op. cit., pp. 365-370 or no. XIII of this paper) is located at Pawi. The two versions agree fairly well in localization and content, the main differences being that the characteristic episode of the pursuit of the fire-thieves is lacking in Sam Bat'wi's account (the omission is not accidental, for, when asked, Sam claimed there was no pursuit) and that Curtin's version makes no mention of the burning of the world and the consequent ascent to the sky. The latter episode, however, may have been borrowed from the Loon story (see note 52). Of the three fire-thieves in Curtin's story two, Ahalamila (fox, not gray wolf) and Metsi (coyote), are identical with 'aha'limilla and me'tc!i of Sam's version; the third, Shushu Marimi (dog woman), is replaced by 'a'iwi?auna, perhaps the sandpiper. It is worthy of note that there are in Sam's as in Curtin's account really only three fire-stealing of the five men that start out only two are named, Coyote joining the party later on. For similar fire myths see Kroeber's "Ute Tales" (Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XIV, 252); Kroeber's "Myths of South Central California" (Univ. Calif. Publ. Am. Arch. Ethn., IV, 211. Truhohi Yokuts with fox, road-runner, coyote, and crow as fire-thieves); Dixon's "Achomawi and Atsugewi Tales" (Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XXI, 165, 175); and Dixon's "Maidu Myths" (Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., XVII, 65). Another Yana fire myth, constructed on Maidu lines, is referred to in Dixon's "Northern Maidu" (op. cit.), p. 339. The version contained in Dixon's manuscript Yana note-books, however, does not differ materially from that here given.

^32:48 A bird described as brown in color, somewhat bigger than a snow bird, and running along the river shore. Perhaps the sandpiper. 'aiwi?au- may be, either actually or by popular etymology, connected with 'ai?au- "to carry fire."

^32:49 An Indian village at North Fork of Battle Creek.

^33:50 An Indian village at Mill creek, situated on a mountain several miles east of Tehama. It was considered by Sam Bat'wi to be the farthest Yana point to the south.

^34:50a It is very curious that practically the same exclamation (do' do do do do do) is used in a Takelma (southwestern Oregon) text by ghosts on catching fire. The resemblance becomes an identity if we remember that close o and open u are respectively lacking to Yana and Takelma.

^34:51 An Indian village on the flat hill (the so-called "Bullskin") that forms the divide between Oak Run and Little Cow creek, removed about half a mile from the former stream. A small lake was situated near by, the resort in former days of countless geese as they migrated north in the spring. See p. 40, l. 1, and p. 142, l. 8.

^35:52 Sam Bat'wi claimed that Fire-Drill Woman was another name for 'ak!a'lisi, "Loon." This would make it plausible that the sky episode of this myth is really taken over from the identical incident in the Loon Woman story; see note 207 and Curtin's "Two Sisters, Haka Lasi and Tsore Jowall (op. cit.), pp. 409-10; also no. X of this paper.

^35:53 This explains why black bears are to be found in every direction. No attempt was made to explain how two eyes could pop off in four directions.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. THE VISIT OF THE GEESE PEOPLE TO MOUNT SHASTA.  [*67]

[p. 45]

Flint Rock had his sweat-house at Mount Shasta. Flint Rock was a chief and lived there at Mount Shasta. "I shall send word to people for them to come," said the chief, named Flint Rock Chief. "I intend to have a dance," said the chief. "Do you go to the south and tell the people to come, far away in the south. Who is it that can run, so as to go and tell the people in the south? Go tell them to come! Go tell the Geese people to come! Go tell the Crane people to come! Go tell the White Geese to come! Go tell the Heron People in the south to come!" "It is I who shall go to tell them. I am a good runner," said Humming-bird. "So!" said the chief, "do so! Go tell them to come!" "What is it that I shall say?" said Humming-bird. "Pray tell them people are having a dance. Pray tell them Flint Rock Chief is having a dance." Humming-bird wrapped a wildcat skin about his head and made himself all ready.

Off he flew, flew to the south. The Geese people were living in the south, the Geese people lived there in great numbers. There was a sweat-house, and Humming-bird flew about over the smoke-hole of the sweat-house. "Bu's*, bu's*, bu's*, bu's*," he said, for that was Humming-bird's way of talking. He was talking to the Geese, telling them the news. Many were the people that looked at Humming-bird, flying about at the smoke-hole. "What sort of person can that be talking? His language is not understood.

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] Perhaps he has come to tell us something, but we do not understand his language. "Bu's*, bu's*, bu's*, bu's*," Humming-bird kept saying, talking at the smoke-hole of the sweathouse. "What he says is unintelligible," said the Geese and White Geese, said the Herons, said the Whistling Swans.

Coyote was living with them. "Hehe'?! This language is not understood. I cannot make out what he is saying. Go and talk to Coyote. He is always saying that he understands every language. Go tell him to come." Someone was sent to tell Coyote to come. (On arriving at Coyote's house he said,) "You! You have been sent for." "What's that?" said Coyote. "Indeed, somebody has flown up to here, and nobody understands his language." "Indeed! It is I who understand the speech of far to the north." Now Coyote arose and went into the sweathouse. Coyote sat down inside, and Humming-bird kept saying, "Bu's*, bu's*, bu's*, bu's*," flying around over the smoke-hole. "We do not understand him," said the people there. Coyote sat down, bung his head down, and listened. "Ha!" said Coyote, and he lifted up his eyes. He reported the news to the Geese people. "Flint Rock Chief has sent for you to come," said Coyote. "This one says that you should peel bark off the trees, to make string. That is what this humming-bird says." [*68] "Indeed!" said the people of the south. "He sends for you. This one says that you should take bark off of ba'ni [*69]bushes so as to make string," said Coyote, reporting to them what he had heard. "He wants you to start out today," said Coyote. "That's all that humming-bird has to say."

"Bu's*, bu's*, bu's*," Humming-bird kept saying, flying about over the smoke-hole. The Geese people said, "Hehe'?! he would be flying off back home, if his language had been understood. It seems that you do not understand Humming-bird's words, that is why he does not fly off. If you had understood his language, he would have flown bock home." Coyote said no more. (The

[p. 47]

chief said,) "Go and tell Meadow-lark Woman about it. She always says that she can understand the language of the far north." A certain man ran off to tell Meadow-lark Woman about it. "He wants you to come." "Who is it that wants me to come?" "It is Goose Chief that wants to have you come. We do not understand Humming-bird's language, and so he has sent for you." Coyote went off home, and now the woman came. She did not enter the sweat-house. Meadow-lark Woman talked with Humming-bird; Meadow-lark talked her own language in speaking outside the house with Humming-bird. They flew up together in the air, talking to each other. Now Humming-bird flew off home in the air, flew back home to the north.

The woman came down and sat in the sweat-house, the sweathouse of the Geese. "He came to tell you," she said, reporting to them what she had heard, "he came from Flint Rock Chief to tell you. He says that Flint Rock Chief is having a dance, that he has been sent after you; that is what Humming-bird says." Goose Chief said, "Indeed! Put your feather headdresses outside to give them an airing! Hang your head-bands around! Wash your necklaces of shell beads! My people, let us go there to have a dance. Her words, telling us of Hummingbird's message, are good. Look at Coyote going off home! He did not tell that to us. Coyote was lying." Many were the people that started off. Now they were all dressed up. "Put nets on your heads. Put on your white head-bands. Put beads about your necks," (said Goose Chief). Now they came from the south, and camped over night at Ci'p!a. "Let us rest here over night. Early in the morning let us practice dancing here. Let us go north dancing. Who is it that will lead the dance?" "I shall be the one to lead the dance," said Coyote. "No. It is the chief that shall lead in the dance." "No," said Coyote, "It is I who will lead the dance, for I am a chief." "Do you think that he who is not a chief leads in a dance?" (they said to him.) "He!" said Coyote, "they call me chief. Far off in the east they tell me that I am a chief," said Coyote. "They call me chief far off in the south. they call me chief far off in the west, they call me chief far off In the north. I travel all around in every

[p. 48]

direction," said Coyote. "I have never before heard people calling me Coyote. Today for the first time I heard myself called dog," said Coyote. "Well! Go ahead, lead us in the dance."

The people started in to dance at Ci'p!a. "Ini'yaha," went Coyote's song. "We'yahina' 'ini'yahina', we'yahina' 'ini'yahina', we'yahina' 'ini'yahina'," went Coyote's song, while they all danced. Now they proceeded north as they danced. Coyote danced in company with Meadow-lark Woman. Very pretty was that woman with her apron of rodent bones strung on buck-skin tassels and with a round tule basket-cap that she had on her head. As they proceeded north the Geese filed up in a long line from the south, dancing. All the Geese people, every sort of person that was there, had wings. Coyote alone did not have wings. Coyote led the dance singing away, while the Geese people filed up from the south, dancing as they proceeded north. "'E', 'e', 'e', 'e', 'e'," whispered the people. They flew up into the air, went right up, all of them, and continued their dance northwards while flying in the air.

Coyote looked up and found himself all alone, dancing on the ground; they had all left Coyote behind and were moving northwards in the air. "What are you doing?" said Coyote, talking up to them in the air, as he found himself abandoned by all. The Geese went right on to the north. Suddenly Coyote stopped dancing and started to run. Coyote ran to the north, came running after the people to one side. Coyote ran across the river, running down the mountains, running up the mountains. He looked very ugly, his legs were bruised with thorns, he was covered with blood, his feet were swollen, his legs were cut up by the rocks and scratched by the brush. Coyote was coming running after them, running all by himself now.

Now the Geese people arrived at Mount Shasta, at Flint Rock's sweat-house. They danced around the sweat-house on the ground. Coyote had not come; indeed he was dead, having been tired out and hungry. The South people danced around, dancing around together in a circle. When it was dark they stopped dancing. Flint Rock Chief spoke out loud, "Get wood! Build a fire in the sweat-house! These people will go inside."

[p. 49]

[paragraph continues] The South people entered, they were chuck full in the sweathouse. "Let us go outside," said the chief, talking (to his own people). "Let us make a fire outside in the night time." The sweat-house was crowded, the people filled it entirely. Those who belonged to that house all moved outside. There were the Geese people inside, all by themselves, sitting inside the sweat-house. Flint Rock Chief shut the door of the sweat-house, so the sweathouse was totally dark; there was no daylight whatever. The people outside, the owners of the sweat-house, were making much noise, having a good time. Three times it was day and three times it was night, and there was no daylight inside; it was always night. The people outside were having a good time pounding acorns and hunting deer.

"This looks bad. Daylight must have appeared long ago." The people inside felt around with their hands. There was no fire there and they were hungry and thirsty. "He has shut the door on us, he is angry at us," said they inside. "Four days and four nights have passed and there is no daylight yet. What shall we do? We are all going to be killed. Hehe'?! Would that I could get outside again! Have not any of you perchance a flint flaker? Have not any of you perchance a flaking maul?" "Yes," said Ma'ldama. [*70] "I have a pitching tool." "I also have a pitching tool," said Bop?didju's*i. [*71] "Yes," said the chief, "it is you that always say that you have supernatural power." The pitching tool was like this here, [*72] the flaking maul was like this here. [*72] Those two men, little Bop?didju's*i and Ma'ldama, had pitching tools. They arose in the sweat-house in the night that surrounded them all. The sweat-house was made entirely of flint rock, thick was the flint rock. They put out their hands inside and felt around all over. They were all like blind men. "Now! pound away!" This is how they did, pounding away at the flint rock to test for a thin spot. Now he pushed his pitching tool against the flint rock and pounded on it with his maul. This is how Ma'ldama did. [*66]

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] "S* s*" said the chips of flint as the), fell to the ground. The flakes made a noise as they were thrown to the ground. Thus he kept it up all day, and little Bop?didju's*i worked too. Every little while they pounded around with their hands to see flow thick it was. Now it became thin and they pounded away at that spot. "S*!" said the flint chips as they fell splintered off to the ground. They pounded with their hands to see how thick it was. "S*!" said the flakes falling down on the ground. Again they pounded with their pitching tools. Thus they did and burst right through the wall. Now they had made a hole right through. The light of day streamed in, it became daylight as soon as the hole had been burst through. The sweat-house was lit up. Now the people returned. They all came out again, returned out of the sweat-house. [*73]

Footnotes

^35:67 This myth reads very much like an explanation or mythic rendition of the yearly migration of the geese and other aquatic birds to the north. The Geese people danced at Ci'p!a (see note 51) just as the geese of today frequent the same spot. It would be going too far, however, to maintain that the myth in its entirety is directly based on the observation of natural events. In its first portion it is strikingly similar to the beginning of Betty Brown's story of "Coyote, Heron, and Lizard" (no. XII).

^46:68 Coyote's explanation of Humming-bird's message is of course an absurd invention on his part. The Geese people, according to him, are to go north in order to help the northern chief make string.

^46:69 A brown-colored bush from the hark of which the Indians make string. Very possibly to be identified with Apocynum cannabinum, "Indian hemp."

^49:66 Accompanied by tapping ruler on knife against window.

^49:70 A bird of dark-brown color, of about the size of a meadow-lark.

^49:71 An unidentified bug. The name means "one who chips off flint."

^49:72 See note 64.

^50:73 The ending seems abrupt even for an Indian story. Sam said that he never heard how the Geese people returned home but thought that the myth ended there he stopped.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV. BLUEJAY'S JOURNEY TO THE LAND OF THE MOON. [*100]

[p. 66]

Many were the people that lived together with Bluejay. He had a sweat-house and used to kill deer. Bluejay had as wife Wildcat Woman. Wildcat Woman became pregnant while Bluejay was killing deer. Bluejay had good luck as hunter and had deer meat hanging around all over to dry. It rained and it snowed. The woman gave birth to a child, gave birth to it inside the sweat-house. Bluejay did not see her as she gave birth to her child. Wildcat Woman washed her boy. Bluejay came back home. "I have a baby," said Wildcat Woman, speaking to Bluejay. "Indeed!" he said, speaking only a little. He spoke very slowly as he answered her. During the night she washed her boy, and when it was daylight Bluejay stood outside the sweat-house. He shouted around to his people, waking them up. "Get up, all of you!" His voice was heard in the east, his voice was heard in the west. "Flake your flints! Warm up your bows over the fire! Let us look for deer."

The people did so, they arose while it was not yet day. The people went off to go to hunt deer. "I shall walk around beside you. My wife has given me a baby." [*101] The people went off, those people now hunted deer. But Bluejay did not hunt deer; he just walked around with them. When it was dark Bluejay returned home and sat down where he was always accustomed to sit. Bluejay had one boy. When he had been growing two days (Bluejay said to his wife,) "Give the boy to me." Wildcat Woman gave it to him in his arms and Bluejay fondled him. "He is very pretty, our boy is very pretty," and he played with his child. Young Bluejay grew older and the young man came to look just like his father.

Young Bluejay played on the side of a smooth hill south of the house, throwing a ball up hill and watching it roll down. In

[p. 67]

the morning again Bluejay went outside the house and shouted to his people, "Wake up, all of you! Hunt for deer!" The people did so, waking up. They went off, went to hunt deer. Bluejay came home when it was dark. "Again I am pregnant," said Wildcat Woman, speaking to Bluejay. Bluejay laughed when his wife said that. When it was daybreak again, Bluejay went off, went to the east. He did not hunt deer, but merely walked around with the men.[*101] His wife gave birth to another child. She gave birth to it on the north side of the house; Bluejay lay on the south side of the house. Bluejay arrived home. Again she had a baby, and she said to Bluejay, "I have given birth to a child." "Indeed! It is good," (he said), and the woman washed it in the night-time. In the morning Bluejay did not go away. He said, "Give him to me." Young Bluejay was playing outside. He was playing ball on the hillside, making balls out of buckeyes. When it was full day, she put her child in Bluejay's arms. He took his child in his arms and looked into the baby's eyes.

Snow was falling outside. Bluejay was angry. "I do not like your child," he said to his wife. He handed it back to her and she took her baby back to herself. "This is not my child. Another man has given you that child." The woman cried as Bluejay told her that. "Go outside!" said Bluejay to the woman. "Stay outside! I do not like to have you stay in the sweat-house. Take the baby outside with you!" But the woman did not go out. Bluejay arose and said, "Give me your child." He snatched his boy away from her and threw him out of the smoke-hole towards the north, while the woman wept, cried for her child. "That child does not belong to me. His eyes are big, he is big-eyed. Look at his hands! They are not like my hands," said Bluejay, speaking, to the woman. "Your child has no crest on his head, he hasn't it." Bluejay would not recognize him as his child. "That one outside is my child. He has a crest like me." [*102] The woman went outside after her child and

[p. 68]

came back into the sweat-house, holding it in her arms. Again Bluejay snatched it away from her, and again he threw it out of the smoke-hole to the north. "Go out! go out! go out!" The woman took her child up into her arms again, but did not come back into the house. Weeping, she stayed outside, and built a bark house for herself.

After a while young Wildcat ran around. (Young Bluejay asked his mother,) "Why are you staying here outside, mother?" "He has driven me out of the house." "Mother, I am going to play on a hill a short distance from here to the south. I shall take this one along with me." "Take him along, take him along. Play with him, play with him." They now went off and proceeded to play. They played all day on the side of a hill to the south. Now they went to the west, playing. Young Wildcat was now grown up. Young Bluejay sat down on a rock and looked around, thinking to himself, "M'! m'!" Young Bluejay said within his heart, "You have thrown my brother out of the house, father." He arose and walked west all day. They walked till they came to Wi'tc'uman?na. [*103] They played, swimming in the water. "You will not see me again, father!" (young Bluejay said to himself). Wildcat called for her children. They did not come. The woman ran about looking for them, but she did not find her children. Bluejay likewise looked for them. Then Bluejay wept and put dirt on his face. "Wai!" said Bluejay, "come back, my son. Where can you have gone to?" Young Bluejay and young Wildcat kept going west, walked until they reached Djitc'it?t'p'a'maana. [*104] Young Bluejay sat down, while they in the east were weeping. Young Bluejay arose and walked as far as Tc!i'yu, [*105] where they sat down.

Silkworm [*106] was living all alone at Tc!i'yu. "Let us go to our uncle and rest there," he said, speaking to young Wildcat.

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] "I wish that there may come to me two bows and many arrows. I wish that there may come to me an otter-skin quiver full of arrows." So it happened; the bows and arrows came to him. Now they started in to shoot, shooting their arrows in rivalry. Both of them shot with great strength. Young Bluejay shot and sent his arrow to a great distance to the south. "Now you shoot!" said young Bluejay, and young Wildcat shot his arrow, sending it off to a great distance. "It is good now," said young Bluejay. Young Bluejay slung his otter-skin quiver over his shoulder, and young Wildcat did likewise. Now, when it was dark, they walked on to the west. They looked into Silkworm's house; young Bluejay entered. He had his javelin sticking in the ground where he was accustomed to sit. Silkworm looked outside and said, "He!" as he put out his hand for his javelin. "Who are you two?" "It is I, uncle." "You call me uncle, do you? Well!" said Silkworm, "come in and sit down." The two of them sat down. "Whence do you come?" "We come from Ba'n?xa." [*107] "Indeed!" "My father threw this brother of mine here out of the house, because he thought he was another man's child." "Indeed!" said the old man. "Whither are you going?" "I intend to go to see the New Moon Chief of the West." The New Moon Chief of the West dwelt to the west on this side of the Sacramento river. "I intend to woo his daughter. I should like to have his daughter." "Indeed!" said Silkworm. "Hehe'?! That's a bad place. Many are the people whom he has killed. People go to woo his daughter, and he kills them." He had many children and people that belonged to him. "How is it that he kills people?" "He fills a pipe with the bones of dead people, he makes tobacco out of the bones of dead people. He fills his pipe with the brains of dead people," said Silkworm. "First he smokes away at his pipe; then he offers his pipe to the people. The people smoke; they who have come to woo his daughter smoke and drop back dead. Then New Moon Chief throws out to the north those whom he has caused to die. Many are the people that have died in that way."

[p. 70]

Young Bluejay listened to him. "Well," (he said,) "let us go to see him." "I shall go along with you, my nephews," said Silkworm. Now they went to the west, walked down the small hills toward the west. Two women were sitting on the east side of the sweat-house. Bluejay tied his hair up round into a topknot, he wrapped his hair around. "Let me sit down there in your hair," said Silkworm, and Bluejay seated him there in his hair. "I shall look down from your right side," said Silkworm. "When you enter the house, do thus. Set your back to him as you sit down," thus said Silkworm, he himself talking. Now, when it was dark, they all entered the sweat-house and sat down with the women. New Moon Chief turned to look, looked across the sweat-house to the east. "What sort of person is that yonder?" (he said to his daughter). "I do not know. He is a stranger." "Give me the pipe. I shall fill it." He rolled his tobacco in his hands, and filled his pipe. Now New Moon Chief finished smoking. "There! Give it to my son-in-law. Let my son-in-law smoke." The woman took the pipe and said to Young Bluejay: "Take it." Now Bluejay smoked. It was not really Bluejay that smoked, it was Silkworm that smoked the dead people's bones. He shook the ashes out of his pipe and handed it back to him. Again he filled the pipe. "What has he been doing, that he does not perish?" said New Moon within his heart. Again New Moon filled his pipe (and said to his daughter), "There! Give it to my son-in-law. Let my son-in-law smoke." Young Bluejay smoked. New Moon looked across the sweat-house to the east (and said to himself), "What can he have been doing, that he does not perish?" Truly it was Silkworm there that was smoking, only it looked as though young Bluejay was smoking. Young Wildcat alone did not smoke. Now New Moon became frightened, for Bluejay did not perish. He stopped filling his pipe.

In the middle of the night Bluejay unwrapped his hair and took Silkworm there out of his hair. He put him over to the north side, close to the ladder [*108] of the sweat-house. Silkworm

[p. 71]

slept. He wrapped himself about with a blanket while he slept at the ladder, so that New Moon did not see Silkworm, In the morning the woman said (to Bluejay), "We are without fresh meat. We have not been eating deer meat." "Indeed!" said Bluejay. "Give me a basket-pan." He had put a big round lump of deer fat in his quiver. He cut the deer fat into slices and put some into the basket-pan. He gave it to New Moon. "Give me another basket-pan," (said Bluejay). It was given to him. He sliced off some pieces of deer fat and again gave them to her. She put it over to the west side. "Give me another basket-pan," said Bluejay. He spoke to the deer fat, "Do not become less. Remain always big." At last there was no more deer fat left.

"Go over, now, across the river to the east," said the Ya'?wi [*109]people. "The people over on the east side talk as if they had a good time. One does not often hear people talking over there. Someone must have come to woo his daughter, that is why they are happy." One man went across the river to the east. He arrived on the east side and saw, this one young man, young Bluejay and Wildcat. "Heh!" said New Moon, "what are you looking in for? Do you think that I am dead?" The Ya'?wi man hastened back home; he returned, crossing the river to the west. "A suitor has come," he said to the Ya'?wi People. Many were the Ya'?wi people on the west side. "Did you see him?" said the Ya'?wi. "Yes." "Who is it?" "A Tc'uno'ya." [*109] "Indeed!" All the Ya'?wi people were angry. Fish Hawk Chief, Crane Chief, the Ya'?wi chief, Heron Chief, Salmon Trout, the Ya'?wi chief, and Big Acorn Pestle,--that many were chiefs. "What are we going to do?" said the Ya'?wi people. "Let us catch salmon." Now they started in to get salmon, speared for salmon in the river. "Hasten across the river to the east. Go and tell the people of New Moon." Some one hastened to go to tell him. "They are fishing for salmon. Fish Hawk has sent for you people to come." "Indeed!" said the New Moon people assembled together.

[p. 72]

New Moon's people shot and speared salmon, but the others seized them and carried them over to their side, to the west; Fish Hawk's people pulled the salmon across to, the west, not letting them have them. "Where are they?" taunted the Ya'?wi people, "where are our friends from the east?" "Do not you two go off!" said the woman to Bluejay (and Wildcat). "Do you stay right here at home!" "We are tired," said Bluejay. "Let us go and see how the people are spearing salmon. Let us go off after them." They did so, he and young Wildcat went off after them. They stood by the river. The Ya'?wi looked across the river to the east and said, "Hehe! Here are our friends from the east." The (New Moon people) were not catching any salmon, the Ya'?wi alone had many salmon. "Give me one," said Bluejay to his brothers-in-law. "Give me a salmon-spear pole. I am going to spear salmon." He was given a pole. Fish Hawk kept on doing thus, spearing salmon. There was a big salmon right in the middle of the river. Bluejay shot at the salmon and speared it, also Fish Hawk speared that same salmon. Fish Hawk pulled the salmon across to the west with strength, also Bluejay pulled the salmon across to the east with strength. Bluejay jerked the salmon over to the east side together with Fish Hawk's pole, he pulled it right out of his hand. The New Moon people and Bluejay went off home. Young Bluejay went off, carrying the salmon on his back, while the Ya'?wi said, "He! The man from the east has beaten us."

"What shall we do?" said Fish Hawk. "Let us get fish with a seine net. Let us fish with a net. Go and tell New Moon, 'Let us fish with a net for the day!'" Some one hastened across the river to the east (and said), "He sends for you to come." "Indeed!" said New Moon. New Moon with great numbers of his people went off. "Now!" said Fish Hawk, and they swam into the water to fish with seine nets. They placed a water grizzly down on the bottom of the river. "Catch hold of Bluejay," said the Ya'?wi people to this water grizzly here. Now the water grizzly stayed there in the water., deep down. "Ha!" Bluejay swain in the river, swam southwards in the water with the seine net. But the salmon did not swim into the net, for

[p. 73]

they themselves had swum to the south in the water. There were ten people--five were Ya'?wi, five were New Moon people. Suddenly Bluejay was dragged down into the water, the water grizzly had caught hold of him. Bluejay did not come up again from the water. All the other people came out of the river, no longer fished with their seine nets. The Ya'?wi people shouted as Bluejay was pulled down by the water grizzly. The New Moon people all wept for him and went off home to cry, "My brother-in-law is dead, as he has been pulled down by a water grizzly," (they said), while the Ya'?wi people shouted for joy and clapped their hands.

Bluejay spoke to the water grizzly, "It's I, uncle." "Indeed!" said the water grizzly, "so it's you, is it? Take off my skin." He did so, took off the water grizzly's skin. The water grizzly did not kill Bluejay. "Take my hide home with you. Go off back home," said the water grizzly to Bluejay. "Pray hang up this hide of mine outside the sweat-house. "Then Blue-jay went back home from out of the water, and, when he had arrived home, he hung up the water grizzly's hide. Young Wildcat was speaking, "Keep still, all of you! Do not weep!" he was saying to the New Moon people. "I do not think that Bluejay is dead, he will soon come back home." They wept no more, ceased to cry. "Well," said the Ya'?wi, "they have stopped crying. Do one of you go over now across the river to the east. Go and see!" said the Ya'?wi. One Ya'?wi hastened across the river to the east in order to see. The water grizzly's hide was hanging outside. The Ya'?wi hastened back home, having seen the water grizzly's bide. Then he told the news to the Ya'?wi, "The water grizzly has been killed, Bluejay has come back home." Then the Ya'?wi people wept, wept for the water grizzly.

"What shall we do?" said the Ya'?wi. "Let us hunt deer and let us make a rattlesnake. Go to tell the New Moon people." They did so, went across the Sacramento river to the west to hunt deer. A rattlesnake was put down on the trail, and the Ya'?wi people proceeded north to hunt deer. "Where are those eastern men?" (said they to New Moon). "They must be back there somewheres, coming from the south," said the New Moon

[p. 74]

people to the Ya'?wi. They two were indeed coming from the south on the trail. (The Ya'?wi) had placed a rattlesnake down on the trail, it was coiled around a bush. Bluejay stepped on the rattlesnake. The rattlesnake jumped up and wound himself about his legs, encircling him completely. Bluejay trampled upon him with his feet, kept stamping on the rattlesnake, and cut him all to pieces. He killed the rattlesnake. The Ya'?wi people wept again (when they saw) that the rattlesnake had been killed. Bluejay went off home. In the morning he started off to go back and said to his wife, "Tell the New Moon people that I am going back home. I am tired now of this place. Come along with us if you like," he said to his wife. "He is about to go off home," she said to New Moon, her father. "Indeed! He is right, he is right." In the morning he went back home with his wife. He went back going east, went east till he arrived at Djitc'it?t'p'a'mauna, went back till he arrived at Wi'tc'uman?na. "Get nearer, land! Do not be far off!" he said. He went back till he arrived at Ha'up!uk!aina. [*110] Now he arrived back home to where his father and mother were.

Footnotes

^50:100 This myth is one of the suitor tales characteristic of northern California. It is a variant of Curtin's "Dream of Juiwaiyu and his Journey to Damhauja's Country" (op. cit.), pp. 425-42. Damhauja is da'mhaudju, Jupka corresponds to dju'ga (gari'?i dju'kga). Though k'e'tc!iwala "Bluejay" appears (as Kechowala) in Curtin's version, his place as hero is taken by Juiwaiyu.

^66:101 For a period before and after childbirth hunting and fishing were tabooed to the husband. Cf. no. XVII.

^67:102 We are not to understand that Wildcat Woman had really been guilty of infidelity to her husband. Her first child took after its father, her second after herself; Bluejay failed to see the point. Sam Bat'wi used the incident to point a moral in regard to marriages between people of different races.

^68:103 An Indian village on South fork of Cow creek (called Sa'ldu Cow creek, i.e., "white man's Cow creek," by Indians), at a distance of about five miles east of Millville, probably near the present hamlet of Clough. It was formerly the site of a salt marsh.

^68:104 An Indian village on Bear creek, south of Cow creek.

^68:105 A bare, rocky spot between the mouth of Bear creek, which flows into the Sacramento, and what is now Ball's Ferry.

^68:106 The wild silkworm, feeding on poison oak.

^69:107 An Indian village situated on a high hill between North Fork of Cow creek ("old Cow creek") and South Fork of Cow creek ("Sa'ldu Cow creek"). It is about twenty miles east of Millville on the so-called Tamarack road.

^70:108 To sleep at the foot of the ladder near the fire was a sign of low station. wa't'a'urisi, "he sits at the foot of the ladder," means "he is an illegitimate child."

^71:109 Ya'?wi is now used as a general term for Wintun Indians, Tc'uno'ya is "easterner," more specifically Hat Creek Indian (the Hat Creek Indians occupied Hat Creek and Burney valleys immediately to the east of the Yana.

^74:110 A spot with many high rocks on South Fork of Cow creek, above Wi'tc'uman?na.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

V. THE CREATION OF THE YANA. [*111]

[p. 76]

"Where is your father?" said Lizard to Cottontail Rabbit. "I have no father." "So! It seems that neither of us have any father. [*112] There are no people here. Let us make people!" They marked out a ring on the ground with a stick. "Wherewith are we going to make people?" they said to each other. (Cottontail Rabbit said,) "Put sticks down on the ground." He put small sticks down on the ground. He put twenty sticks down on the south side, he put twenty down on the west side, he put twenty down on the north side, he put twenty down on the east side. There were no sticks in the center. "It is good now," said Cottontail Rabbit and Lizard. (Lizard) took some sticks across the mountains to the east, twenty sticks he took to the north, he took sticks to the south, twenty sticks he took across the mountains to the west. Now he had placed all the sticks in every direction.

There were no sticks left for the center, there were no sticks for it. "Put down any sort of sticks in the center. The people of the far east will be very tall, they will be very handsome. The people of the far south will be very tall, they will be very handsome. So also will be the people of the far west; they will be very handsome and the men will be tall. So also will be the people of the far north, handsome and tall." Now he did it. Cottontail Rabbit took up the sticks and went off a great distance to the east. He put the sticks down and returned from the east over the mountains. Cottontail Rabbit put twenty sticks down

[p. 77]

in the south and again returned. He placed sticks across the mountains in the west, he placed sticks off in the north. "Let us put down bad sticks in the center. There are no more good sticks here." "Yes," said those two persons talking to each other. [*113]

Footnotes

^74:111 This and the following are the only incidents of the creation myth that could be procured. Of a creation from out of a primeval watery waste, referred to by Dixon in his "Northern Maidu," p. 339, as possessed in common by the Maidu, Achomawi, and Yana, Sam Bat'wi knew nothing. This inclusion of the Yana with the Maidu and Achomawi probably rests on an oversight, as Dixon's own version of the creation of the Yana fails to corroborate his statement (see below, Part III, no. 1). The creation of the Yana from sticks is in Curtin's "First Battle in the World and the making of the Yana" (op. cit., pp. 467-84) credited to Jupka (silkworm), instead of to Lizard and Cottontail Rabbit (p. 483). The scene of this myth is laid at Wama'rawi, an Indian village at the cone north of Battle creek and several miles west of the present Shingletown.

^76:112 This curious prelude is probably intended to show that no one had as yet been born.

^77:113 The meaning of this is that the Yanas were made of shorter stature than the surrounding tribes. Cf. Powers Tribes of California, pp. 275, 276, for a confirmation of this opinion.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI. ORIGIN OF SEX, HANDS, AND DEATH. [*131]

[p. 88]

Women (were formerly men and) used to go hunting deer but came back home without having killed anything. The women, (now men), stayed at home, making acorn meal and acorn bread. Again the men went out to hunt deer, but did not succeed in killing any. The women were finished with their acorn pounding when the sun came up in the east. They killed only one deer. There were thirty men, and similarly there were thirty women. The people had no fresh meat to eat, for no deer were killed by the men. (Said Gray Squirrel and Cottontail Rabbit to one another,) "It is bad. What shall we do?" said the women. "The men have not killed any deer." "Let us make men out of these women. Yes!" The men arrived home. The men were angry, and whipped their wives. "It is bad. Let us make women out of the men, and let us make men out of the women."

At daybreak they went off to hunt deer. In the east a certain person [*132] was building a fire on the ground. Now the men came, hunting deer. The one that was building the fire sat there. He took smooth round stones and put them into the fire. Those who were hunting deer sat around the fire in a circle. That one person also sat there, but the men did not see the fire, did not see the stones. Suddenly the stones burst off from the fire. They popped about in every direction. "S*!" said those who had till then been men, who were there in great numbers. Their private parts were cleft by bursting stones.

"Let us make men of those there." So it was, and they now became men, while those who had formerly been men had now become women. Now they stayed at home, pounding acorns and

[p. 89]

making acorn bread. Now the men went out hunting deer and killed many deer. Cottontail Rabbit was standing there and said: "Hehehe! Yes! Now it is good. It is good," said he, looking on while they killed deer. The women made acorn bread and pounded acorns. Hehe?! The people did not die, the people were very numerous. Coyote said, "I do not wish the people to be numerous. There are too many women and too many men in every direction, there are too many children in every direction. The people do not die, they grow old. There is no poisoning by magic, there is nobody to cry in winter," thus he spoke. There was nobody that knew about death. Cottontail Rabbit knew about it, Gray Squirrel knew about it, Lizard knew about it. [*133] That many there were who knew about death.

Their hands were this way, round, not divided into fingers. "Let us cut through the hands," they said to everybody, for people did not have fingers. "I shall make fingers," said Lizard. "What are you going to make fingers for? Our hands are good as they are," said Coyote, talking to Lizard. "What are we going to do if we shoot arrows, if we go out to hunt deer, if we go out to hunt small game?" said Lizard. Coyote sat here to the north; here to the south sat Cottontail Rabbit, Lizard, and Gray Squirrel. "Bad are our hands," they said to Coyote. "What are the women going to do when they pound acorns, for the people have no fingers. They will be able to take hold of the pestle if they have fingers. Let us make fingers," said Lizard, talking to Coyote. "They will use their elbows as pestles. They will hold the acorn mortar down with their legs whenever they Pound acorns, whenever they pound sunflower seeds, whenever they pound anything," said Coyote. "M'! m'! m'! m'! This is how they will do," said Coyote. "He!" said Lizard, "it is bad. Will they not hurt themselves in that way, if they use their elbows as pestles?" "It is bad," said Cottontail Rabbit. "I shall make fingers, so that it will be good for all the people in that way, and when they go out hunting they will be able to do

[p. 90]

well when they shoot, if they have fingers. Why do you talk about intending to change things around?" said Coyote. "I want to change things around because I don't like them as they are. Bad are the hands, they cannot do things well in that way."

It was good weather as it is now, [*134] the sun came out shining through the clouds. Lizard went down hill for a short distance to the south, all alone. He sat down and leaned his back against the rock. He looked around on the ground and saw small fragments of flint. Lizard picked up a fragment of flint and cut through his hand, making fingers. He cut his hands up into fingers. Many were the people at the village; no one saw him sitting to the south on the side of the hill. Lizard looked back up to the north, looked at his hand. He waved his hand around, did like this. "Hi'! Look, all of you, at my hand." They looked at Lizard's hand. "Hi'! Here is my hand!" The people looked at him while Lizard quickly moved his hand back to the ground among the rocks, for he did not want the people to see his hand all at once. "Well, well! Hu'i!" whispered the women, the children, the men; everybody saw the hand. Three times he quickly raised it up in that way, three times he quickly moved his hand back to the ground. "Hu'i!" they whispered, "he has fixed it, he has fixed his hand." But Coyote did not see it, did not know anything about it.

"People will do thus," (said Lizard). "Look how they will bend their bows." "Fix mine too. Cut through my hand," said one man, and Lizard did so. He cut through them, made five fingers in the people's hands. "Look how people will kill deer, how they will kill salmon, how the women will do when they have fingers. This is how women will do when they pound. They will hold the pestle in their hand. Now we have good hands." He came back up hill from the south and cut all of their hands. Coyote saw it. "How did you manage to get fingers? M'! Do so to me also! Cut through my hands!" said he to Lizard. "No!" said Lizard. "Let your hands be as they are!" and Coyote said nothing in reply. Now the people went hunting deer, killing deer with arrows, bows, and flints, for they

[p. 91]

now had fingers. Lizard said, "When women will have a baby, it will be born with fingers." Now he finished working at their hands. "It is good now. Our hands are good now," said all the people. "Why should we want to say more about it, for our hands are good now." For Coyote he made no fingers. Coyote sat on the north side of the sweat-house and did like this, hung his head down.

The people were very numerous, they were like blackbirds in number. There was no one who died, there was no poisoning by magic, there was no one that wept. The men grew old, but they did not die; the women grew old, but they did not die. It rained, and all the people went in together into the sweat-house. Then it snowed. Coyote had a son. He said, "Let us cause people to die." He spoke thus to the three men who were sitting here on the south side of the sweat-house. Lizard was holding his head down; there with him were Cottontail Rabbit and Gray Squirrel. All three men held their heads down, listening to Coyote's words, "It will be good if people die." Now Cottontail Rabbit, Gray Squirrel, and Lizard spoke, "M'! ?m! ?m'!" said Lizard. "People shall not die, we do not want to cry when people die," said Lizard. "It is true that people will die, but they will come back to life again. We will bury them in the ground when they die, and they will move up out again. In burying them when they die, we shall not bury them very deep." "Why should they come back to life again?" said Coyote. "When they die, let them die. If any one dies, we shall weep. (Imitating sound of weeping): That is what people will say, people will weep. If one's brother dies he will weep; if one's sister dies, he will weep; if one's child dies, he will weep: Hu! Like this they will put pitch on their eyes, they will put on white clay, like this; they will mourn. 'Wai! Wai! Wai!' that is how people will do when they weep. What could Lizard say, for he was beaten out?

It was snowing now, and the trees were all covered with snow. Lizard, Gray Squirrel, and Cottontail Rabbit whispered to one another. The people did not go out of the house, being afraid to go out because of the snow. The people were crowded in the

[p. 92]

sweat-house. A certain man became sick, Lizard himself having made him so. The sick man died. Coyote said nothing. One man is dead, but the people did not weep because of his dying there. "What shall we do with this dead man?" said Cottontail Rabbit. "Let us bury him." "Where is it that we shall bury him? There is too much snow outside." "Bury him here in the sweat-house, on the south side of the floor." They dug a hole and put him down into it, but not very deep. They covered him over with earth, while the snow was still falling. [*135] After he had been buried and they had caused him to lie down in his grave, the grave moved slightly. Coyote sat there, looking at the grave. The man who had died acted in that way, he kept moving his grave. The dead man was trying to come back to life again, so he kept moving it. Coyote looked at him as he moved it about, kept looking at him intently. The dead man moved up thus much from the grave. Coyote leaped up, jumped on the dead man and pushed him down into the grave. "Die!" said Coyote. He raised his foot and did thus, trampled down upon the dead man. "What are you coming back to life for? Die! Die!" Thus he did, trampling him down with his feet. The people did not say anything. Coyote went back to where he had been sitting before, he took his seat again on the south side. He still looked at the grave, but it no longer moved. Indeed he was dead for good now. "Now!" said Coyote, "Cry! Weep! Now that person is dead. We shall never see him again. Go ahead! Mourn with pitch! Go ahead! Smear pitch all over your faces! Go ahead!"

The people finished mourning. "Well! Let us go to hunt deer," said the people. A young man, Coyote's son, went along with them to hunt deer. "What shall we do to him? Let us make Coyote cry," said the people. There was a trail that ran to the east. A short distance to the east there was a yellow pine. and the trail to the east passed close by the yellow pine. "What shall we do? Let us make a rattlesnake." "Yes," they said. So a rattlesnake was made in the east. Here he was, curled

[p. 93]

around a tree. They told the rattlesnake what to do, and he said "Yes." There where the yellow pine was standing they laid him down. Now young Coyote came walking from the west along that trail. Indeed there was a rattlesnake there now, they had put it down there for young Coyote. Now young Coyote came close to the rattlesnake, when suddenly the rattlesnake jumped up upon him. He curled around young Coyote's legs. He shouted while the rattlesnake pulled him about and bit him. The rattlesnake killed young Coyote, so that he died. "Your child is dead," Coyote was told by the people. "Where?" "He lies dead to the east, he has been bitten by a rattlesnake." Coyote said, "Indeed!" as he wept. Coyote was now dancing around, putting dirt on his face. He acted like crazy, while the people carried young Coyote home to his house. Coyote said, "Well, my friend!" thus he said, speaking to Lizard, dancing around with grief. "Wai! Wai! Wai! My friend, you said that you would let people come back to life again after they die. Let my son come back to life again. I do not like to cry much. Let him come back to life." "'M 'm'!" said Cottontail Rabbit. "Cry! Cry! You said that you would cry. Weep! Weep! Put white clay on your face. You said that you would weep if your brother died. That is what you told us. Cry! Cry!"

Footnotes

^77:131 This myth, given by Sam Bat'wi as one connected narrative, contains three distinct episodes: the mutual change of sex of the first men and women, the fashioning of their hands by Lizard, and the introduction of death through Coyote's willfulness. The second episode finds parallels in Curtin's "First Battle in the World and the making of the Yana," p. 479 (where the model for men's hands is made by Pakalai Jawichi = p'a'galai dja'witc!i, "water lizard"), and in Dixon's "Maidu Myths," p. 42 (where Lizard is replaced by Earth Initiate). For the third episode cf. Dixon, l.c., pp. 42-44. The scene of this, as of the preceding, myth is laid at Wama'rawi (see note 111).

^88:132 i.e., Cottontail Rabbit.

^89:133 Cottontail Rabbit, Gray Squirrel, and Lizard form a sort of creative trinity corresponding perhaps to the Maidu Turtle, Father-of-the-Secret-Society, and Earth-Initiate (see Dixon, op. cit., p. 39). They are collectively opposed by Coyote, as is Earth-Initiate of the Maidu myth.

^90:134 i.e., When the myth was being dictated.

^92:135 The Indians would sometimes bury a dead man in the sweat-house when it snowed too hard and rebury him outside as soon as a favorable opportunity presented itself.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII. COYOTE AND HIS SISTER. [*152]

[p. 103]

Coyote was dwelling at Ha'udulilmauna. [*153] Coyote was living there alone with his sister. His sister pounded acorns, while Coyote went out to hunt small game. When it was dark Coyote came back home from hunting. The woman soaked acorns at a small creek to the south. In the morning Coyote went out to hunt small game, and came back again when it was dark. "Take this acorn mush," said his sister, giving Coyote some acorn mush to eat. Coyote ate the acorn mush with his fingers.

Coyote was sick. "I am sick," he said to his sister. "Indeed!" said the woman. "There has arrived here a person from the west, and have you not seen him?" he said to his sister. "So?" said the woman, "who may he be?" "A Killdeer person told me, he arrived here," he said to his sister. Coyote was sick. For two days Coyote was sick, and his cheek on one side of his mouth was swollen. "I'll tell you, sister, what the Killdeer person told me." "Indeed!" said the Coyote woman to her brother, "what was it that he said, when he told you the news?" "He says that they are going to have a dance, that is what he told me, and he came to tell us about it." "Indeed!" said the woman. The woman had no husband and Coyote had no wife. They two alone, he and his sister, stayed there together by themselves.

[p. 104]

The door of the house was on the south side. The woman came back from the south, having gone to fetch water. She went in by the door, but Coyote was lying there sick. He had put round stones into his mouth, so that Coyote's cheek was swollen. The woman went to him, there lay Coyote. Coyote Woman had gone out to fetch water and stood right there. "He!" said the woman, "go back inside! Move away! Move away from the door! Lie down yonder on the north! You might be hurting your cheek if I step on you." "?En" groaned Coyote with (pretended) pain. "Step over me, take your water. Step over me, sister." [*154] The woman did so, stepped over him. Coyote was lying on his back and yelped (when she stepped over him). [*155] "M'!" said the woman. "You see, why did you do that, not lying away from the door? I told you that your cheek would be hurt." She pounded acorns, and soaked them in a small creek to the south. Coyote Woman came back into the house, fetching water. Coyote was lying at the door. "Lie down away from here!" (she said). "Step over me, sister." "M'!" said the woman. The woman did as he asked her, stepped over him. Coyote yelped as before. "See now, you hurt your cheek."

"I shall tell you, sister, will you go to stay over night to have a dance? They say that the Killdeer people are going to have a dance. They say that they are going to have a dance there at Wi'tc'uman?na." "Yes," said the woman. "But I shall not go off, I shall not go to see how they dance," said Coyote, "but do you go to stay over night to have a dance! I shall tell you," said Coyote. "When the eastern people come they will have their faces blackened with black pitch. All those eastern people will be that way, having their faces blackened, and all of them will have faces that are quite black. When yon see the Ya'?wi [*156] people, (you will notice that) the Ya'?wi chief will be very tall and will talk loudly as dance leader." The woman listened with lowered head. "Pray do not look at those eastern people, but do look at the Ya'?wi. When the chief shouts as leader, take him

[p. 105]

and dance with him. One Ya'?wi will have sucker-fish fat rubbed all over his face. That one is the chief, look at him, and when it is night, take him to yourself!"

Coyote Woman fixed herself up nice. She painted herself with red paint, put her buckskin skirt about her hips, put on her white-grass tasseled dress, and put her tule basket-cap on her head. Ah! That woman was pretty. "Well, I shall go off, it is nearly dark." "Yes," said Coyote, "I must stay right home, for I am very sick," he said to his sister. Now the woman went off to the west, all alone. The sun was down already and it was night now. "Ha+u!" They danced, filing in towards the fire. Coyote Woman stood there, held her fists pressed against her cheeks. The woman did not look at the eastern people as they danced. "Ha+u!" said the Ya'?wi in the west, as they danced. The woman looked up in the night; she was very pretty. The woman looked to the west, the chief was shouting, "Heha'u! Heha'u! Heha'u!" Three times he shouted. Coyote's sister looked all around, looked at the chief. "That yonder must be the one," she said in her heart. "That is what my brother said to me. He told me to look at the chief, when he shouts as dance leader."

When his sister had gone away, Coyote took the stones out of his mouth and threw them away. He dressed himself up nice, put sucker-fish fat on his face. "I wish there might come to me an otter-skin quiver! I wish that I were tall!" It happened thus. Coyote became tall, and an otter-skin quiver full of arrows came to him. Coyote was very handsome. In the middle of the night Coyote went around and shouted, "Hau! hau! Hau! hau!" There he was, dancing as chief. The woman had come from the east. There was Coyote dancing, and there was the woman coming dancing from the east. The woman took hold of the Ya'?wi chief, took hold of her brother. They were dancing together, dancing during the night. Coyote pulled the woman off to the east (saying), "Let us go to the east! Come on with me!" The woman did so, going off to the east with him into the brush. They lay down to sleep, sat there talking to each other. Coyote tickled the woman, the woman did likewise to the man.

[p. 106]

He lay on the woman and put his arms about her, copulating with her, pushing the woman about. Of goodly size was the woman, fat and very pretty. When it was nearly daylight, Coyote got up again, having finished copulating. Coyote ran off home while the woman still stayed in the brush.

Coyote hastened back home to the east, running very fast. He went back into his house, and put his smooth round stones back into his mouth. Again Coyote lay down on the ground by the door. The woman came back home from the west running quickly. The woman was angry, thinking in her heart (about what had happened). She arrived home and saw how Coyote was going back into the house. She entered inside. Coyote lay down. The woman was pregnant now. "He!" said the woman, "get up, husband!" Coyote, with swollen cheeks. whined in answer, "It was not I who did it!" "Do not bawl!" said the woman. She took a stick and whipped Coyote as he lay on the ground. "Get up! Go and hunt deer, husband! I am pregnant." "I! I did not go away. It was not I that did it" (whined Coyote). "Yes!" said the woman, "I saw you." Now she gave birth to children, gave birth to them outside the house. Coyote as usual lay right inside. "Go out!" said the woman, "I am pregnant." She gave birth to ten little coyotes. She put them into her pack-basket and went down south to the creek. She turned her basket over into the creek and they floated westwards in the water. The woman returned from the south and arrived back home. Coyote arose, took the smooth round stones out of his mouth, and threw them away. Coyote went out of the house, ran down hill to the south. He ran west along the creek, following his children. The little coyotes floated westwards in the water; he ran west, following them along the creek. They floated on till they arrived at Wi'tc'uman?na, [*157] he still running west along the creek. Coyote had run west ahead of his children. He made a fish trap, twining it out of willow. He placed it in the water. There was Coyote, while the little coyotes came floating in the water from the east. They floated past the willow fish trap. Coyote hastened back out of the water. The little

[p. 107]

coyotes floated west, but he ran west ahead of them with his willow fish trap in his hand. When west of them, he hastened to the creek and put it into the water. The little coyotes came floating in the water from the east, floated west past it. "He!" said Coyote, "get up out of the water, boys, and get something to eat for yourselves." They floated west, floated till they arrived there at Hama'damtc!i. [*158] "Get up out of the water, boys." They did so, came up out of the water. They were now grown up young men. "Start off south for the hills across the plain." The young coyotes did so, scampered about in every direction to look for gophers, jumping on the gopher piles to mash the gophers to death. "Ah!" said Coyote, "that is good, boys. Spread out in every direction and get food for yourselves. I shall go back home," said Coyote. Coyote now went off, leaving his boys behind him.

Coyote went north and turned east, leaving Clover creek to the north. He went east to Bagat?didja'myak!aina, [*159] that far he went. Coming up from the west, Coyote had an otter-skin quiver, and very good was the flint in his quiver. He had white feathers and put them into a net-cap, an eagle's white breast and leg feathers he put into the net-cap. [*160] Coyote did not have merely arrow shafts put under his arm, these were all provided with flint arrowheads. Frost came from the east. Frost also had a net-cap filled with white feathers, he had his feathers made of snow. Very pretty were Frost's white feathers. Frost was going west, Coyote was going east; they met each other at Ganu'mya. [*161] "Hu!" panted Coyote. Coyote sat down, Frost

[p. 108]

sat down. "Whither are you going?" asked Coyote. "I am going west," said Frost. "Indeed! I am going east," said Coyote. "Indeed!" said Frost. "Tell me," said Coyote, "how are the east people getting along?" "There are no people. I did not see any," said Frost. "He! Very beautiful are your bow and your arrows. Hehe'!" Coyote said, "I should like to have your white feathers," but Frost said nothing. "Let us change about," (said Coyote). "This bow of mine is bad, these arrows of mine and my white feathers are bad." "Oh, well! Let us change about." "Yes," said Frost, and he gave him his arrows, his net-cap filled with white feathers and his bow. "Let us trade good things with each other." Frost handed his net-cap filled with white feathers to Coyote. Now Coyote put white feathers made of snow on his head; just so Frost put Coyote's white feathers on his head. "Well!" said Coyote, "I am going east. Do you for your part go west."

Now he went east, while Frost on his part went west; now they departed from each other. Frost laughed. Coyote went east, and (soon) said to himself, "I am sweating." Really it was snow that was melting, the water came dripping down on Coyote's face. He looked back at his bow, he looked back at his flints and arrows. No arrows were to be seen, no bow was to be seen, they had all melted away. Coyote stood there and looked all around; Frost had gone far off to the west and was no more to be seen. Coyote put his hand on his head, felt around on his head for his white feathers, but the white feathers were no more. Coyote stood still, pondering. "Dam?nima'na!" said Coyote, "you had good sense, young Frost! I thought indeed they were real white feathers," said Coyote. "That is why I changed about with you. You had good sense." He went on east with nothing now, without bow and without white feathers. Frost's white feathers did not melt, nor his bow and arrows. Coyote now went off home, until he arrived at Ha'udulilmauna.

[p. 109]

  

VIII. COYOTE AND HIS MOTHER-IN-LAW.

[p. 112]

Crow said, "I shall hunt deer." The people camped out to hunt, all the women camped out. They went out till they settled down to camp at Luwa'iha; [*169] the men were out hunting deer. Coyote was married to Mountain-Quail Woman, a young woman. Coyote said, "I do not want to have you camping out with me. It shall be my mother-in-law who will camp out with me. You stay home!" said Coyote. "I do not wish to camp out with my

[p. 113]

son-in-law," said old Mountain-Quail Woman. "All the old women have gone camping out. Go camping out! Go camping out! Camp out with him!" said the young woman to her mother. The people did so, camping out to hunt deer. The old woman started to camp out, to camp out with Coyote, while Coyote's wife stayed right at home. The women built camping-out houses, built at Luwa'iha with ma'du grass, with dead bark of pine trees, and with bark of bottom oak; they laid ma'du grass on thick on their houses. Also Mountain-Quail Woman built a house for Coyote.

The Crow people hunted deer together with the Blue Flies. The Buzzard people were there in great numbers, and others hanging around. Now they hunted deer and many deer were killed. They packed them home to the camping-out houses. The Blue Flies, Crows, and Buzzards did not really hunt deer, they looked for deer carcasses. They found a deer that was long dead. Crow said to Blue Fly, "I have found a deer carcass." "It is I who came upon it first," said Blue Fly. "I found the deer carcass. I saw the deer," said Crow. He disputed with Blue Fly. "It is I who came upon it first," (said Blue Fly). "Look at what I have shot on it!" He had thrown his excrement way ahead of him. Crow said no more, for he was beaten. Blue Fly carried off home the deer carcass that had been found by Crow.

When it was dark every one came back from hunting deer to his camping-out house. and it was about to rain during the night. The old woman, Mountain-Quail Woman, had a big vulva. Coyote had his bed on the east, over there on the east side of the house, while the old woman lay across from him on the west. It rained during the night, the water came pouring down on where Coyote was sleeping. "O mother-in-law! I am nearly dead frozen," said Coyote. "He!" said the woman, "I put lots of straw over your place of sleeping, son-in-law! Why should it leak?" (Coyote had said to himself,) "I wish that her part of the house should not leak!" "Your place of sleeping does not leak," (said Coyote). "I should like that we sleep together with heads and bodies averted from each other, mother-in-law!" [*170]

[p. 114]

[paragraph continues] "Turn your head away to the south, turn your head away to the south!" (she said). "I am nearly frozen to death," said Coyote. "I never heard of son-in-law and mother-in-law sleeping together with heads and bodies averted from each other. People never have that happen to them," said the old woman. The young woman did not carry about a vulva; (the old woman) carried all of it about and Coyote had seen the vulva. "You will put a rock acorn-mortar between our feet and I shall turn my head to the south," said Coyote.

The old woman turned her head to the north, while it kept on raining during the night. He put a rock, a rock acorn-mortar, between them. "Leak, leak! sleeping place! Do not leak! Mountain Quail Woman's sleeping place!" said Coyote to the rain. It did so to Coyote's sleeping place; there was much water all over it. "Do not leak (on her bed)!" In the middle of the night he caused the old woman to fall asleep. She did so. Now the old woman was sleeping, snoring. "O, away with mere talk! Shall I go on arguing about it?" Coyote got up from his bed on the ground and spread apart her loins. Now he copulated all night with his mother-in-law, pushing her about. The old woman did not wake up.

When it was nearly daylight Coyote ran off home, having, finished copulating. She was like a frog, for all her fat had been taken away from her. Coyote arrived home, running east to his, wife. The (old) woman ran home after him. She ran ran back east after him and arrived home. "Husband! Do not call me mother-in-law!" (she said to Coyote). Mountain-Quail Woman was pregnant. "So that is why you told me to go out camping with yourself! You intended to act in that way!" Mountain Quail Woman threw the children into the water but Coyote did not follow his children. [*171]

[p. 115]

  

IX. THE ROLLING SKULL.  [*191]

[p. 123]

Many were the people dwelling at Unte'unaha. [*192] Wildcat's wife was pregnant and he had a child born to him. The woman gave birth to a child; Wildcat did not go to hunt deer, for his wife had a child. [*193] Wildcat said, "Let us go to get pine nuts. We can do no other work now than to go to get pine nuts. And dress up your child!"

Now they went to the east together with their child. There were many pine nuts there, the trees were loaded down with them. "I shall climb up for them here. Let us get pine nuts." "Yes," said the woman. Wildcat climbed up the tree. He threw the pine nuts down one after another, broke off the pine-cones and threw them down. The woman had put her baby in its cradle down on the ground, and pounded the nuts out of the cones as Wildcat broke them off and threw them down below. He shouted down to his wife, "Are they big nuts?" The

[p. 124]

woman said, "Yes. Throw them all down," said the woman; "they are big nuts." He threw the pine nuts down, and said, "Hu!" He threw some more down, saying "Hu!" "Yes," said the woman. Wildcat spoke to her within his heart, spoke down to her, "Hehe'?! I wonder what's going to happen, for my sleep is bad." The woman did not answer. "Hu" He threw pine nuts down to the south, he threw them to the north, he threw them to the east, he threw them to the west. "Last night I dreamt in my sleep. I dreamt that I was throwing myself down. I threw down my shoulder, I threw down my other shoulder, I threw down my thigh, I threw down my other thigh." The woman did not turn back to look, as she pounded the nuts out of the cones; the baby was lying in its cradle on the ground. "I dreamt that I hurled down my backbone. I dreamt that I was rolling all over with nothing but my skull. I dreamt." The woman looked east to the digger pine. Blood was dripping down from the pine tree. The woman put her hand over her mouth, as she looked at the blood. The woman was afraid, and ran off home. He bounded about up in the tree, being nothing but a skull. The woman left her child behind her, forgot her child. She arrived, running, at the house. "I don't know what he is going to do. He has thrown his own members down, and bounds about up in the tree with nothing but his skull. Blood is dripping down from the digger pine. I am afraid," said the woman.

"Indeed!" said the people. "Let us run off to save ourselves. He might cause us all to die." The people did so, and started off to run for safety, running off to the south. They all went into the sweathouse at Wama'rawi, [*194] and put a sandstone rock on the roof to keep others out. The people filled the house, children, women, and men. Wildcat was saying, "Hu!" but the woman did not answer him. Wildcat's skull came bounding down, bounded down to the ground. He lay quietly there for a short while, not seeing his wife. Then he bounded around, nothing but a skull. He saw his child and swallowed it. "Am!" said Wildcat to his wife. He bounded back home to the west, he bounded back and arrived at his house. There were no people

[p. 125]

there. He bounded about to every house. There were no people. "Am! Where is it that you have all gone to, running away to save yourselves? I'll find you!" He followed all their tracks, as he bounded about. He found their tracks which they had made in moving to the south. "Am! I shall find you," said he, as he bounded off to the south. He cut bottom-oaks down one after another, he cut the brush down. He bounded on to the rocks, and burst them to pieces. He bounded south to P'u'ls*u?aina, [*195] rolling along to the west, a human skull. He was like a strong wind, thus he was as he went along. [*196]

He bounded up hill to the south to 'O'djinimauna, [*197] following the people's tracks. He bounded on until he arrived at Wama'rawi. "Let me in, you people, I want to enter," said the human skull. "Don't say anything," (they whispered to one another). "Don't let him in," said the people. He was not allowed to enter. "Let me enter, you people!" "Don't you let him get in! Be quiet!" "Yes!" he now said outside within his heart. "You people won't let me in, won't you?" He bounded back a little way to the north, and came back swiftly, a human skull, on the ground from the north. He was very strong, and cut up all the bushes everywhere, cut up all the trees. He was going to burst into the house, but he could not, or it was too strong. He bounded off to the east. He came bounding back from the east, intended to burst west into the house. The sweat-house shook, but it was too strong for him to break in. He bounded off to the south. He came bounding back from the south, intended to burst into the house from the south side, but it was too strong for him. The people were heard talking inside the sweat-house. He bounded off to the west. He bounded back from the west, acted like a flint arrow-head, so strong was he, but he could not break into the house. He lay quiet a while, in order to rest. There he lay. "Hehe'?!" said the human skull. "You people were very sensible." He bounded up into the air, intended to burst into

[p. 126]

the house from above, through the door. He came bounding down, but could not burst through the roof, for the house was too strong for him. He bounded up again (saying to himself), "I shall try it once more. Perhaps I shall succeed in bursting through the house." He did so, bounded away up into the air. He came bounding down, but bounced back. That human skull had nearly burst into the sweat-house, for the sandstone rock was already pounded thin. The people inside were afraid. "He'! It looks as if we shall all die. It seems that he is about to burst into the house," said the people. Wildcat bounded back down hill to the north, and lay there now on the ground. "Why should I try to burst into the house? The sweat-house is too strong for me."

He bounded back to the north, rushed back as far as Old Cow creek. He arrived rushing back at what had been his house. "Whither, now, shall I go?" He bounded north and met some people. He killed the people and went on rushing to the north. He rushed down hill to the north at Djit'p'ama'uwitc'u. [*198] He killed ten people, and went rushing up hill to the north. He was heard coming by all the people, rushing along, acting like a wind, as he came rushing on. He rushed on as far as K!a's*ip!u. [*199]

Coyote was coming from the north at I'da'lmadu. [*200] Coyote had on an elk-skin belt and carried a quiver of otter-skin. Coyote stood there, listening, listened down on the ground. "That must be the human skull," said Coyote. He was coming from the north. "I am going to meet him," said Coyote in his heart. "I do not think that I shall be killed. I hear that he is killing the people." The human skull came rushing down hill from the south; Coyote on his part was coming from the north. Coyote stood still right there at Djewint'a'urik!u. [*201] "Heh! What shall I do?" He took off his belt, and hid his otter-skin quiver

[p. 127]

and net-cap in the brush. The human skull came rushing from the south, approaching nearer and nearer. Coyote said, "I wish there may be to me an old, ugly-looking pack-basket. I wish there may be to me an old, ugly-looking apron of shredded bark. I wish there may be to me an ugly-looking skirt." It was so. The skirt, the old pack-basket, and the apron of shredded bark came to him. "I wish there may be to me pitch, white clay." He besmeared his head with pitch, put it on thick on his face; he just managed to look through his eyes, because of the pitch. The human skull came bounding from the south. "I am going to cry," said Coyote. He carried the old pack-basket on his back, thus did Coyote as he came from the north, while the human skull approached nearer and nearer from the south. "He! he! he!" he sobbed, "he! he! he!" Coyote was walking along with the help of a stick. The human skull lay quiet a while, listening to the person crying. Coyote came up to the human skull. Coyote looked at the human skull and cried, "I hear that you were bad in the south. What are you acting that way for?" The rolling skull spoke, "I was dreaming," he said to Coyote. "My wife was having a child, and I dreamt that I threw my own body down. I dreamt that I was bounding about, merely a skull." Coyote spoke to the human skull, "Hehe'?! I should like to bake you on hot rocks, because if you continue to act that way, bounding about, merely a skull, you will surely die. I have seen a person that way before, acting like you because of a bad dream, and I have caused him to be a person again," said he, speaking to the human skull, who lay there, big-eyed, consisting of nothing but his eyes. "I put wood and rocks into a hole. I made a round hole, and packed wood." Wildcat was listening to what Coyote was telling him. "And I built a fire down in the hole. I put lots of wood on the fire, so that it burned well, and I put rocks on the fire, big rocks, and when the rocks were hot, I went to look for pitch. I mixed soft pitch with old, red pitch. Hu! I besmeared that skull of yours all around with pitch, I smeared pitch all over it, nice and smooth. Hu! And I put the skull down in the hole," he said to Wildcat. "'S*' said the pitch, as it spluttered away."

[p. 128]

"Do that to me, please," said the human skull. "I put hot rocks, big rocks, on top. Hu! And while the pitch said 'S*!' the skull stretched out until it became a person again, and hu! it arose out of the fire, having again become a person." (Wildcat agreed to let Coyote do thus to him. When he became heated up, he attempted to burst out, but could not.) It shook all around. Wildcat no longer moved about at all, for he was dead now. He had tried to burst up out, but in vain. "Aha'! Hehe!" said Coyote. "You can't beat me. I was never beaten in anything." He took his quiver and bow out of the brush again, threw away his pack-basket, threw away his apron of shredded bark, threw them all away. He put on his belt and tied his hair up into a top-knot. "There's no such a thing as my being beaten!" Coyote now went to the south. He went up hill to the south, came to the top of the hill, and proceeded south, went until he came to Djit'p'ama'uwitc'u. He kept going south until he arrived at Wama'rawi. Many were the people in the sweathouse. "Come out of the house, all of you," said Coyote, shouting inside to them. "I have killed the human skull. I killed him over there at Djewint'a'urik!u." The people did so, all came out of the house. They all now went off home, going back to the east, going back to the south, going back to the west, going back to the north.

Footnotes

^93:152 This myth consists of two quite unconnected episodes, Coyote's rape of his sister and his deception by Frost. The former of these episodes bears a resemblance to Betty Brown's story of "Coyote, Heron, and Lizard" (no. XII), except that in the latter it is Coyote who is deceived by his wife.

^103:153 An Indian village at a mountain, said to be named "Black Mountain," situated about two miles up from Wi'tc'uman?na (see note 103).

^104:154 Coyote wished to see his sister's private parts.

^104:155 Pretendedly with pain, really with lust.

^104:156 The Yana name for the Wintun.

^106:157 See note 103.

^107:158 An Indian village at the present hamlet of Millville, not far from the confluence of Cow creek and Clover creek.

^107:159 A point near the present Basin Hollow, between Cow creek and Clover creek, formerly a favorable spot for the gathering of roots, seeds, and clover and the burning out of grasshoppers. It took its name (see note 146) from a hill with big sandstone boulders on the summit.

^107:160 The yo'l?aiyauna, a sort of white war bonnet, consisted of the white breast and leg feathers of the eagle loosely filled, like down, into a net worn on the head (tc!a'iwanu, larger than the ordinary k!a''di, "net-cap"). The net itself was not visible, as it was entirely covered by the white feathers.

^107:161 The present Basin Hollow in Clover Creek Valley. It was a waha'iri?mauna, "resting place," at which it was considered good luck for traveling parties to stop.

^112:169 An Indian village on Old Cow creek about twenty-five miles east of Millville.

^113:170 Avowedly for reasons of modesty.

^114:171 An implied reference to the preceding story (no. vii).

^115:191 This myth is practically identical with Curtin's "Hitchinna" (op. cit., pp. 325-35); Hitchinna, "wildcat," corresponds to 'itc!i'nna, Metsi, "coyote," is me'ts*!i, Patokya, "skull people," is p'u't!uk!uya. cf. also Dixon, op. cit., pp. 97-8, and no. XXIII of this paper.

^123:192 An Indian village located on a plain between the upper courses of Old Cow creek and Clover creek, at a distance of about fifteen miles south of Round Mountain. There was said to be an abundance of flint in the neighborhood.

^123:193 See note .101.

^124:194 See note 111.

^125:195 An Indian village on the present "Tamarack Road," near Ba'n?xa. See note 107. P'u'ls*u?aina means "red clay."

^125:196 Sam Bat'wi said that when the older Indians first saw the trolley cars of the whites, they compared them with the wildly rushing P'u't!uk!uya' or Human Skull.

^125:197 An Indian village on the upper course of Bear creek.

^126:198 An Indian village on the south bank of Cedar creek, near the Bullskin Ridge.

^126:199 An Indian village situated on a hill a short distance south of the present Buzzard's Roost (Round Mountain).

^126:200 A rocky spot with small creek just north of the present stage station situated about a mile and a half south of Montgomery creek.

^126:201 An Indian village about two or three miles north of the present hamlet of Buzzard's Roost or Round Mountain.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

II. NORTHERN DIALECT (Gari'?i.)  [*202]

  

X. COYOTE, PINE MARTEN, AND LOON.  [*207]

[p. 133]

Coyote went around looking for gophers' roots by tapping with a stick at Yu'mimadu, [*208] he felt about for gophers' holes by tapping. Suddenly he heard someone coming to him singing. "Heh!" he said. "Ih!" he said. He looked all around, when suddenly he saw two girls. "Ih!" he said. He threw away his open-work carrying basket, he threw away his digging-stick. He threw away the pitch. He took off and threw off his signs of mourning. Now he put on his buckskin trousers. He put dentalia on his shirt, he put dentalia on his moccasins.

(He said to them,) "Do you go there, to my house! Yes, they said. Bull-Frog Woman, Coyote's wife, was pounding acorns. "He!" she said, "what are you going in there for? Who told you to go there? Pine Marten is dwelling yonder, up

[p. 134]

towards the south. Two black-bear skins are hanging up; just look at them! This is Coyote living here. Don't look at him! This is Coyote here living between the two houses. He has stolen the black-bear skins from the next house on the west. [*209] Don't go into Coyote's house! This here is Coyote. The people have gone into yonder house. They have come back home from hunting and have been staying over there.

(The elder sister said,) "I do not know about this. We see the black-bear skins. We should enter the house. Our father told us, 'You will go as far as that.'" (They argued as to whether they should go in or not, but finally they entered. When Coyote returned he said to them,) "I suppose they are going to bring back meat. It is dark already. I always distribute deer meat. I hire those fellows yonder. Everyone has been carrying home deer meat, everyone has been killing deer, and they have already come back home. I feel ashamed because I have no meat left over. I always give food to everybody, and it is my custom to distribute it. Now I shall go east to the next house." (He said to his wife,) "Make a big fire. We shall roast the meat."

Coyote looked on while Pine Marten's people were eating, but did not enter the house. Bones were thrown out of the house to him, one after the other, and he swallowed them. They were thrown out to him, and he kept swallowing the deer bones. He finished, went back west to his house, stood on the roof of his sweat-house. He cut out pieces of flesh from his hams. He went into the house (saying to his wife,) "I have no meat left over. Cook this! Feed them with it!" (To the girls he said,) "I always do so; I never have any left over. [*210] Tomorrow I shall have some left over, and you shall have plenty to eat." "Ih!" she said. "It seems to be human. It does not taste like deer meat; it tastes like human flesh. We were not told to enter here. It seems to be Coyote who lives here. Pine Marten lives in the next house on the east. I smell nothing but deer fat over there. We

[p. 135]

were told that Coyote lives between the two houses. You have no sense," (she said to her elder sister).

She went east to the next house when it was daylight. She entered the house. (Pine Marten's mother said to her,) "You two thought that that was somebody living over there. That is Coyote. He has stolen the black-bear skins. That is Coyote living there, those hides belong to us." (After she had been given much to eat she returned to her sister, and said to her,) "I have been given food; I have eaten much. He yonder is really the one (we are looking for). I told you so before, but you wouldn't listen. Eat this here! Much have I eaten." "Well," (her sister said,) "I shall go and bathe. We shall go east to the next house." (Pine Marten's mother) spread out a black-bear skin on the ground for them. "Do you two enter! I don't know what Pine Marten will do. Perhaps he won't turn to look at you." She roasted food and gave it to them to eat. "Do you eat this! Probably you were told to come here." (When they came back from hunting) someone said, "Hm! She smells like Coyote's divorced wife." "Sh!" (said Pine Marten's mother,) "don't say that! My son might feel ashamed. Just behave yourself! Don't talk in that way," she said.

(Coyote was very angry, and said to himself,) "You think you will go out to hunt deer! Now I shall cause it to rain." It rained and it was like winter. The water rose high. (All the people were inside Pine Marten's sweat-house, and Coyote put it on fire.) "It is I that did it," (said Coyote). They all survived together. The sweat-house burned all up. (They said,) "Let us escape. Let us all go up into the sky." Coyote said, "I shall go along with you. Oh, I shall lie on my belly in the bottom of the basket." "You will not do right," (they said to him). "I shall just lie down on my belly in the bottom of the basket," he said. "Do you all get inside now!" (said the chief. To Spider Woman he called out,) "Pull us up to you!" She pulled them up. (When they were approaching the sky, (someone noticed that Coyote was making a hole, and said,) "Oh! it's going to break apart!" "Heh!" (said Coyote to Pine Marten's people). "Now you know, do you not, that I am jealous of you." The basket broke apart and fell down to the ground.

[p. 136]

 [*211] (All were burnt to death except one). An old gray-haired woman, Bo''nuyaup!a, [*212] alone survived. She cried, "Whither now shall I go? I shall go far away to the north. Two who still survive there will indeed take pity on me. I shall hire them." (She went up north.) There were geese there in great numbers. Many of them were killed (by those two). "We kill many of them," (they said to her). "Have you not perchance seen her who has destroyed us all? You may have done so." "Yes," they said. "We have seen some one. Perhaps indeed it is that one whom you mean." "Perhaps she wears a bead necklace," she said. "Yes, she wears a white necklace of beads." "Would that you took pity on me!" (she said. "Kill her for me!") "I shall indeed do so this very same night." (That night he killed the Loon Woman and took off the necklace of beads. Every bead was really the heart [*212a] of one of the people that had been burnt to death. He gave the necklace to Bo''nuyaup!a).

"Now I shall be happy. Now I shall go off home." She came back home to her house. She struck the hearts, and the people came back to life. They all came back to life. "You thought concerning me, did you not, 'She has no sense.' You would have treated me in that way! But my friends are dwelling yonder, far away in the north. I suppose you said to yourself, 'I have killed them all,' did you not? But you did not kill them. You thought you were sensible. It was you who thought of killing me." [*213] Now it is ended.

Footnotes

^129:202 The thirteen gari'?i myths and non-mythical texts here given were obtained in July and August, 1907, a few miles to the north of the hamlet of Round Mountain (or Buzzard's Roost), Shasta county. The informant was Betty Brown (Indian name Ts!i'daimiya), since dead. There are now not more than seven or eight Indians that are able to speak the dialect. In some respects Betty was an inferior source of text material to Sam Bat'wi, as evidenced by the very small number of myths it was found possible to procure from her. Her method of narrative was peculiar in that she had a very marked tendency to omit anything, even the names of the characters involved, that was not conversation; this has necessitated the liberal use in the English translation of parentheses in which the attempt is made to arrive at a somewhat smoother narrative.

^129:207 Two quite distinct myths seem in this to have been amalgamated by Betty Brown into one. The first is the well-known story of the visit of two sisters to a chief (generally Panther, in this case Pine Marten) and their deception by Coyote, who poses as the chief. For this first myth cf. Dixon's Achomawi tale in "Achomawi and Atsugewi Tales," Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XXI, 163. The second is the Loon Woman story typical of Northern California, of which but a fragmentary, ill remembered account is here found. For the latter myth cf. Curtin's "Two Sisters, Haka Lasi [= ts*!ore'djuwa, "loon"] and Tsore Jowa [= ts*!ore'djuwa, "eagle"]," (op. cit., pp. 407-21); Dixon, "Maidu Myths," pp. 71-6; and the Achomawi and Atsugewi versions in Dixon's "Achomawi and Atsugewi Tales," pp. 165, 175.

^133:208 A point near the present station situated about a mile and a half south of Montgomery Creek.

^134:209 The two sisters had been told by their father that they would recognize Pine Marten by the black-bear skins hanging up in front of his house.

^134:210 Coyote pretends that he is so liberal in the distribution of deer meat, that he never has any left over for himself.

^136:211 From here on the trend of the first story is absolutely lost, the remainder being a much abbreviated account of the latter part of the Loon story.

^136:212 An unidentified bird.

^136:212a So Curtin and Dixon. In another connection Betty Brown said the white encircling the loon's neck was due to the fact that she had at one time put the intestines of people about her neck.

^136:213 These words are an apostrophe to the dead Loon Woman.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

  

XI. THE DROWNING OF YOUNG BUZZARD'S WIFE.  [*215]

[p. 140]

(Buzzard's son said to his people,) "Now dig for roots! They are ripe already. Let us climb sugar pines. We shall move tomorrow and you will settle down there. Now I shall climb for sugar-pine nuts, they are ripe already. The people will all come there, and we shall settle down there where there is a nice spring, I think the people will come here. We shall wait for them." Many were the people that came together. (The chief said,) "Now let us climb for sugar-pine nuts, and take food along." (To the women he said,) "Now you will dig for tiger-lilies. Now procure food for yourselves. Probably you will not like to climb (sugar-pines). If you finish it, they will have food for themselves."

(They all went off to Silver Lake [*216] to get sugar-pines nuts. Buzzard's son told his wife not to venture into the water, but when he was gone she said,) "I should like to go into the water there. Let me see! Let us go to drink." "Do not go to drink," (she was told). "Why should I be afraid? I shall go to drink." She saw logs bobbing up and down in the water. "Let me see!" she said. "I can swim across yonder to the west." They missed her and looked around. "Let me see!" she said, "I shall try it. I can swim out of the water." "You would not be able to swim out of the water," (she was told). She took off her skirt, (saying,) "I shall swim into the water. Just see me!" She swam to the west. They were many who saw her. Now she sank right between the logs. "I told you that before," (she was told). Her buckskin skirt and tassels beaded with pine nuts remained as she had left them. Then they cried. "Why is it that you are crying?" (Buzzard's Son asked them). "She is sinking." "I told you, 'Do not take her to the water!' It is your fault. It

[p. 141]

would have been good if I had been there myself. To think that I should have come here just for that! I shall stop (climbing for sugar-pine nuts). Let us look for her! Pray do so, to see if I can find her. Let us try it. She is a good girl." (He said to one,) "Run back to the people! They shall come here." He ran back, telling them to come. "Yes," they said. "Let me see!" he said, "I will try to save her." They drew off the water by means of a ditch. "You will probably not be able to draw it off, you will not draw off the water," (they said to him). "What, now, shall we do? Do you all clean out the ditch! I hardly think we shall be able to find her. We shall not find her. She must have sunk straight down, she must have sunk right between the two logs. That is a bad place."

They all went back home, parting from one another. Some stayed together right there. "No longer," (he said), "shall I procure winter food for myself. Now I have done with that. Alas! I was happy, I did not think that this would happen to me. Now I shall have done." "Why, pray," (her mother said to him,) "did you let her go off? You should have taken water while on your way. You were foolish." "I did not know. I should have gone with her, but she just rain off by herself. She should have told me, 'Let us go and drink.' She was angry. I am not good. My heart feels grieved." They all arrived home, they lay down in the ashes in the fireplace. [*217] Also the men did so. Her people, those who had climbed for (sugar-pine nuts), cried. They piled the pine-nuts into the fire. [*218]

(Before she had left, Buzzard's wife) had said, "Perhaps I shall not again enter the house. I dreamt that I was dying. Pray burn up all of these things." "I am afraid," (said her mother,) "of your speaking in that manner." "We shall probably be away two months climbing for (sugar-pine nuts)," (said her daughter,) "and I shall perhaps die. I shall not again enter my house." "I shall cry because you speak in that manner," (said her mother). "Truly, you shall indeed find it out." Her mother wept. Now she is dead. Her hair now comes flying back

[p. 142]

home. It comes blown back home. (She had said,) "I shall surely have died if my hair comes hither, blown back by the wind." "Take along with you," (said her mother,) "your tasseled buckskin skirt and your apron fringed with white grass. Put your beads about your neck." "Yes," she said. "Now, mother," she said, "good-bye! [*219] You shall not see me again." "I am afraid," (said her mother). "Stay at home. I am afraid for you." "Father, do not feel bad. Just cry a little bit for me. You shall grow old. Mother! pray do not cry much. If you see people eating, do not go over to the next house. If you see food over there, pray hold your head down. [*220] You were happy in raising me. I did not think before that I should take a husband."

Footnotes

^137:215 It is curious that in the telling Betty Brown left out all the names of the characters. It was only when the text was gone over for purposes of translation that it was found what animals she had in mind. The chief is Buzzard's son (ma'ts!k'ili'lla), his wife is an insect with long blue wings (p'a'k!a'nna perhaps Dragon Fly), her father is Woodpecker (ts*!ura'du). The text is distressingly elliptical in narrative.

^140:216 The Yana name is Tc'a'p!ulxa. it is situated about eight miles southeast of Round Mountain, at a height of approximately 3700 feet.

^141:217 As sign of mourning.

^141:218 It would have been unlucky to use them.

^142:219 The literal translation is, "Now stay!"

^142:220 I.e., do not look on greedily when others eat.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII. COYOTE, HERON, AND LIZARD.  [*240]

[p. 153]

"Do you all come together! I intend to move north the day after tomorrow; I want to camp out for a dance in the north. Get food together! Tomorrow we shall eat before starting out. Dance! Try it now! Let us go to camp out for a dance, let us go out to camp in the north country. Let us go to eat their salmon. They must be getting salmon already." (Thus spoke the chief of the Geese people.) They danced. "Try it! You are going to have a dance. Get ready to start when it is daylight! Get ready your feathers, get ready your aprons fringed with pine-nut shells. Get ready your 'u'miyauna aprons. What shall stay over night at Ci'p!a; [*242] you will have a dance there, you will practice there, as it is a very good place. You will dig for annis roots at that place, and you will take them along as food. You will dig also for da'mna roots. There we shall remain for two nights. After that we shall start to move along ahead to Djewit?t'a'urik!u [*243] and to I'da'lmadu. [*244] There you will practice dancing and will get sunflower seeds. You will rest there and gather sunflower seeds, for the North people [*245] are very fond of sunflower seeds." Now they proceeded

[p. 154]

to the north. It was Lizard [*246] who had sent word for all the people to come to a dance.

(When they had come near to the north country, the chief said,) "We shall move to yonder place. Make yourselves nice and clean! Let us dance up to there! Lizard has sent word to you, 'Dance!' He has just sent for me, and has told me, 'Dance up to here!'" They started in dancing now, while Lizard shouted encouragingly to them. "It is good," said Lizard. There were all sorts of Geese people there from every place. "Be seated here!" said Lizard. "You will eat soon," he said. "Soon you will have a dance. I have killed a person, that is why I am having a good time." (The chief of the Geese people) spoke in reply, "Yes, that is why I have come hither. I like to have a good time. These children like to have a dance, and that is why I have brought them hither from the south." "It is very good," said Lizard. "I rejoice to see you," said the chief of the Geese people. (Lizard said,) "I have a large sweat-house; they will have much salmon to eat, for I am wont to catch them. Soon you will have a dance."

(Lizard said to his people,) "Go for some kindling wood, so that we may have a fire to give light. Do you people cut wood, so that these people may cook." They all went off together to get kindling wood. (The chief of the Geese said to his people,) "Give them annis roots as food, you have brought along sunflower seeds."

Lizard had sent word to every place. He had sent all over for people to come to his dance, and Heron Woman heard about it. (Coyote, her husband, said to her,) "You should go to spear salmon, I should like to eat some fresh salmon. I am always eating ma'ls*unna roots." "Yes, indeed I shall do so. I shall go to the river to look for salmon. You, for your part, will go to tap around for gophers' holes, while I go tomorrow to get salmon."

She held her salmon spear and looked into the river, waiting

[p. 155]

for salmon. All at once a sucker came swimming from the west. "Go on east to K!a''djade, [*247] to Cibu'p'k!aimadu." [*247] Soon another sucker came swimming from the west. "I do not like you," (she said,) "your bones might get stuck in my throat. Swim on east to Cibu'p'k!aimadu." All at once a salmon came swimming from the west. She speared the salmon. Then another one came swimming from the west and, (after spearing it she ceased. Now she built a fire and cut open the salmon. Then she put it on the fire to roast. After some time she took it off again and ate the salmon, dipping it into acorn mush. When she had finished eating she put the remains away into a basket, and cleaned everything up nice and smooth. (She said to the salmon remains,) "Pray do not smell. Coyote might smell it." She put them away, cleaning things up nice and smooth. Now she braided tassels, making a tasseled buckskin skirt. After three days of braiding she finished her apron of white ma'ha grass, and twined a tule basket-cap and a willow basket-cap.

It was already dark when Coyote came back home with bruised legs; ugly he looked, and he was all covered with mud. She, the Heron Woman, was wont to come back home when it was dark, satiated. Coyote baked his ma'ls*unna roots and his annis roots, picked out the big ones, (and said to her), "You should eat these annis roots." "I do not care to eat them," Heron Woman was wont to reply. "Eat these roots for which I have gone far off. Why is it that you do not eat raw food? [*248] What is it that you have eaten?"

Again she did so for herself. She went off early in the morning and did as before, got salmon for herself. She caught four salmon, put them down on the rocks, and dried the pounded red flesh of the salmon. She used to dry the pounded flesh and, after cleaning things up smooth, put the remains away. "Pray do not

[p. 156]

smell!" she said, "he might transgress your taboo." [*249] When it was dark, Coyote came back home. "I feel sick," said Heron Woman, "I have a toothache." "Indeed!" said Coyote. "When was it that you became sick?" "I dreamt something, and I am always sick." "What is it that you dreamt of?" "I was just dreaming of something," said Heron Woman. "My cheeks are swollen." "Indeed!" said Coyote. "I have a toothache. Dig up tc'i'l?awauna [*250] roots, you will pound them up and put it on my cheeks." "Yes, indeed, I shall do so. You should eat baked roots; have baked ma'ls*unna roots." Coyote was wont to kill ground squirrels, he was wont to kill gophers, he was wont to kill moles. She put raw acorns into her mouth. "My cheeks are swollen," she said. "I cannot swallow. You should put hot rocks into water, so that I may be able to drink it. My throat is swollen." "I shall come back home when it is dark," said Coyote. "Pray do not come back home when it is dark, please come home somewhat earlier." "I always run about to a great distance."

Again Heron did as before. She took her raw acorns out of her mouth and put them down on the ground, where she was accustomed to sleep. Again she caught salmon. She caught five salmon, put them on the rocks to roast, and pounded up the red flesh. She never gave him any salmon to eat, she never gave him any food. When it was dark, she returned home as before. The people were having a great dance. She said, "They say that they have been having a dance for three nights. I want my swelling to burst, I want it to burst," she said, always speaking falsely. "It will be good," (said Coyote), "if your swelling burst." "Let me see!" (said Heron Woman to herself,) "I shall go to camp out where they are having a dance." She was wont to take her skirt secretly, her buckskin skirt, tasseled with ma'ha grass. "Pray do not be seen!" (she said to her skirt). She now ran off at night to stay over night where they were having a dance. "Do not build a fire," she said (to Coyote). [*251]

[p. 157]

[paragraph continues] "Pray act as though sick, as I always do; groan, build a fire when it is already daylight," (she said to her acorns). Now she went off, and danced with the people while Coyote kept on sleeping. "Here comes the fine dancer," (said Lizard,) "Coyote's widow!" [*252]

When it was just about to dawn, she was wont to run back home along the river. She entered her house again, put the acorns into her mouth again, and again lay down on the ground. "Where are you now? Have you gone away already? Come and build a fire for me! I feel cold." "Heh!" said Coyote, "I have been sleeping soundly." He arose and scurried about at his work. "Do look at my cheeks!" she said, "the swelling will burst." Have you not perchance heard that the people are having a dance?" (said Coyote). Lizard was having a great dance. "Indeed!" she said, "I have not heard anything about it. They did not come here to say anything about it. I have not heard," said Heron Woman.

As was his wont, Coyote went off to tap around for gophers' roots, never staying at home. Now the woman went off again to stay over night where they were having a dance. This time Coyote found it out. "Here comes the fine dancer," (Lizard was saying,) "Coyote's widow!" "Ih! My name is being called," said Coyote. "He calls it," he said. "Yes, it is good," said Coyote. "It seems that you think that you are sensible. It is I who am a sensible person, I am a great one." Now he went off when it was daylight. "You will not throw me away. So that is why, as it turns out, you reject my food! I run about in every direction, looking for food, saying to myself, 'Let her not be hungry!', and you reject it. Perchance you think you have much sense? I am one that am superior to all, I am superior to my brother chief. I am a person that has much sense. You will not rejoice." Now Coyote went off.

"I shall go for wood," said Lizard, "I shall soon come back home. The kindling wood was very good." He went for it; Lizard split up the kindling wood very fine. Suddenly Coyote came crying down hill from the south, he was weeping. (Coyote

[p. 158]

was dressed up as an old woman, and pretended to carry a baby. He was really carrying his penis, wrapped up like a baby.) "It seems to be Coyote, is it not?" said Lizard. "Is it you who are chopping wood?" said Coyote. "Yes, I am the one that am giving the dance. Many are the people that have come together here," said Lizard. "I have sent word to every place for all the people to come," he said. "I am coming back here," said Coyote; "this here is my orphan child; my husband has been killed." "Indeed!" said Lizard. 'Well! I shall go down to help them,' I was saying to myself. That is why I returned to this place here. Where is it that you are accustomed to go back home?" "I always go back down hill here to the north." He tied the kindling wood with rope made of tc'ilha'imadu, with rope made of ba'ni-bark strands. "It is heavy," said Lizard. "It was never that way before," he said. (Coyote had wished to himself that the burden should be heavier than usual.) "I shall push the burden on to you. It is heavy," he said. "It is generally light. Why is it that it is that way?" he said. "Stand in front of me. Pull the burden from me on to yourself." "I might fall," said Coyote, "I shall just push it onto you." (Coyote had put down a piece of sharp flint on which Lizard would have to kneel in drawing the burden on to his shoulders.) And then Coyote pushed it on to him. "Away with all this talking!" (said Coyote to himself). Lizard did (as Coyote had intended), and the veins of his knees were cut through. Now Lizard was dead.

"Yes! I shall treat you people in that way." And then he took off Lizard's skin and put it on himself so as to resemble him. "Pray go back to our house. If she wishes to have a fire made for her, pray go and enter the house and build a fire for her. If she wishes to have a poultice put on her, put a poultice on each cheek," (said Coyote to his penis). Coyote's penis did so. It put poultices on Heron. Now Coyote took up the wood and carried it, putting Lizard's appearance on himself. Then he went back down hill to the north.

"The chief has come back home, he was out to get wood, (said the people). He stepped on top of the ladder of the sweathouse and he put down the wood, and now he entered the house. Water was poured on his face; he blinked. "That one must be

[p. 159]

[paragraph continues] Coyote, for he blinks," (they thought). "You will soon have a dance," he said. "I have a sore throat, because of my shouting. Soon you will all go to sleep. Dance!" he said. Just then his faithless wife came. "Amm! You will act in that way indeed, will you? Perhaps you think that you will live?" [*253] he said (to himself). "So you try to fool me when I am asleep, do you? (Aloud:) "Hehe! Here comes the fine dancer, Coyote's wife! Soon you will all go to sleep," he said. "You will dance in the daytime tomorrow; you will dance till night-fall."

Now they were all asleep, sleeping all together, snoring. Now Coyote smeared pitch around the sweat-house, smeared pitch on the feet of all of them, smeared pitch on the people. "Do not run out to save yourselves!" Now Coyote went out of the house. The people in the sweat-house burned up. "That is what I always do when I am angry. Now cook for your loved one! What I do is good," he said. "So that is how you act, is it? That is why you reject food? I go far off to get roots for you, and you reject them!"

Duck alone saved himself, and with him was Goose; Goose was burnt, burnt off on one side. Then he walked flat on his feet into a lake. Duck did likewise. "Now he has taken revenge on us. Why did he act in this way to us?" With them were also Ground Squirrel and Gray Squirrel. "Whither shall we go?" they said. "If I recover," (said Goose,) "I shall go back to the south. I should not have listened to (Lizard's invitation)." "Do not speak thus," said Duck. "Go straight north to the far north! Go still further north! I shall think it out," he said. "Let me see! Go east to the Hat Creek Indians," said (Goose), "and go east to the people dwelling across the river to the north, and go east to the people of I't'a'urik!u. [*254] Go over to the south to the S*uk!o'niya," [*255] he said, "go east to the rising sun. I also

[p. 160]

shall be wont to do so," said Goose and Crane, "I shall go straight north. I never thought that I should do that. I was very happy at home; I had plenty to eat. Never did I think that I would do that. A meteor will fall down and burst," he said, "and the water will boil. It will be that way also down the river to the west. [*256] People will lie down in them if they are sick in any way." (He spoke to Ground Squirrel,) "You will be he who will always look around for food," (and to Gray Squirrel,) "while you will be he who will jump about among the yellow-pines, you will get yellow-pine nuts, and you will be satiated. I shall have my place here. I shall also be north across the river from here at Wacu'p'di [*257] for that is a very good place. To that place there will be a bridge going north across the river, and the place will be called Diri'p!oha. [*258] That place will be heard about all over, and people will say, 'Let us go to bathe at Diri'p!oha.' It will be only slightly warm at Wacu'p'di; so it will be across the river from here. Wild plums will grow in that place, mut!s*u and ma'ls*unna roots will also grow there. Salmon will swim to the north, trout will swim to the north."

Footnotes

^142:240 The account of the visit of the Geese people to Lizard at Big Bend (of Pit River) bears considerable resemblance to Sam Bat'wi's account of their visit to Flint Rock at Mount Shasta (see note 67). Heron's deception of her husband Coyote is paralleled by Sam's story of Coyote and his Sister" (see note 152).

^153:242 See note 51.

^153:243 The gari'?i form of Djewint'a'urik!u (see note 201).

^153:244 See note 200.

^153:245 By dja'udjabiya, "North people," are here meant those that correspond to the later Achoma'wi or Pit River Indians of Big Bend. By Big Bend is meant the land enclosed on the south by Pit River as it takes a sweep to the north and south between long. 122 degrees 50' and 122 degrees.

^154:246 The lizard (k!uwi'lla) of this myth is not the small species (k!a'lts*!auna) of Nos. V and VI. He was described as a big, brown, long-tailed animal, whose bite is not poisonous. The name is given by Curtin (op. cit., p. 313) as Gowila.

^155:247 See note 225. The place referred to is the Achoma'wi (Fall River Indian) village on Fall River near its confluence with Pit River, at the present Fall City (or Fall River Mills). The name Achoma'wi (Adju'mawi?) refers properly only to the Fall River Indians, known by the Yanas as Cibup'k!a'imaduya\ (gat'a'?i Cibumk!a'imaduya\).

^155:248 By "raw food" is meant roots and other vegetable food as contrasted with more staple food, particularly acorn-mush, deer meat, and salmon. Distinct verb stems are used for "eat," according to whether reference is had to the former (tc'o-) or the latter sort of food (mo-).

^156:249 It was forbidden to eat salmon at the same time as deer meat, small game, or gophers' roots. This explains Heron's refusal to eat the roots offered by Coyote and her desire to keep the odor of salmon away from him. The transgression of the taboo would mean the stopping of the salmon run.

^156:250 A medicinal root used for swellings.

^156:251 She did not wish to have Coyote get up early, for he might then observe her coming back from the dance.

^157:252 I.e., "grass widow," divorced or unfaithful wife. Lizard's words are ironical.

^159:253 The exact translation and significance of this sentence are rather doubtful.

^159:254 Now known as Hot Springs Valley or Big Valley. It is in southern Modoc and northern Lassen counties and is drained by Pit River.

^159:255 S*uk!o'niya seems to have been of somewhat indefinite application as a term embracing Indians to the extreme east. it was used by Betty Brown to refer to the Northeast Maidu of Susanville and the Achoma'wi of Dixie Valley. Sam Bat'wi thought it meant the "Hot Springs" and "Snake" (i.e., Shoshone) Indians. The valleys referred to in the text--Burney and Hat Creek valleys (inhabited by the Atsuge'wi or Hat Creek Indians), Fall River, Big Valley, and Dixie Valley--were formerly visited in the spring by myriads of ducks.

^160:256 This explains the occurrence of hot sulphur springs in Big Valley and Big Bend.

^160:257 Kosk Creek, a northern tributary of Pit River. Big Bend is directly opposite its confluence with the latter stream.

^160:258 Hot Springs of Big Bend.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII. THE FINDING OF FIRE.  [*268]

(Translated from Curtin's "Creation Myths of Primitive America," pp. 365-70.)  [*259]

[p. 170]

In the beginning Au Mujaupa had fire very far down south on the other side of a big river. The people in this country had no real fire; they had a kind of fire, but it wasn't good. It just warmed a little; it wouldn't cook like the fire we have now. People killed deer and fished, but they had to eat fish and venison raw.

[p. 171]

In the west people had fire, but it wouldn't cook. In the north there were many people, and in the east; but they had no fire that would cook.

"There must be fire in some place," said the people at Pawi; "how can we find it?"

"I will go out to-night to look," said Ahalamila.

That night he went to look for fire. He went to the top of Wahkanopa, looked east and west, saw no fire in either place. Next he looked north; no fire in the north. He looked south; saw no fire anywhere.

Ahalamila came home and talked to the chief and people. "I saw no fire," said he; "I could not see any, but I will go to a better place the next time and take some one with me. I will go to-morrow night to the top of Wahkalu. Who here has a good head, who has a sharp eye to see fire? I want to look for fire to-morrow night from the top of Wahkalu; from that place I will look all around the whole world to find fire."

"We have a man here," said the chief, "who can see through a tree, who can see down through the earth to bed rock, who can see through a mountain. You can take him to-morrow night with you. He is Siwegi."

Ahalamila went to Siwegi. "Will you go to-morrow night to look for fire?" asked he.

"I will go if the way is not too long."

"Oh," said Ahalamila, "it will not be long. I will shorten it."

Siwegi agreed to go; and when the time came, they started. Ahalamila doubled up the trail and made it short; in an hour they were on the top of Wahkalu, both ready now to look for fire. The night is very dark; they can see the smallest fire easily.

They look to the east, look with great care, look a good while, see no fire; they look to the north in the same way, see no fire; they look to the west, no fire there. Now Ahalamila looks south, looks a long time, and sees nothing; he looks half an hour to the south, sees a little glimmer like a light very far away. '

"Siwegi," said he, "I see a small light down south; it seems like fire far away. I think it is fire."

[p. 172]

"Look again," said Siwegi, "look sharply. Maybe it is fire." "I have looked enough, I think it is fire," said Ahalamila; "but I want you to see it, I want you to look now."

Siwegi looked a little while. "Yes, that is fire," said he.

"Well," said Ahalamila, "we see fire, we know that it is far off in the south."

Ahalamila made the road short, and they were back at Pawi in an hour. "We have found fire," said Ahalamila to the chief and the people. "We know where fire is, we can have fire now."

"We must have that fire," said the people.

"There is no way to get the fire but to go for it," said Ahalamila.

"Well," said the chief, "since Ahalamila saw the fire he will go for it; but the road is long. Who will go and help him? Who will go for fire with Ahalamila?"

About fifty men offered to go, and they started next morning. The journey was long and very hard. Soon two or three men were tired and went home; not long after more were tired, and when they had gone far down to a great river, just north of where the fire was, of the fifty who started only three were left,--Ahalamila, Metsi, and old Shushu Marimi.

Just south of the great river Au Mujaupa had a very big village, and in the village a large sweat-house. In that house he kept the fire, and had a great crowd of people living in the country outside who served him, and kept every one in the world from stealing his fire. These people were Patcha, Chil Wareko, Chil Daiauna, Sabil Keyu, Juhauju, Juwaju, Jukami, Jukilauju.

The three, Ahalamila, Metsi, and old Shushu Marimi, were at the northern end of the bridge, and sat there watching till all at the sweat-house was quiet. The bridge was very narrow and slippery; so Ahalamila put pitch on his feet and hands, and on Metsi's and Shushu's feet and hands. All three crossed without slipping, and found every one asleep in the sweat-house.

The old chief, An Mujaupa, had covered the fire well with ashes. All was silent within and without. Ahalamila, Metsi, and Shushu. crept onto the sweat-house quietly, and looked in. All were asleep.

[p. 173]

"I will go down first," said Metsi.

"No, I will go first," said Ahalamila. "I will get the fire and reach it to you; you take it and run very fast."

Ahalamila slipped down. Metsi and Shushu remained on the roof. Ahalamila opened the fire carefully, took out a good piece and handed it to the old woman. She put it in her ear. He handed her another; she put it in her other ear, slipped down from the top of the sweat-house, ran across the bridge, and hurried away.

Ahalamila gave Metsi two pieces. He put them in his two ears and started. Ahalamila filled his own ears and followed.

The three had run over two mountains when Au Mujaupa woke up and saw that the ashes had been opened, and that fire had been taken, that a coal had fallen near the central pillar. He sprang up, went to the top of the sweat-house, shouted, called to all his people,--

"Fire has been stolen! Fire has been stolen! Go, you, and follow!"

Now Patcha, Chil Wareko, Chil Daiauna, Sabil Keyu, and all the wind people rose up and followed, raced and stormed in every direction. So much rain came that the whole country was covered with water.

Now Juwaju was ahead of all Au Mujaupa's people chasing the three robbers. Chil Wareko came too, and fell upon the three furiously; he drenched and chilled them. Next came Jukami and Patcha, who nearly froze them.

Metsi was almost dead; the fire went out in both his ears. Ahalamila lost his fire too. Chil Wareko, Juwaju, and Patcha quenched it, then he let it fall.

Old Shushu. was behind a good way, but she ran all the time. She kept her hand on one ear as she ran. She lost the fire out of her other ear, and when the piece fell out it broke in two and fell apart. Chil Wareko picked up the fire and took it back; he found six pieces, thought that he had all. He and the others stopped following.

Ahalamila and Metsi ran ahead, left old Shushu to get on the best she could, and reached home first. They were wet, very cold, and tired.

[p. 174]

"Where is your fire?" asked the chief.

"I have none; Chil Wareko took my fire," said Ahalamila.

"Where is your fire?" asked the chief.

"Chil Wareko took it," said Metsi.

The chief was very sorry, and all the people were sorry. The old woman did not come, and the people said, "She must be frozen dead."

At sundown old Shushu came back; she came very slowly, was terribly tired, but courageous. She reached the sweat-house, came in, said nothing, lay down wet and cold.

"Where is the fire?" asked she; "did not Ahalamila and Metsi bring fire? They are young and strong, and had plenty of fire."

After a while she stood up, drew some wood-dust together, then sat down, opened her ear and held it over the dust; a big piece of fire came out. Wood was brought quickly, and soon the whole sweat-house was warm. The people who were cold before were warm now and glad.

"Bring meat and we will try how it tastes when 'tis roasted, said the chief.

He cut some venison and roasted it. One and another tasted the meat. "It is very good," said they; a third one said, "I'll try it,", and Gagi took a taste. "Oh, it is sweet, very good," said Gagi.

Each one roasted meat and ate heartily. Next day all went to hunt, and had a great feast in the evening. A chief from another place came to the feast and got fire, and took it home with him. Soon all people had fire; every one had fire in all parts of the country.

Footnotes

^160:268 By the courtesy of Mrs. Curtin and Little, Brown, and Company permission was received to reprint Jeremiah Curtin's myth entire. No changes have been made in his spelling of Indian names, but the Indian translation gives them in more strictly phonetic form.

^160:259 Curtin's version was read to Betty Brown and translated by her sentence by sentence. It is of considerable linguistic interest to see how a connected English myth appears when translated back into the Indian.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIV. INDIAN MEDICINE-MEN.  [*273]

[p. 178]

(The) medicine woman (said), "It is four days now that I have been doctoring her, and she is not well yet. I am afraid that perhaps she will not recover." "Do you go after him," (said the sick woman's husband,) "perhaps he will cure her. He is always saying, 'I am a great medicine-man.'"

(The medicine-man) has arrived. "Put down water on the ground!" [*274] Round white shell beads he offered him as pay, he offered him dentalia. (He thought,) "He will be glad because of these, when he sees them." "I do not like these trinkets

[p. 179]

here," (said the medicine-man). "I like p!ale''si shell beads." "And do you doctor her! Doctor her during the night, perhaps she will recover." "Oh, I am not afraid of my doctoring the one that is sick. Why should I be afraid? I am a medicine-man. She will not cry. She will yet eat her own food." "Go out of the house! Shout! Call upon your dream spirit So always does the medicine-man do." "She will recover, I dreamt. 'Pray speak to the spring of water!' my dream tells me. 'Pray do not eat! Go ahead and eat tomorrow when the sun is overhead! You shall go to the spring to bathe!' I dreamt. 'Pray pass the night on the mountain!' Now I shall return in the night. Wake up the people. They will help to sing. I am a good medicine-man. 'Pray ask the rocks! Ask the trees! Ask the logs! Go about twice, and the owl will talk and the yellowhammer, and pray roll tobacco between your hands and smoke it. Do not eat anything! Pick up the round luck stones!' Thus I dreamt. She will recover."

"Ho! you people wake up! He's [*275] already coming back. Do you all go into the house together and sing. I shall do likewise whenever any of you are sick; I shall do likewise, even if I do not sleep. There are still other people who have not come to my house. If I had had much to eat they would all have come, and they would all have been laughing among themselves, if I should have had food to give them. [*276] Those people do not like to assist in singing. I shall go to bring them; they shall help to sing. I suppose they raise their hands contemptuously at me. [*277] Perhaps, is it not, they are sound asleep or eating, therefore they do not come over. I suppose they do not hear. Run over to tell them to come tomorrow! 'I am a sensible person,' indeed they say. Pray do not let them say that, even if they have handsome wives. [*278] If they refuse, pray let at least one come along. Pray

[p. 180]

let him come the day after tomorrow." "I should like to see my brother. Do you go after him to bring him back to me!" (said the sick woman).

(The medicine-man said,) "I have dreamt of everything. 'Pray do so!' it said to me. 'Doctor her for three nights!' said my dream to me. 'She shall recover and go about, she shall go off to get roots, she shall procure food for herself,' said my dream to me. 'Shout! Run around the house, when you are about to enter the house again.' Pray do not make a noise. Pray stop the children from making a sound, stop the dogs from making a noise! I might stagger and fall down, I have not much heart." (When he returned, he said,) "There is no one here, I am the first. I am tired already. The medicine-woman is angry, is she not? therefore she does not help me in doctoring. Let her soak cu'nna roots in water. I shall eat them raw. Now I shall eat them, if I see that she [*279] is to eat her own. I shall not go off and leave her, I shall go off home only when she shall have recovered. I rejoice (that she will recover). I do not like to have my brother lose her. I always come here and I always eat here, that is why I am sorry for him. I am the only medicine-man. I go to every spring, and I am answered. It [*280] will not abandon me. Blood flows from out of my nose, I have it running out of my body; the blood flows straight out, every part of my body is covered with blood. I shall find it [*281] for you. If I die, then all the good people will die, then they will drop dead. I was possessed of supernatural power. The women are not thus. The women that are doctors I have never yet heard to cure; they merely put on style, wearing their ceremonial net-caps. I am not thus, that is why I remain alive. [*282] I am let alone, and I am good. People take pity on me, that is why it is that I am quick to take pity on them. I am seen coming and she is told, 'Hurry up and cook! he is already coining! Feed him!' he says to his wife. 'Cook!'

[p. 181]

he says. 'Feed him!' I dreamt, that is why I came here; I came to see what I could do for you. I would not do thus, I shall not step in that trail, if I drop dead. Now I shall have ceased. [*283] I seem to be like one who looks on, while you people are eating. I have never done thus, although my people are many in number. [*284] I seem to be like one who looks on, and as though I say, 'Would that I might enter the house!', that therefore I came."

  

XV. MARRIAGE.

[p. 182]

He had been bringing her food. (She said to him,) "I do not love you." (Her mother said to her,) "I like him. Take him for your husband! I want to have him as son-in-law. I will not have you in my house, you shall not again enter my house (unless you take him as husband). Let us get food!" [*286] (Then she said to him,) "We shall go together. I love you very much. To-morrow we shall get married. Let all of your people come here. All of you come and see us, and stay all night! I have nothing to say against it. I do not know what (my mother) says, but probably she will be very glad to have (you) as son-in-law.

[p. 183]

(Her mother said to her,) "I am glad that you have taken him as husband; I am tired of feeding you. You shall go home with him and keep house with him, and you will have children. Truly I shall come to see you, and he will come to see us. Whenever I am hungry you will give us food. He will go to hunt deer, and I shall fetch it home. He will go to get salmon, and I shall fetch it home. Do you give us food! You shall give us food, and I shall pound acorns. I shall do similarly for you. I shall fetch them to your house, and you will feel rejoiced, my daughter! Whenever you see me coming you will feel rejoiced, and you will give food to your people. Every one of them will be glad. You have always been very good, you have been sensible. Your husband is a good man and he is sensible."

(He said to her,) "And I will give you as food whatever I hunt. Surely I shall not whip you. You on your part shall not scold me." (She said to him,) "If I have a child we shall go off to your house. Stay now in my house." (He said to her,) "Yes, I will stay in your house. Now I shall go out hunting." (She said to him,) "Now we shall grow old together. Perhaps it will be I who shall die first, perhaps it will be you."

Footnotes

^174:273 In this and the following texts attempt was made to secure from Betty Brown an account in her own language of some phases of Yana religious and social life. Owing to her tendency to use conversational narrative instead of general description, these texts are rather illustrative by means of real or imaginary incidents of the life of the Yana than ethnologically satisfying statements. No. XIV gives an idea of the touchy medicine-man, insulted because few are found willing to assist him in his doctoring.

^178:274 For the medicine-man. Cf. p. 193, l. 2.

^179:275 I.e., the medicine-man, who has passed the night up on the mountain to gain supernatural power.

^179:276 They would laugh for joy. As it is, they are not very enthusiastic about helping a poor man.

^179:277 It was a sign of contempt to extend one's arm with outspread fingers towards another.

^179:278 Bitterly ironical.

^180:279 I.e., the sick woman.

^180:280 I.e., my supernatural power, guardian spirit.

^180:281 I.e., the disease-causing "pain."

^180:282 He implies that he does not cause any one's death, so that there has been no reason to seek his life. If a medicine-man failed too frequently to cure, he was suspected of malice and was decapitated.

^181:283 The medicine-man is disgusted with the scurvy treatment accorded him and swears never to do as much again.

^181:284 I.e., although there are many relatives whose hospitality I might claim.

^182:286 In other words, the mother finds it hard to support her daughter and is only too glad to dispose of her to a desirable son-in-law.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVI. A LOVERS' QUARREL.

[p. 185]

"S*uwa! May I dream of him! Would that you might come. You thought that you would not love any one." (Her lover has come and says to her,) "I love you very much, that is why I have come." "Perhaps you do not love me." "I have loved you for a long time, and I shall always do so. I shall always come to see you. Pray come to our house, and I shall do likewise. After a while we shall be married." "Pray let me grow. I am not yet grown up." "My mother already knows about it, and I shall stay with you, and you shall do likewise to me." (She said,) "I am afraid that you might abandon me. They say that you are a bad fellow, and I did not know about it. You shall go off to hunt." "You talk too much to me, and it is I that speak rightly. I do not know what I shall do. You are not, it seems, a sensible person. I shall be good to you, I shall give you good clothes. Do not be afraid of me! Why, pray, do you speak thus? You should have told it to me long ago. Perchance you think that you are the only one. There are many women, and I shall take any one. Do you think about me, 'He will cry'? Perchance you say, 'I am very pretty.' Indeed, I have abandoned a pretty one. What, pray, should I do if you do not love me? I shall try another woman. Perchance you think about me, 'He will not find any women.' You do not know what I have in mind. I have many brothers and sisters who would help me [*291] if I go anywheres to woo. Many are the nephews and nieces, my sister's children."

Footnotes

^185:291 With the payment for a bride.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

XVII. CHILDBIRTH AND DEATH.

[p. 187]

"She is pregnant. Wait by my wife. She will be sick. She tells me, 'Go and bring my mother!' She is always sick in the night, and I am afraid. I shall not go about, I shall always stay at home. 'You shall not go about,' she says to me. She eats too much, perhaps her child will grow too fast." "Yes!" (said her mother). "It seems she never listens to what I tell her. Whenever she goes out of the house, I say, 'Do not look back when you go outside. Your child will imitate that. Do not eat too much. Your child might grow too quickly.'" She cried when she was told that. "You should not tell me that. I do not feel any pain in my back."

Now she said, "I am sick." Four days elapsed, and the medicine-man was sent for. (Her mother said,) "I can do no more. I am tired out now and good for nothing. You always greatly doubt what I say. You girls do not know anything. Being old, I give advice. It is I that always speak about that.

[p. 188]

[paragraph continues] Would that she took my advice to herself!" Now the medicine-man came. "What, pray, shall I do to her? I do not know what to do (in such cases)." She was very dry. "Hehe'?! What shall we do with her? Do you (women) press upon her belly! [*292] I am always afraid, carefully I give counsel." "Please give me some water to drink!" (said the pregnant girl).

"Let me see! Give her supporting sticks as a seat, and she shall get up. Go clear around the house!" "Alas! I shall die," she said. "Step out, do not be worried. You never take my advice to yourself. I know what I say, that is why I tell it to you." Twice she ran around her house. Now a fox gives a bad omen, a fox talks before daybreak, and she sat down again on the supporting sticks.

"Oh! What have I done to you?" (said her mother). The husband wept in the woods. (Her mother said to him,) "Now! Go up on the mountain! [*293] Build a fire, break off spruce twigs and put them down, and get pine needles!" Now he was building a fire. He flew about busily at his work, his heart being very joyful (with hope). Yonder is he, who has gone far off building the fire. He came back at midnight. "How did she get along?" "She is about to die," (said her mother). "Her mouth is all dry." Suddenly she died.

Footnotes

^188:292 A woman in confinement did not lie down, but was always seated, while one of the women in attendance sat behind her, gently pressing upon her belly in order to hasten the delivery.

^188:293 Round Mountain (Djiga'lmadu) is meant.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XVIII. DEATH AND BURIAL.

[p. 192]

"He is sick, he is very sick. It looks as if he is going to die. Perhaps he will not recover. If four days have elapsed and he has not recovered, you will run to get the medicine-man, and he will suck the sickness out of him. You will offer him as pay perforated white beads. Wear them around your neck. Surely he will get up and start hither, for medicine-men always like perforated white beads." He who had been sent arrived (at the medicine-man's house) and put the beads down on the ground. The medicine-man smelled them. "I shall not be able to make him recover. I shall indeed go to see him anyway. The perforated white beads already have an odor." [*296] He ran back and

[p. 193]

arrived home. He hung up the beads and cried, sitting down on the ground. "Do you put water down on the ground. The medicine-man has already come." The medicine-man sat down. "Well, I shall try to do what I can." He doctored him. "He will not recover. I do not understand what to do, I am beaten." [*297] After he had finished doctoring, he said, "He will die." (The sick man's father) started in to cry, and they all wept with him. "Do you run to bring them hither!" he said. "They shall all come here. I do not wish them to be ignorant about this."

On the following day, at daybreak, he had died. They all started in to cry together. "Go and dig the grave! Do you put together the perforated white beads, the dressed buckskin blanket, dentalia, wa'k'u shell beads, aprons fringed with pine-nut tassels, various pack-baskets, and trinkets. Make a burial net of coarse rope, and wrap him up in it." Then they washed him and combed his hair. The people all came, came together, dancing and weeping, women, men, and their children, while his mother cried. He was lifted down and put away in the house, while the people and his father and mother wept over him. They did not eat anything. Now they sewed together the deer-hide blanket.

"Now!" said (his father). "Amm!" [*298] Don't think that you will continue to eat. There is no sickness going about, and yet I am the only one going about that has sickness. Since the people were not sick, I thought I had a good medicine-man. Perchance you think you will not go to get wood!" [*299] (Thus he spoke to himself). "You will just go ahead and bury him tomorrow! Do you make the grave deep!" (he said to the people). There was a man from the south [*300] who said, "I do not intend to cry." He had flint arrowheads and inspired everyone with fear. "Whence is the poison that is always acting? I have no intention of eating, of eating my food with tears." It was the

|

[p. 194]

brave warrior that spoke thus. "You will bury him at noon. Probably nearly all have come. They say that there are many weeping for him, they say the chief weeps for him, they say that he is greatly angered. My medicine-man forgets, does he not? I shall not be the only one to cry. [*301] Do you all start!"

They took him up and carried him, all sorts of belongings being wrapped up with him-arrows, bows, and various blankets, Now they had all moved down to his grave. They brought him down to the grave and put him into it. "Now! Cry!" said he. His brother lay down in the grave, was pulled out back again. "Do not weep, you will soon follow him." [*302] The women all danced and cried, weeping for him, putting down water on the ground to the east of him. "Now it is well, is it not?" he said. "Let me see! Go ahead and fail to find the poison. [*303] In former days he said to me, 'Surely you shall have no cause to weep, and thus it will always be with you.' That is what he said to me."

The dead man's mother stayed there all night near the grave. Now the people all moved off back to his house. "I shall no longer stay in the house. Set the house on fire!" They set on fire his ropes and all his belongings. "Set the food on fire!" They set everything on fire, and moved on to another place. "You all will go to get other food. I did not think that I would ever be without his laughter when eating." They were all weeping at night, when suddenly the old woman came back. Now at night they started in to eat. "Do you all eat after weeping! Truly we shall all die; we shall not live forever, is it not so? The time of death is near at hand. [*302] Do you all procure food for yourselves! Go to the river and catch salmon. No!" he said, "I shall not hurry (to eat). 'Yes, we shall catch salmon (for you),' he used to say to me. [*304] I shall cry yet a while, if you please. I shall take food soon."

[p. 195]

The chief spoke. "Pray do it now!" he said (to the warrior). "Lie in wait for him on his trail. He will find out! They say he has been talking about me, that is what he has been saying. Yes, he will know! He thinks that he has sense. I have sense. the sense of a chief. I shall soon speak out my mind. Though he was my medicine-man, pray shoot him!" he said. "Take him out into the brush and kill him!"

The people brought wa'k'u beads, dentalia, and perforated white beads. "Here! Pound these," they said. He pounded them at the grave. "I did not know about it, that is why I did not come," (they said). Every summer they burn food (at the grave).

Footnotes

^192:296 I.e., they already smell of death.

^193:297 Le., I can not cope with the disease spirit.

^193:298 He angrily apostrophizes the medicine-man, whom he suspects of having magically "poisoned" his son.

^193:299 The implication is that he will murder the medicine-man when he unsuspectingly goes out into the brush for firewood.

^193:300 This man, named Wa'it'awasi, was said to be a brave warrior, a yo'?laina.

^194:301 in other words, the medicine-man's folks will weep, for he shall not escape with his life.

^194:302 This sort of consolation seems to be rather Christian than Indian.

^194:303 He is again angrily apostrophizing the medicine-man. "You will fail to find it, will you?"

^194:304 He remembers how his son used to say to him, "Don't bother about getting salmon. I'll attend to that myself."

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIX. BETTY BROWN'S DREAM. [*308]

[p. 196]

I dreamt. I went off towards the east across a dried-up creek; the creek bed was all covered with moss, it was green with moss. Now I went to the north along the trail. Now I stood on the outside (of a house).

"Enter!" said to me a man whose hair was all white. There

[p. 197]

was also a woman who was blind in one eye. [*309] She offered me as a seat a chair of ice. I looked from one thing to another. Everything was made of ice, and it hung down in icicles. "It is near dinner-time," she said. "He will pull the bell," she said. "Now you will be seated, and he will pull you up." "I seated myself, Now he had pulled me up. There was a medicine-man sitting there, talking. The medicine-man was made of rock, he had on a net-cap of white down; he was all white-haired, even his eye-lashes were white. I was afraid. I sat down to eat.

(She said to me,) "Go and see your mother! She is sitting inside there yonder." So I went into the next room to the south. "So it is you, my daughter!" she said, and hugged me. "Go and eat!" she said, and I sat down. Everything was of ice. "So it is you who have come here, cousin!" (said another woman that I recognized as Mary). "We are living in a good place. The place we lived in before was bad. This place here is very good, it is all covered with flowers and it is green. It is very good." And then someone overtook me. "Let us go back!" I slipped down on the left side to the north. Then I started to go back, but I did not go back home by the way I came.

Footnotes

^195:308 This dream seems to be the result of a mixture of Indian and Christian ideas. Possibly it owes something to the Ghost-dance movement, which reached the Yanas from the so-called "Chico Indians," i.e., Northwest Maidu of the Sacramento Valley.

^197:309 She was a. Wintun woman, named K!ulo't'imat?ya, whom Betty had known in life. The man she had known as Wa'imayasi.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XX. SPELL SAID BY A GIRL DESIROUS OF GETTING A HUSBAND.

[p. 198]

S*uwa'! [*310] May you think about me to yourself! May you turn back to look! Would that I might stand before his face! I just cry to myself. Would that I might see him every day! I do just as you do. [*311] Sometimes I dream of him, and I rise when it is daylight, and I look about. Now, as I see him, my heart flutters. I look at him without raising my eyes. He gives me trinkets, and I take them, and I wear them for some time, until they are worn out.

Footnotes

^198:310 Spells and more or less formulaic utterances in general are introduced by S*uwa', of unknown, if any, significance.

^198:311 The implication is not clear. Perhaps it means, "May you love me as I love you!"

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXI. CURSE ON PEOPLE THAT WISH ONE ILL.

[p. 199]

S*uwa'! S*e'galt!imaya! [*312] May ye speak to make me happy! May you suddenly experience that wherewith you curse me! May you suddenly drop dead without being sick! May you drop dead, you who drink my blood! May you suddenly all perish! Drink my blood! [*313] Would that I might be happy! May I not be sick in any way!

Footnotes

^199:312 [p. 198] It has not been found possible to get at the significance of this apparently formulaic word. It would seem to be a term of address to the supernatural powers concerned in man's happiness or woe. For s*uwa', see note 310.

^199:313 Either to be interpreted as s*i'? dji watdu'w "drink (imper.) my blood!" or contracted from s*i'dj dji watdu'w "drink-me my blood!" As Betty Brown expressed it, "You folks are always mixing up my blood with your coffee," i.e., "curse me and wish my death."

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXII. PRAYER ON SNEEZING.

(Said by a Woman)

S*e'galt!imaya! May I be happy! Do you people not speak about me! Do you speak for my happiness when speaking about me!

(Said by a Man)

May I be happy! May my legs feel light! May you people speak for my happiness! Would that you would let me alone! I bathe, and I go back into my house, and I rejoice in my eating.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 200]

  

SUPPLEMENTARY TEXTS [*314]

  

XXIII. THE ROLLING SKULL. [*315]

(Round Mountain Jack's Version)

[p. 202]

Wildcat had a bad dream. He climbed up a digger pine and broke off the branches, broke them all off. He wrenched off one of his arms from his shoulders, then wrenched off the other one also; he also wrenched off one of his legs, also the other leg. He broke off his backbone and threw it down; he also broke off his neck. Down he bounded, (now nothing but) a human skull, and there he lay for a while.

He bounded to the south, and, bounding, arrived at a house. All the people died. He bounded (still farther) south, to a house in the south. All the people died. He turned and bounded back, hastened back to the north. Off towards the west the people died: he hastened back to the east. He hastened off towards the north, and arrived at a house; the people died. He hastened back to the south; there were no people. There he lay for a while. He came hastening back from the south, came hastening back to this place. He hastened back as far as a hill.

Coyote was coming from the north, from Montgomery creek. The human skull was singing. Coyote heard him, and stood still. "Come to me, pack-basket!" [*318] he said. "Come to me, tasselled apron? Come to me, basket-cap! Come to me, bread! Come to me, salmon! Come to me, deer-meat! Enough now!" Now he was carrying a pack-basket on his back. "Come here, staff!"

[p. 203]

he said. Now he was walking along, coming from the north. Now (Wildcat) was rolling north, bounded along the ground to that one. (Coyote, now) a woman, was coming from the north, came near to him. He started in to weep. "Yes," he said, "my brother acted in that manner. I put rocks in the fire, dug a round hole in the ground, and put the hot rocks into it. I roasted him in the hole. Let me roast you in a hole: you will not die." (Wildcat agreed, and Coyote) roasted him in a hole. He kept holding on to him, kept holding him down tight. (Wildcat attempted to break out.) The earth shook all about, but he did not (succeed)--he remained there. Coyote put out his hand for him, took up the head back again, the human skull.

"I am a sensible person," he said. "It is I that have always been possessed of much sense." Now he took him up and carried him off. He went west (until) he came to a halt. "Now!" he said, "I shall throw you into the creek here. People will bathe here," he said; "they will become medicine-men." Now he threw him into the creek there. Then he went back home to the east.

Footnotes

^200:314 These two supplementary texts of myths were obtained in 1900 by Dr. R. B. Dixon from Round Mountain Jack, who has since died. Round Mountain Jack, whose Indian name was Bui'yas*i (cf. bui- "to kick"), was recognized as the last chief or "captain" of the Northern Yana and was always mentioned with respect and affection. By Dr. Dixon's kindness I am enabled to append these texts to my own. The first is a variant of a myth independently secured by Curtin and myself, the second is valuable as the only Yana version secured of a widespread western American myth. With Dr. Dixon's consent I have normalized his orthography in conformity to my own. The dialect of the texts is gari'?i or Northern Yana. On only one phonetic point is there uncertainty. Dr. Dixon often writes a syllabically final r where my own materials shows gat'a'?i n, rt', or t?, gari'?i t (or t'), rt', or t?; e.g., Dr. Dixon has tirdjaua'lti (i.e., dirdjawa'ldi?) where Central Yana would show ditdja-, Betty Brown's material ditdja-. As it is doubtful how far Dr. Dixon's r represents voiced r and how far voiceless r (or rt', rt?), it has seemed most expedient to normalize all eases with variant r in conformity with the phonetics of Betty Brown's material.

^200:315 Cf. text IX and footnote 191.

^202:318 The pack-basket, tasselled apron, and basket cap stamp the woman, the bread, salmon, and deer meat are to be the contents of the pack-basket, the staff marks the old woman.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XXIV. GRIZZLY BEAR AND DEER. [*319]

[p. 207]

There was a house in which dwelt Deer. Grizzly Bear was angry. "Cut off some of your flesh for me," (she said to Deer). "I am going to eat it." Then (Deer) cut some of it right off and roasted it. (Grizzly Bear) ate it. "It tastes good," (she said. Some time after this, she was lousing Deer, and scratched her. Deer protested; but Grizzly Bear said,) "I was lousing you." Now she caught hold of a louse; now she bit (Deer's) neck and killed her. Then she cut up her belly and ate her up, ate up much. All (the Deer people) she killed. She went off looking for (Deer's two children, but) did not find them. She came back home. To the south she went and killed all. She returned north. Off west she ate up all the deer, and returned east. Off north she ate up all the elks, ate them all up, killed all. She went eastwards again and killed all the deer. She stood still and looked around. "I have killed them all," she said. "Enough now!" she said, and then proceeded back home. "Let us play!" (said Deer's children to Grizzly Bear's). "Yes, yes!" they said. "Let us smoke each other outside!" They dug a hole in the ground. "Let us smoke each other!" (said Deer's children). "You go in first!" (Grizzly Bear's children said to them). "Yes, yes!" The fawns now went in. (Grizzly Bear's children) put in pine-needles, and then caused (Deer's children) to smoke. [*321] "Enough now!" they said, "I am all smoke now." "Yes," said (Grizzly Bear's children). Now they came out again. "Do you go in," they said, "Grizzly Bear children!" Then they put in pitchwood and pine-needles again, and caused (Grizzly Bear's children) to smoke. "Enough now!" they said. (Deer's children) held them down to the ground, (so that) they died. They were no more. (Deer's children) took the pitchwood out again and thrust their hands inside. They pulled out (one of Grizzly Bear's children, then) they pulled out the other one. Each one carried one in his arms. They brought them back into their house, laid them down on the ground, and put a deerhide blanket over them. "Now!" they said, "let us run away! Let us run to the south!" they said. Now they came running from the east, from Montgomery creek.

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] "Where is the rock?" (said the younger brother). "Let us proceed to the mountain, where there is brush!" (said the older one). "No!" said the younger one, "she might see us at the mountain," he said, "if we stay there. Let us proceed to the rock," he said, "to where there is a rock." "Yes," said (his brother), and then they got up on it. "It is good," they said.

Grizzly-Bear Woman now hastened back and arrived home. She went inside again and said, "Wake up, you two! What are you doing? What are you sleeping for?" They did not speak. Then she picked up a stick and struck them. She put (their blanket) aside from them; they were dead. She looked at them. "Where are they?" she said, asked the poker. It said nothing. She asked the stone. It said nothing. She asked the earth. It said nothing. She asked the stick, she asked the fire, she asked the coals. "Yes," they said, "they have run to the south." "Yes," she said. She bit the stone, for she was angry; she bit the stick; she bit the fire. She went out. "Amm!" she said (threateningly). "Where will you go to?" she said. Now she came running from the east, tracked them by their footprints. For two days she ran along, came running from the east. She did not find them. She tracked them around back to the rock. She looked up, there indeed they were.

"Do you come down again!" she said, "O orphans! What are you running away for? Come to me! Are you not hungry? Let us go off home! It is nearly nightfall." "No!" (they said). "You have been killing all (of our people),--my mother, my father, my brothers, my sisters." "Amm!" said Grizzly-Bear Woman, and proceeded to gnaw the rock; she moved clear around it. "O rock!" said the fawns, singing, "go upwards! rise up!" And then it did so. It rose up while Grizzly-Bear Woman kept gnawing at it. Only a little was left of the rock. [*328] For two days she gnawed the rock, when suddenly she died, let her hands drop down on the ground.

They hastened down. And then they cut up her belly, pulled out (her) entrails and hung them up. They cut off one (of her legs) and hung it up. They cut off (her) other leg also and hung it up. They cut out her head and threw it to the west; (her) backbone they threw to the east. "Now!" they said, "be a grizzly bear! Eat people!" they said.

Footnotes

^203:319 Compare Dixon's "Maidu Myths," p. 79, where further parallels are given (see also Dixon's "Northern Maidu," p. 341). The Takelma of Oregon have a similar myth.

^207:321 wu'lwisindja, "I am fanning smoke into house" (from Dr Dixon's notes). The method of smoking here employed seems to have been to fan the smoke of burning pine needles into the temporarily constructed sweat-house; cf. Dixon's "Maidu Myths," p. 79.

^208:328 Information was secured from Betty Brown of two rocks with a circular notch said to have been bitten in by a grizzly bear in pursuit of the deer that stood on top. They are a short distance east of the hamlet of Montgomery Creek and are known as djanu'nak!aina, "notched rocks." They were doubtless thought of by Round Mountain Jack as the scene of the mythical incident.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 209]

  

III. SUPPLEMENTARY YANA MYTHS  [*329]

  

(COLLECTED By DR. R. B. DIXON)

  

I. THE CREATION OF MEN. [*330]

Lizard, Gray Squirrel, and Coyote lived in a big sweat-house at Wama'rawi. [*331] They had no wives or children. Coyote wanted to make people, but the others thought that they themselves were enough. Finally Lizard agreed, "We'll make people, different kinds of people." So Lizard went out and cut three sticks like gambling sticks. The others wanted to know how he was going to make people out of these. Lizard said, "I'll show you." One stick he took for the Hat Creeks (Tc'uno'yana), one for the Wintun (Ya'?wi), and one for the Pit Rivers (Wa'dja'mi). [*332] When he looked at them he said, "There is something lacking." Coyote asked, "Who has been left out?" Lizard said, "The Yana." So he took any kind of a stick, broke it up into little pieces, and put them in a pile for the Yana. The

[p. 210]

stick for the Hat Creeks he placed in the east, the stick for the Wintun in the west, the stick for the Pit Rivers in the north.

All three, Lizard, Gray Squirrel, and Coyote, then made a big basket, heated rocks, put water in the basket, and heated the water by putting the hot rocks into the basket. Then Lizard put the sticks into the boiling water, put in more hot rocks to boil the sticks. All then went to sleep, after setting the basket outside on the roof and covering it up. Before they slept Lizard said, "Early in the morning you will hear some one when the basket turns over. That will be because there are people. You must keep still, must not move or snore."

Early in the morning they heard people falling down, heard the basket turn over. By and by they heard the people walking about outside. They got up, then covered the door with a large rock to keep the people out. They did not talk or answer those outside. For a long time the people were talking. One called out, "Where is the door?" Coyote said, "Keep still, that talk does not sound right." [*333] Others then spoke, asked also. Then Coyote said, "Now it sounds right," and then they opened the door. Then all the people came crowding in, all came into the sweat-house. Then the three said, "It is well. There are people."

Footnotes

^209:329 Besides the two texts given above (nos. XXIII and XXIV) Dr. Dixon's manuscript Yana material comprises a number of myths obtained in English. These are here made accessible with Dr. Dixon's consent; only such changes have been made in the wording and spelling of Indian names as seemed necessary. Some of the myths, though here and there exhibiting interesting variants, too closely parallel the versions obtained by Curtin and myself to warrant publication and have therefore been omitted; they are "The Creation of Men" (determination of sex and making of hands), "Flint Chief's Entertainment," "The Bringing of Fire," "The First Death," "'I'lhat?aina" (first part), "Coyote and Frost," and "Coyote and his Sister." Dr. Dixon's informants were Sam Bat'wi and Round Mountain Jack.

^209:330 What is here given is only the first episode of Dr. Dixon's myth of "The Creation of Men," the other two dealing with the origin of sex and the making of hands by Lizard. Dr. Dixon's version of the making of the Yana and other tribes from sticks seemed different enough from my own (No. V) to justify its inclusion here. If, as seems likely, Sam Bat'wi was the source of this version, it is certainly curious that it differs so markedly in detail, if not in general character, from that secured by myself only seven years later. It is noteworthy that Dr. Dixon's "Creation of Men" does not include the origin of death; this was obtained by him as a separate myth.

^209:331 See note 111.

^209:332 literally, "dwelling-north."

^210:333 That is, they had not yet learned to talk Yana correctly.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. THE CONTEST OF FOX AND COYOTE. [*334]

Silver Fox (Bo'k'u'ina) had a sweat-house at Di'yurik'dilla (or Di'yurimadu), in Cedar Creek valley. Coyote lived there too. Silver Fox went out to hunt deer, killed some, but did not bring them home. At night he alone would eat. A big snow came; there lay Coyote on one side of the house, he did not get up, though he was hungry. But at last he got up and went out to hunt for gophers. Whenever Coyote found a gopher, he killed him by jumping on his house; then he dug out various sorts of roots with which he filled his basket. He killed about twenty

[p. 211]

gophers, came home, and cooked them. Silver Fox expected to have a part, but Coyote ate them all himself.

This sort of thing went on for six days. Silver Fox did not go out, for he had all kinds of food; six kinds he had-dried deer meat, salmon, roots, cedar gum, acorn bread, and pine nuts. The snow fell for seven days. Coyote could not get out, the snow was so deep. Silver Fox said, "I'll have two moons of winter. If we had five moons we should starve whenever a snow like this came." Coyote got up, sat with his head down, thinking. He said, "No, I want five moons of winter. If there were only two moons, widows could get plenty of wood and be happy. It is better to have five moons." Now Silver Fox said, "No. I want to have two moons. Every one will be good and well off. What should we eat if there were five moons of winter?" Coyote said, "It is better that widows be hungry, that they should not have much to eat."

By and by another big snow came, Silver Fox had made it come. Silver Fox went out; he had a long stick with a crotch at the end to pull down dry branches, and he had a burden basket on his back. Every time he pulled the branches down from a cedar, sweet roots (cu'nna) came down. He carried them home, but did not let Coyote see them. The next day he went out again. There were bunches of something on the pine trees that burned. He set on fire some pine needles and put them on the end of his stick, then held it up to the bunches all about. Then he lay down face down and soon many grouse hit him all over. When they were all down he got up and put them in a brush sack (k'e'watc!i), filled it with the grouse. Coyote was not allowed to see it. After some time Silver Fox felt sorry for Coyote and let him see the food he had brought back. "Son-in-law, how did you get those roots?" said Coyote. Silver Fox said, "I took a stick, broke off cedar limbs, and down came the roots." Coyote said, "I will go and do the same." Silver Fox said, "I don't lookup when I do it." Coyote went, got hit badly, and looked up. He saw no roots, only branches. He went home sick. Fox said, "I did not look up when I was hit and hurt." Coyote saw him bring back grouse. "Son-in-law, how did you

[p. 212]

kill them?" he asked. Silver Fox told him. Coyote said, "I'll do that too." Silver Fox told him what to do, but Coyote did as before. When four grouse came he said, "Stop! I want to eat." They stopped, only four grouse came. Coyote cooked and ate them. Then he went to another tree and repeated what he had done. He jumped up, could not stand being hit by the grouse. He looked about--there was nothing there. He went home.

He asked Silver Fox how he managed to bring back so many always, but received Do answer. Coyote asked, "Son-in-law, how did you catch those yellow-jackets!" Silver Fox said, "I smoked them out with leaves. After smoking them out I dug them up with my penis. When the yellow-jackets came, I did not run. There is lots of meat [*335] down in the nest. When the sun rises I hold my hand over my eyes and see the yellow-jackets going into their holes." Coyote went out and did so. He saw the yellow-jackets' nest, smoked them, then dug out the nest with his penis. The yellow-jackets began to bite his penis. For a while he stood it, then could not any longer. He rolled on the ground with pain; then he went off. He said, "Son-in-law, I'm sick. The yellow-jackets bit me all over."

By and by Coyote lay down, and would not move when the snow came. Silver Fox got angry; he thought he would kill Coyote, because he did not believe him and do as he told him. Silver Fox had a wife, his shadow, and kept her in the space between the edge of the sweat-house roof and the ground. One night Coyote heard Silver Fox and his wife talking. Silver Fox went out to hunt. Coyote said, "Who is it that Silver Fox is talking to? He must have a woman somewhere." He hunted all about, asked everything. The main post said, "Here it is." Coyote tried to hold her, but suddenly she was gone, was never seen again. Silver Fox came home. He knew that his wife was gone, but did not say anything to Coyote.

Snow kept coming. Silver Fox thought that the best way to catch Coyote would be in a net. He did not know which kind of rope to use-deer-sinew or milkweed. By and by he began

[p. 213]

to chew milkweed string; he had pine nuts in his mouth. Coyote said, "I know that Silver Fox is eating pine nuts." Silver Fox went out. Coyote hunted for the nuts, found several baskets filled with them. He filled the sweat-house with those that came down when he pushed about under the roof with a stick. He told the nuts, "Stop! Don't all come." Silver Fox came back, and Coyote said, "This food came down. I don't know what is the matter." Silver Fox said nothing. Then he said, "You eat it up!" and Coyote did so. Then he slept. Then Silver Fox began to roll a rope on his thigh. Silver Fox slipped up as Coyote was sleeping and measured the size of his head. Then he finished the net.

In the morning Silver Fox said to Coyote, "Let us go out and catch cottontail rabbits." Coyote said, "Yes." Silver Fox said. "I'll put in a trap over there to the south. When you drive them, run fast." He did so, found many rabbits. Silver Fox told him to run right up to the net. Coyote did so, but broke out of the milkweed net easily. All the rabbits escaped. So they went home.

Silver Fox called for a deer-skin to come to him. He made a net of the sinew, again of the size of Coyote's head. Again they went out together, set traps as before. Silver Fox told Coyote to drive the rabbits and cry out, and to run very fast as he came to the net. Coyote did so, and got into the net; he could not get out. Silver Fox had a big live-oak stick and with this he hit him. Coyote said, "Son-in-law, don't hit me." Silver Fox said, "Son-in-law, you don't believe me," and he hit him again, and killed him. Silver Fox said, "You don't believe me, so I shall have the food in the trees. People were merely to stretch out a hand when they saw deer, and it would fall dead. It is not to be so now." [*326]

Silver Fox went home. He hunted all around for the places where Coyote had urinated. He went all over the country except Klamath Lake. He thought he had killed all the Coyotes. One morning he heard one yelp. Coyote was angry, came back. and made a fire start all around. Coyote came over to this side

[p. 214]

of Burney Valley. Silver Fox saw Coyote coming; he blew and said, "Come, grasshoppers! Come, plums! Come, cherries!" Coyote came along and saw the grasshoppers, plums, and cherries. They looked good, so he stopped to eat them. Silver Fox said, "When Coyote sees the food, he will stop and will not be angry." Coyote ate the plums and cherries, and said, "I want to eat. I'll not go and kill people." Coyote called for  a sack, filled it with the food, and came back. He said, "Son-in-law, I have good food." Silver Fox had called for   pitch. When Coyote asked him why he had put on pitch, he told Coyote that he was sorry he had lost him.  Silver Fox would not eat, though Coyote wanted him to. Silver Fox said nothing. Coyote said, "What are we going to do? It looks like spring." Silver Fox did not answer.

Footnotes

^210:334 Compare the Hat Creek myth in Dixon, "Achomawi and Atsugewi Tales," Journ. Amer. Folk-lore, XXI, 171-174. Some of the incidents are also found in Takelma mythology.

^212:335 The reference is to the larvae, formerly a favorite article of food when procurable.

^213:326 These statements seem rather irrelevant here. The meaning evidently is that Silver Fox had intended to make the procuring of food easy for the people, but that Coyote had spoiled things by setting bad precedents.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. THE LOST BROTHER. [*339]

Pine Marten's brother Weasel was stolen by Lizard (k!uwi'lla). Pine Marten was living at Big Bend. [*340] He went out to hunt and left Weasel at home. He told him to hide under the edge of the sweat-house roof. Weasel did so. By and by something came into the house saying, "Tsa, tsa, tsa." Weasel looked and saw that it was Lizard. Weasel thought Lizard very pretty, jumped out, and played with him. He gave him fat to eat. As Lizard ate more and more, he grew bigger and bigger. Weasel was seared and began to cry. Lizard put Weasel in his quiver and went off.

Pine Marten came back. "Where are you, my brother?" he said. There was no answer. He knew he was stolen, and cried all night. He hunted for him everywhere; he asked all things where he was, but in vain. Mouse had an arrow of tules that was very long. Pine Marten took this and leaned it up against the sky. He climbed up, reached the sky, and traveled to the east. He made a fire in the trail, and saw Moon coming traveling

[p. 215]

to the west. He had a basket on his back and carried two daughters in it. As he walked he said, "Wahaki, wahaki." Frost came out of his nostrils. Moon came along, saw Pine Marten, and stopped. He said, "Well, son-in-law," and put down his basket. He. came up to the fire. Pine Marten said, "It's cold. Father-in-law, I'll throw you up into the sky. I came to ask you something, for you ought to see everything. Have you seen my brother?" "Yes," said Moon. "See over there, somebody is being hung up by Lizard." Pine Marten asked Moon what he should give him as a gift. Would Moon have beads? "No!" Pine Marten then asked if he would have red and blue ones; Moon said, "Yes." Pine Marten gave them to him, and we see them as a halo around the moon. Moon told Pine Marten to go back to the earth, to the place where he had seen Weasel. He did so, went back to his house.

Lizard went out of his house, went south to get pitch-wood in order to cook Weasel, whom he was going to kill. Pine Marten slipped out of his house and followed; Coyote came also. He made himself into an old woman. He called for a basket and beads; they came, and he made himself look like a woman. He wore a tasseled buckskin apron. He came up to Lizard; Lizard could not seem to split the wood well, he knew that some one was watching. Coyote began to cry out; Lizard heard and thought it was Coyote fooling him. Coyote came up and said, "I am your aunt. I hear you stole Pine Marten's brother and are going to kill him. I hear you are going to have a big dance." Lizard answered, "Coyote, you are trying to fool me." Coyote answered, "No, I'm not Coyote. I'm your old aunt." Lizard then believed him.

Coyote cried for pitch and asked for fire. He asked if Lizard wanted to eat, as he had some bread in his basket. Lizard said, "No, there is going to be a big dance." He made up a big load of wood. Pine Marten was far off, watching. He blew "hw+, hw+," toward Lizard, made it very cold. Lizard said, "I'm cold. I'll go and get warm." He tried to lift the load of wood, but it was so heavy that he could not, for Pine Marten had said as he blew, "Be heavy!" Coyote offered to push it upon his back. So he came up behind and made believe to get ready for lifting

[p. 216]

the load. But instead he gave the ground a great kick; it opened and Lizard and his load of wood went down out of sight. All the people at Lizard's house heard Lizard fall down into the ground. All said "i, i" and thought their chief was dead. But the Spider Woman said, "No. I made the noise by hitting the ground with my acorn pestle."

Pine Marten now came up to where Lizard was buried. He dug him up, skinned him, and put on his hide. He went to Lizard's house. The people inside said, "That must be a stranger." Another said, "No, it's our chief." Lizard had eight or nine wives, ducks. When Lizard used to come home, he used to drink three baskets of hot water. Pine Marten called for them, but drank only two. This made the people think that there was some trick. All got up and began to cry out. Pine Marten whipped them, so they all became quiet.

Night came. Weasel was hanging up close by the post of the house, and was to be killed that night. Pine Marten took him down, however, and left only a shadow of him hanging there, to fool the people. He put Weasel in his quiver. Pine Marten then asked all the people to come to a big sweat. All sweated, then sat down. Pine Marten said, "Let us dance. Then we will sleep." They did so. Then Pine Marten said, "Let us sleep," and blew "hw+, hw+." All fell at once into a deep sleep. Pine Marten then put pitch all over the house, inside and out. Then he set it afire at the smoke-hole and at the door. He jumped out himself. All the people were burned but one woman, a duck.

Footnotes

^214:337 That is "wished" for it by means of his supernatural power.

^214:338 Pitch was daubed on the face as a sign of mourning.

^214:339 Compare the Pit River myth in Dixon, "Achomawi and Atsugewi Tales," Journ. Amer. Folk-lore, XXI, 167, 168.

^214:340 See note 245.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV. THE FLINTS AND GRIZZLY BEARS [*340a]

At Bala'wi [*340b] lived Flint Woman (Djuwa'lk!aimari?mi). Eagle, Buzzard, Bluejay, and other birds lived there too. Eagle stayed outside all the while, called all the people brothers. He

[p. 217]

went out to hunt. The Bears had a house in Bear valley and were at enmity with the Flint people. Lizard lived with the latter. He told the young fellows to make a fire in the morning and they all went out to hunt, went up to Bala'wi. The Bears did not want them to hunt there, and came also. Lizard said, "Young people, look out. We'll have to fight today." The Bears said, "We don't want to fight." So they did not fight that day, and the young people killed deer and brought them home. Old Grizzly Bear said, "Tomorrow we'll have a fight. I'll go after more of my people."

Lizard was chief of the Flint people. He said, "Tomorrow we must fight, you must riot go hunting." Lizard called all the Bears to come to the fire where he had built it. He had a poor piece of flint. The bears came to the fire, looked as if they were going to eat up the people. Lizard had a bear-skin quiver. The Bear women said, "You can not hurt us with that little flint. (We can stick those flints into our hearts and they won't hurt us.)" Lizard said, "Let me see you do it." So the women each took one of the little flints and did so, but the flint stayed inside of them; they could not pull them out of their hearts as they had thought. Lizard told them to go off. They did so and fell dead. Lizard was much pleased.

Then the Flint people fought the Bears, fought all day. Each side killed half of its adversaries. Next day they fought again, and all the Flint people were killed except Lizard. The Grizzly Bears were all killed except two old women. Lizard hunted for these, but they caught him and killed him. The Red and Blue Flint people were dead. Striped Flint (p'a'nma?amauna) had told the old Flint Woman that his spittle would come to life again. Flint Woman was not killed; she cried all the time, put lots of pitch on her head, so much that it stuck out of the sweat-house. The two old Bear women would come in the morning and bite off some of this. They thought that there were more people left.

One morning Flint Woman heard something calling out, "Da, da!" She jumped up and picked up something. She cleaned it with warm water, washed the child. She took the best black-bear hide and put him on it. She did not sleep that

[p. 218]

night. After two nights and days he began to crawl about. She wanted him to lie still, and put another hide on him. After four days and nights he was nearly ready to stand up. Then he began to talk; he was called Tsawa'tdikapsu. He said, "I want to eat, grandmother." She had some deer fat and gave it to him, and he ate it. He wanted more, and he ate it. He wanted dried salmon, and he ate it.

He began to walk about. Many little animals looked into the sweat-house. Tsawa'tdikapsu saw them and told his grandmother to look at them. He asked her to make a little bow for him. She said, "No. You are too small to shoot." "Yes," he said, "make one for me. I want to shoot." She did so, made a string and bow. A mountain quail looked into the sweat-house, the boy shot it. She then took the quail and struck the boy with it on the small of his back, as was always done to a boy when he shot his first game. Presently the boy broke the bow, and asked, "Make me a big one, grandmother." She did so. Said he, "I want to go out." "No," said she, "there are bad people outside." The boy wanted to go, so she let him go. Said she, "Don't go far off." A rabbit came along, and the boy shot and killed him. He took it in; she was glad. Said he, "I saw something with big eyes and ears, small legs, and a short tail. When he eats, he keeps moving his tail." She said, "That's a deer." The boy went out again and saw an elk. He described it to his grandmother, who told him what it was. She said, "Don't shoot him, you can't kill him." The boy pulled his bow to show how he could, and broke it. The bows of the many people who had been killed were hung up all around the sweat-house. He asked his grandmother if he could try one of them. She said, "They are too strong for you. I don't think that you can pull them." The boy said, "I'll try." He started at the north, broke them; he went around to the east, south, and west, and broke them all. The last one was to the west, he could not break it. His arm doubled back. He asked, "Whose bow was this?" She said, "It belonged to one of those that were killed." Again he tried to break it, but in vain. In every way he tried to break it, but to no purpose. He tried to break it with his feet, with big rocks, but in vain. He said, "That is my bow." It was backed with deer sinew. He picked out the best flints.

[p. 219]

She said, "Don't go far." The boy said, "I'm going to kill that big deer for you." "I don't think you can do it. You are too small," said the old woman. He went out. The elk was still there. He shot him and brought him back to his grandmother. "I wonder if I can shoot through that oak tree," said he. She said, "You are too small. Don't talk so, my grandchild." He went and shot through the tree.

"Grandmother," he said, "I'm going to start out. Tell me where are the people who killed my brothers." She said, pointing to the north, "They live there." The boy went. He saw two bears eating clover. The boy stopped and thought; asked his flints, "Which of you is the strongest?" The striped flint said, "I am." The red one said, "I am the one. When I hit people they die at once. Do not walk far off." The boy said, "Come, feathers!" There was a little bird that the boy told to go down below and call. "When the Bears hear it, they will stand end on and listen." The bird did so. The boy shot, and the arrow went into the mouth of one and out at the anus, and the same of the other. He skinned them, carried them back in the evening. His grandmother was frightened. "Don't be afraid," he said, "it is I." She cried; he hung up the two hides outside.

Next day he went again. He told five of these same little birds to come. "Go into that brush. If you find the bears, call; if not, do not call." They did so, and called. The boy told the birds to drive the bears out. They did so, drove out four. The boy killed them, and carried the hides home. He went all around that mountain, killing bears in this way every day. By and by the two wicked Bear women were the only ones left. They jumped on the boy, held him one on each side, and said, "Don't kill us. You are our husband. I'll keep you as my husband." He asked, "How many more bears are there?" "They are all gone but us," said they. The boy asked them if they were going to kill his grandmother, and they said, "No." They said, "I'm going to keep you as my husband, take you to my father." They went back with the boy to his house. His grandmother asked, "What sort of women have you?" "Bears," said he. "Why didn't you kill them?" she said. The boy said, "No. I'm going

[p. 220]

to keep them as my wives, and they will show me their father."

One day he stayed, and asked the two Bears where their father lived. "In the west, where the moon sets," they said. "We will start tomorrow and go there." The boy said to his grandmother, "Where is there poison?" She said, "They will fool you, they will throw acorns into the fire and make you blind. That is the way they killed my people." The boy said, "Where is there poison?" "At Wula'uwitc'u there is poison, there is a poisonous spring that smells bad." He went there, and one can see his footprint there where he made it. He took his pipe, held it over the spring, caused the poisonous air to go into it, then stopped it up. Then he came back, and the two Bears said, "We'll start tomorrow." He told his pipe, "When I smoke you, kill all the people."

There he went, with one step he went a great distance. Four times he stepped and came close to the sweat-house. He nearly broke it in as he stepped on it. It was Moon's house, and there lived the Bears. He asked, "What is the matter? Who is out there?" The two Bears came in, and Moon asked, "Who is there?" They said, "My husband. Don't talk." Moon said, "Why not?" When the boy came in, all the people thought, "We can kill him easily." Moon called him in, and everything shook when he came in or when he moved. He had on a woven rabbit-skin robe. Moon said, "We will have a big sweat," and all his people came in. They said, "Let us throw this man into the fire." They made a big fire; all Moon's people got up and danced. The boy did not move, sat with his head down. The rest made fun of him, told him to get up and dance. By and by Moon threw salt into the fire, thought to make the boy blind. He didn't move. Moon said to him, "Get up and dance." Then Moon put sweet acorns into the fire, but could not blind the boy.

Pretty soon the boy got up; when he stepped, the ground trembled. The Moon people began to push one another about, tried to push the boy, but could not move him. Soon he took out his pipe, smoked, and all the people fell dead, and Moon too. The boy said, "I do not want you to be trying to fight or to hit me. I am ma'p'djam?aina, [*340c] I cannot die." The two women he

[p. 221]

did not kill, he kicked them down into the ground. He went out, and blew smoke all about, killed every one.

Then he came back, and went all around to the places where his people had been killed. He picked up an eyelash from each one. "Have you a big bucket?" he asked his grandmother. "Build a fire when it is nearly dawn and heat rocks." All the eyelashes he put into the bucket. Then he turned and lay down with his face to the ground. To his grandmother he said, "Throw the hot rocks in and lie down also." She did so. By and by they heard shouting, "Here's my bow. Here's my place," and so on. All those dead people were alive again. The boy got up and said, "You are my brothers. I told my grandmother that I would come back again when I died. I did so. I caused you dead people to come to life."

Footnotes

^216:340a This myth was evidently obtained from Round Mountain Jack, as shown, among other things, by the linguistic form (North Yana) of the Indian names occurring in it. It differs considerably in detail from the form of the myth obtained by myself from Sam Bat'wi (no. I), and is therefore given here in full. Curtin's version also is evidently, a Central Yana one.

^216:340b A mountain north of Stillwater creek.

^220:340c See note 63.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

V. 'I'LHAT?AINA. [*341]

One day Flint Boil said to Djuwa'lk!aina [*342] "I have been dreaming, I dreamt last night. I dreamt about a woman and her father. What is his name? I want to know." Djuwa'lk!aina said, "In which direction did you dream?" Flint Boy said, "I dreamt of Yallo Bally [*343] mountain." Djuwa'lk!aina said, "I know whom you dreamt of." Flint Boy asked, "What is his name?" Said Djuwa'lk!aina, "Tcuitcuiwayu. He lives there." Flint Boy said, "I want to go there, and I want to take my nephew [*344] along." Djuwa'lk!aina said, "Yes." Flint Boy said, "I am going to marry the daughter, but I have no company on the road." Djuwa'lk!aina said, "But you are going to take your nephew." Flint Boy said, "Yes, but I want something like a bear, something that makes a noise. I don't want

[p. 222]

him to talk as we do. He must talk another language." Djuwa'lk!aina said, "What is he going to say?" Flint Boy said, "When he sees any one coming he will say, 'Wu, wu!' I want to make a dog." Djuwa'lk!aina said nothing. Flint Boy asked if she wanted to bear it talk now. She said, "Yes." So Flint Boy said to his nephew, "Bark, practice!" His nephew did so, said, "Wu, wu, wuuuu." It was a terrible sound, and every one heard it all over the world-north, east, south, west. Flint Boy said, "What shall I call you? You bite and bark." His nephew said, "My name is 'I'lhat?aina. I must have a big throat to bark." Flint Boy asked him to try barking again, and he did so. All the people in the world heard him, all said, "I hear a dog. That is Flint Boy's dog." 'I'lhat?aina, was small, but he made a great noise.

Flint Boy went away, went to the Sacramento valley, came to Sacramento river. He crossed with 'I'lhat?aina, and went on to the west. He came to the mountain at night, went up to the sweat-house, looked in, and saw the girl of whom he had dreamt. Many other people were there also. She sat on the east side. Flint Boy came in and sat down beside her. All looked at him, her father and mother looked, and said, "Who is that?" Flint Boy had left 'I'lhat?aina, outside, had tied him to the acorn sacks. Her father said, "Where did that man come from?" The girl said that she did not know. "It looks as if you were married," said her father, and he gave her a black-bear skin for Flint Boy to sit on.

Flint Boy had told 'I'lhat?aina not to bark or bite any one. "I am going to marry the girl. When I have done so, I shall get up early to hunt, and I shall tell her to take care of you." Early in the morning Flint Boy got up and told his wife about the dog, told her that it was vicious and that she must not touch it or talk to it. In that case it would not bite her. She agreed to care for it. Flint Boy went away. The woman went out and saw the dog. She patted it, saying, "Nice dog." The dog shook its head and tail, and said, "Where is my master?" She answered, "He has gone away." Then the dog barked, and every one was frightened, terribly frightened. Flint Boy heard it far away; he was frightened, for he knew that some one had fooled

[p. 223]

with the dog. "I believe I've lost my dog." Some one had really turned it loose. 'I'lhat?aina tracked Flint Boy, while the woman was frightened. 'I'lhat?aina could not find his master. Flint Boy came back, brought ten deer. The woman said, "I've fed him and turned him loose." "It's a bad dog. You ought not to have touched it."

That night it grew cloudy, while before it had been pleasant. Flint Boy went out, finally found the dog. He tied him up again, and told him to bark. He did so--"Wu, wu, wuuuu!" Djuwa'lk!aina heard it and said, "I bear Flint Boy's dog in the west at Bally mountain." All the people heard it and said, "That is Flint Boy's dog. He is married here at Bally mountain." By and by Flint Boy went out to hunt again, and gave the same instructions as before. The people made him bark as before, let him loose. Flint Boy heard him. "I know what is the matter," said he,

It grew cloudy. The dog said, "It will rain." On the top of Bally mountain there was a great cloud, black and thick. The cloud came down over the dog, it swirled and rolled, and it went up in the air. The dog was in the cloud, he had called it and made it about himself. He did not want to be tied up, but to go with Flint Boy on his hunts. So he left Flint Boy and went up above. When he got part way up he barked, and the people heard it all over the world. Flint Boy heard it and was sad, for he knew the dog was lost. He never saw his dog again. 'I'lhat?aina lives in the black clouds still. When he barks, it thunders.

Footnotes

^221:341 This account of the origin of thunder is only the latter part of the myth of "The Flints and Grizzly Bears" obtained by Dr. Dixon from Sam Bat'wi. It corresponds closely enough to my own version, but is published here because of its greater wealth of details.

^221:342 Flint Boy's grandmother. The name means "rock-lying-on-ground."

^221:343 The Yallo Bally mountains are west of the Sacramento at Red Bluff, a very considerable distance to the southwest of Redding. The reference is more probably to Bally mountain (6246 ft.), one of the main peaks of the Bully Choop range. It is within easy sight of and almost due west from Redding.

^221:344 'I'lhat?aina, who had been dug up from the ground, is here termed the nephew of Flint Boy.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI. FIXING THE SUN.

Sun lived at Hi'tsiriha, three miles up from P'a'wi. There was a small hill there of red earth. The people went out to hunt, but did not stay long. Sunset came quickly, the day was short. It was a great trouble. Everyone was in trouble. "What shall we do about it? If the sun came up far off to the east and not right here near us, it would be all right." But the sun was in the center of the world, and that was the cause of the trouble.

The people all got together and talked it over. They asked Cottontail Rabbit and Blue Squirrel. "We have got to move

[p. 224]

the sun." Rabbit said, "Yes, we'll do it." The, people asked, "How?" Rabbit said, "We'll carry it on our backs. When I'm tired, Squirrel can take it." "Where will you put it?" "We'll put it over the mountains far off to the east." They started to carry it, carried it off to the east. When they got tired, they changed off. They carried the sun far, far away, to where he now comes up.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII. WOODPECKER AND WOODRAT.

Red-headed Woodpecker was married to Woodrat Woman. They lived at We'yuldiyauk!aimadu. The people were nearly starving for lack of food. Only Woodpecker had any; he got his acorns at a great distance. He had ten sacks, and some acorns he had in the holes of the trees. Woodpecker came home every night, and Rat Woman had lots of soup and bread. Woodpecker and Woodrat Woman would give none to any one. Woodpecker had a brother-in-law, Woodrat. He was sick, his foot was sore, he could not walk. Formerly he had been a fisherman. Woodpecker told his wife, "Give my brother-in-law plenty to eat, he is sick." She did so.

Woodpecker came home with a big load of acorns. The woman gave her brother lots of soup. Woodpecker sat there and ate too. He saw her give her brother soup, and said, "Here! don't do that. Why do you give him that?" Then he got up, took the soup away, and set it down by his own bed. Woodrat turned his back to the fire and went to sleep. The same thing happened every night. By and by the woman dug a hole under her brother's pillow and put the acorn bread in. She put some in, so that while he pretended to be asleep he could eat. Thus Woodpecker was fooled, as she offered soup each night and Woodpecker took it away. But his brother-in-law had bread.

One night Woodpecker came home. He got up in the morning- and told his wife, "Tell my brother-in-law to wash his hands mid to come and eat soup." She did so, gave him soup, but Woodpecker took it away. The next day Woodpecker said, "How comes it that my brother-in-law is so fat?" Woodrat said, "I'll get even with you." When Woodpecker had gone off, his

[p. 225]

brother-in-law got up and said, "Where's my salmon spear? I'm going to get salmon at Cow creek." He saw some in the water and caught two, then took them home. "Cut them up," he said to his sister. The two ate, had a great feast. By and by he hid all the salmon. Woodpecker came back and smelt the salmon. ".What is it that smells like salmon? You people must have been eating salmon," he said. She said, "No. I don't smell it. Where should we get salmon from?" Woodpecker said he thought he had smelt it; Woodrat said nothing.

Woodrat went again, and as before caught salmon. One day Woodrat said, "Sister, we have had enough salmon. Give Woodpecker some when he comes." They had it all ready; when Woodpecker came in, the salmon was brought out. Woodpecker looked at it and said, "You people have salmon. I thought so." He was very eager to get some to eat. "My brother-in-law is very good," he said, but Woodrat did not move. Woodpecker said, "Give my brother-in-law plenty to eat. I'll not say anything again." Woodrat said to himself, "I thought you had no sense. You must give me food, but I have the best food after all." The woman gave him soup and bread, and Woodpecker did not take it away any more.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII. RABBIT WOMAN AND HER CHILD.

Jack Rabbit lived at Ba'wa at Battle creek. There were many people there. It was the spring time, the clover was growing. All went out to get clover, young girls and all. Rabbit had a baby, but no husband. She went with the rest. She had no friends to whom to give the child while she was gone. One woman said, "I can take it for you." "Yes," said Rabbit. She gave it to her, and went off for the clover. By and by she came back with the rest, and put the clover in the house. She put the roots in the ashes, and sat down to eat, ate all the roots. Some one had given her some meat, and she ate this also.

Then she remembered her baby. "I forgot my child," she said. She jumped up and went to the woman to whom she had given it. "My friend, how is my child? I want my baby." She answered, "Some one else has taken him to the next house." So Rabbit went there and asked. She was given the same answer.

[p. 226]

[paragraph continues] So Rabbit went on, and was answered as before. She went to house after house. Rabbit felt bad. She went to the last house and received the same answer. She went all around once more. The people had killed the child, had given some of it to Rabbit when she came back. Rabbit stopped and cried. She thought, "I ate my baby."

Rabbit had another baby. It was sick. Rabbit said, "My baby is sick. I do not know what is the matter." The people had no medicine-man. Someone told her, "There is a medicine-man living to the north." She took her baby and went after the medicine-man. Some one saw her and asked, "Where are you going?" "My baby is sick." The man said, "What is the matter?" Rabbit said, "I do not know. It has the colic (?), I guess." The man said, "I am a medicine-man." It was Coyote. She said, "What is your name? I want to go to Pale'lu, there is a medicine-man there. Ma'makalik!uwi is his name." Coyote said, "Yes. That is my name." She said, "Well, take the baby."

Coyote took it. He sat down on a rock, looked at the baby, and put his hand on him. Rabbit said she wanted to go home. "I thought that you would doctor him; now I want to go." Coyote said, "No. If I am going to doctor, I want to do it at my house." Rabbit said, "Yes." She went to Coyote's house. Coyote doctored the child, danced. When he got through, he said, "The baby is all right." That night he told Rabbit. "Go to sleep on the south side." She did so. Coyote said. "I'm going to doctor somewhere else. I shall be back soon," and he went out. By and by he came back. He looked at Rabbit, saw that she was asleep. He walked softly up, sat down, and looked at her. He thought, "I want some meat. I've had no meat for a long time." So he killed her, and the baby too.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX. COYOTE AND RABBIT GAMBLE.

Coyote wanted to gamble with Cottontail Rabbit. "We must have fun," he said. Rabbit said, "How shall we have fun?" Coyote said, "I'll show you how." Coyote made five sticks for each side about two feet long of a small sized wood, and got some

[p. 227]

ma'du grass. Coyote made a small stick four inches long (dju'p!ayauna) and put it in with the five long ones. He rolled these up in the grass and laid them down. He rolled up the other five and put in the short one. This bundle he placed beside the other. The guessers clap hands and with one or the other hand designate which bundle the short stick is in. If they fail to locate it, they lose. If they guess right, they have the sticks passed over to them and themselves roll. Coyote said, "Do not use this game in summer, use it in the fall and winter. Stop when the leaves come out on the oaks, stop playing this game. If you use it all summer, there will be no acorns."

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

X. GOPHER AND RABBIT GAMBLE.

Gopher and Cottontail Rabbit gambled. Gopher had many arrows and a bow. He told Rabbit, "We will always gamble when we meet." "Let us do so today." So they cut sticks at Big Cow creek. Gopher bet one of his arrows first, and lost. Next he bet another one, and lost. Then he bet his bow, and lost. He bet his quiver, and lost. He bet his belt, and lost. Everything he had he lost. He said, "I have nothing left to bet. I will bet my people." Rabbit said, "All right." He bet his people, and lost. He bet his wives, and lost them. He bet his children, and lost. He said, "I will bet myself." He bet his arm, and lost. He bet the other arm, and lost. He bet all his body, and lost all.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI. COYOTE AND THE STUMP. [*345]

Coyote went to P'a'wi one day. It was early in the morning and it was very foggy. He met some one in the trail. Coyote stooped. "Whew! I'm tired. Where do you come from?" The man did not answer. Coyote sat down to rest, and said, "You came early, so did I." The man said nothing. Coyote said, "Talk! One must say something when he meets one." There was no reply. Said Coyote, "If you are angry, say so!" No

[p. 228]

answer. Coyote said, "If you want to fight, I can fight." Coyote got up. There was no answer. Coyote said, "I'll hit." He did so, and his right hand stuck. It was no man, it was a stump. Coyote said, "Let go my hand!" with no result. Coyote hit him with his left hand; it stuck. Coyote said, "Why do you hold my hands? Let go! That is no way to fight." No reply. Coyote kicked with his right foot; it stuck. He kicked with his left foot; it stuck. He butted; his head stuck. By and by a man came along and saw Coyote. He said, "Coyote is a fool. He has been fighting that stump."

Footnotes

^227:345 In Dr. Dixon's manuscript this incident is immediately preceded by the story of Coyote and Frost (see no. VII of texts). It is practically a version of the world-wide "Tar Baby" myth. A very similar myth is told by the Takelmas.

      
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII. LOON WOMAN. [*346]

At Hak!a'l?imadu, a lake near Hat creek, lived Loon Woman (Hak!a'lisimari?mi). She had no husband. Every man that came along she killed; she would tell them, "I love you." The man would stay with her, then she would cut out his heart, dry it, and tie a string on it. She had treated ten people thus, had made beads out of their hearts, and wore them as a necklace. She was a nice-looking woman, living all alone.

She thought, "I dreamed of a man last night. I dreamt that it was Eagle's son." She dressed up with her beaded apron and basket-cap, fixed herself up nicely, painted her face, and started away. Eagle lived at Ci'p!a [*347] with a great many people, he had a big sweat-house. Coyote lived there also. Loon came down, came to the sweat-house in the afternoon when the people were all dancing. They saw her coming from the east; her beaded apron made a noise "so?, so?, so?," as she walked. Meadow Lark Woman lived there also, was an old woman living alone east of the sweat-house. Loon came to her house, and called her aunt (gara'ina). Meadow Lark was in bed, but got up when she heard Loon come in. "Who is that?" she said. Meadow Lark had a long spear (lu'mi) in her bed. She seized the spear and was about to spear Loon, when Loon said, "It is I, aunt." "You must say who you are," said Meadow Lark, "or I'll spear you."

[p. 229]

[paragraph continues] Then Meadow Lark stuck her spear up again. Loon came in and sat down, while Meadow Lark hung her head. She felt bad, was all alone, and cried. She thought that Loon was some relation. In the big sweat-house were many people sweating and dancing about the fire. Loon said to Meadow Lark, "My aunt, I am going to see what is going on." Outside were many young women dancing, dancing for fun. Meadow Lark said, "Go, but be careful. The young people may pull you about, they may not like to have a strange woman about." "I do not want men to pull me about," said Loon.

Loon went out, sneaked among the girls who were dancing. The girls saw her coming, for it was moonlight and they could see her. She was a stranger. Every one looked at her, no one knew her. The beads about her neck looked strange, looked like the hearts of people. The girls, however, took her in and let her dance with them. Loon said to one in a whisper, "Let us go and look into the sweat-house and see the men, see how they dance." The girl said, "No, we never look in when men are sweating." Loon said, "Let us look anyway." Two women there knew who Loon was, and they were afraid. One woman said, "Let her look if she wants to. Take her up to the sweathouse."

Loon looked in, saw the men dancing. Eagle would not let his son dance, he had put him away next to the wall, put him in a black-bear skin and rolled him up. The people finished their dancing, all went out to the creek to swim. They were strung all along the creek; then they all went back to the sweat-house. Loon was among the girls again. There was an old man in the sweat-house, talking. "What did you tell me a while ago? Didn't you tell me that a stranger woman had come?" "Yes, there is one outside." Said he, "Do not play with her. I know her, I saw her make trouble in five places. I know her name. It is Hak!a'lisimari?mi. Let her alone. If you do not play with her tonight, it will be well."

A vagrant man was walking about, saw Loon, and began to tease her, pull her about. Her head was hanging down. He put his hand on her shoulder, but she said "M+, m+," and shrugged her shoulders. Five stranger men were teasing her. Finally

[p. 230]

they stopped playing with her. Loon was angry, got up, and went to the sweat-house. There were many people there. She looked in, saw that the fire was low. "O you men, one of you come out and be my husband! One of you is my husband, come out," she said. No one answered. "My husband played with me only a little while ago. Why doesn't he come out? I want to go home. Hurry up." One answered, "Was it I? Do you want me?" He went out, Loon looked at him, and said, "You are not the one." He went away. She called again, "Come out." Another answered and came out, but he was not the one. This was repeated several times. By and by Loon stopped talking, went away.

She went to the creek where the men had been swimming, looked in where each man had swum. Eagle's son had been the last one, far off all alone. She looked to see if any man had lost a hair. She found one hair, pulled out one of her own hairs, and measured the two. The man's hair was shorter, so it was not her husband's. She wanted a husband whose hair was as long as her own. She hunted all along the creek, could not find one of the same length. All were too short. Finally at the last place she found a hair, and measured it. It was of just the same length as hers. "Now I have it," she said. "I thought I would find it somewhere."

She went back to the sweat-house, and as before she called on the men to come out, and as before each one that came was rejected. All had come out, young Eagle was the only one left. She kept calling. Some of Eagle's people were in there crying. She called to them not to cry, but to send out the man. They knew what she wanted, and therefore cried. Eagle said, "Well, I will give up my son's life, for I do not want my people to die. I must give up my son." He took him out. The boy was shining like gold. Loon said, "That is my husband." He came out, and would not look at her, did not want to go home with her. She said, "I want to go home tonight. I dreamed of you." Loon seized him.

The old people cried in the sweat-house. Loon and young Eagle went home, went east toward Hat creek. She said, "I do not want daylight, I wish it to be night yet. I want to sleep

[p. 231]

with my husband." She said to Eagle after they had gone a short distance, "I am tired, let us sleep." Eagle would not talk; Loon asked him to, but he refused. Loon fixed the bed and lay down, as did Eagle. She tried to play with him, but he did not wish to. An old man at the sweat-house had put an acorn-cup on Eagle's penis, so that he could have no connection; he had told him not to sleep. The woman wanted the young man, but he was incapacitated. Eagle blew on her and put her to sleep. She stretched out and snored. Eagle did not sleep, but watched the woman. Late in the night he got up, removing the woman's arms from him. He found a log and laid it beside the woman, put her arms about it as they had been around him. Then he ran off.

He came home and told the people that he had run away. The people said, "What shall we do? We must go to the south, we must run away." "No," said another, "Loon will catch us if we go south. Let us go to the north." "No," said another, "let us go to the east." "Let us go to the west," said another. "No, she will catch us there." "Where shall we go?" "We must go up to the sky." "How shall we go up? We must hurry before Loon gets up." "Who will take us up to the sky?" said Eagle. Spider had a rope, he [*348] was the man. The people had a great sack (p!u'gi), and they all got into this. "Hurry up," said Spider. Then Spider made the rope come down from the sky and tied it to the sack. "Who is going in first?" Coyote said, "My friend, I will be the first." "All right, but be careful." He got in, and all the rest got in after him. Spider said "Stretch!" to the sack and it did so, stretched to the north, south, east, and west, till all the people got in. Then Spider pulled the rope, pulled the sack up.

When it was half way up, Loon woke up. It was daylight. She stretched about, pulled the log about, and found out what it was. She grew angry, said "Am+! All right, you can not get away from me," said Loon to herself. "Am+, am+!" she said. She came back to the sweat-house, looked for her husband. She had a fire-drill (mi'niyauna) with fire in it. [*349] She looked

[p. 232]

about, called into the sweat-house, but there was no answer, there was no one about. "Am+, am+!" said she to herself. She looked to the south, there was no one in sight. She looked to the east, there was no one. She looked to the west, there was no one. She looked to the north, there was no one. "You are smart, you people. I wonder where you are. You can not get away from me." She hunted all about, looking for their tracks, but she found none. She looked on the gopher piles, there were no tracks there. She began to wonder what to do. "I guess I will set fire to this place. It is the only thing to do." She broke the fire-drill, threw one-half of it to the east, and one to the south. Fire blazed up where she threw the sticks; everything burned. Loon had a big club, and stood watching the fire.

In the sack Coyote said to the people, "I want to make a peephole to see the fire down below." Spider had said that the village was burning. The people said to Coyote, "No, do not tear the sack." "Just a little," said Coyote. Coyote made up his mind to do it anyway; he did so, looked through, saw the fire. The tear began to rip, the hole grew larger, by and by the sack broke. Coyote fell out first, fell down over and over; all the rest fell after him, fell into the fire.

Loon was watching the fire. She saw a man fall into the fire. looked up, saw all the people falling. "Am+, am+!" she said, "I told you that you could not get away from me." Wildcat fell down; his eyes popped out. Loon bit the eye with her club as it popped out, knocked it back into the fire. Black Bear fell in; his eyes popped out. Loon tried to hit it back but missed it. it got away, flew far off. Lion fell in, but she missed his eye. Brown Bear fell in. Eagle fell in. The fire all burned out; all the people were burned up, except those whose eyes had escaped and who are alive today.

Loon went home. Diver, a small mud duck, did not like Loon. He lived on a lake at Ci'p!a. Diver was afraid of Loon, so he made a net, took two moons to make it. Heron (mi'mk!a) came along, came to see Diver. He said, "Why do you make a net?" "I shall use it," said Diver. Heron wanted to know, but Diver would not tell. He set a trap for Loon; Diver caught her and killed her.

Footnotes

^228:346 See note 207. The details of this version, secured apparently from Sam Bat'wi, differ widely enough from the Yana Loon Woman myth obtained by Curtin to justify its publication here.

^228:347 See note 51.

^231:348 See note 45.

^231:349 See note 52.

     
Yana Texts, by Edward Sapir, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 233]

  

XIII. PINE MARTEN'S QUEST FOR MOON'S DAUGHTER. [*350]

Moon lived in the west. Lion, Wolf, and others lived far up toward Fall river in a big sweat-house. Lion went first to Moon's house for his daughter, went in. Moon put brains in the fire, and there was a strong smoke, so that Lion could not breathe. The two women said, "You must die. There are many dead outside. My father does not want me to have a husband." Moon gave Lion a pipe to smoke. He took but two whiffs and was killed. Moon threw him out. Then Wolf went to sue for Moon's daughter, went in. The same thing occurred to him. Silver Fox went, with the same result. The women cried, told Moon he had killed enough, but he did not mind.

The last one to sue was Pine Marten. He put Weasel in his quiver which he carried with him. When he came in, Pine Marten caused the smoke to go away. Moon gave Pine Marten a strong pipe. Pine Marten smoked it, blew the smoke down into a hole in the ground, and returned the pipe to Moon unaffected. The girls warned Pine Marten. Weasel pulled out a stronger tobacco, but Pine Marten made the smoke go down into the ground as before. Moon gave Pine Marten a stronger tobacco again, but it had no effect. He threw back the pipe and broke it.

Pine Marten went for wood, brought spruce and cedar. He came back and put it all in. "That is the kind of wood one should use for sweating, not brains." The spruce wood popped, the sparks burned Moon half up. Pine Marten danced. Moon cried out to stop it, for he was nearly dead. Pine Marten stopped it, and Moon said, "You ought not to do that." Moon said, "Son-in-law, go swim." So he went, and soon a big water grizzly (ha't'enna) pulled him in, and tried to kill him. He could not do so, however. Pine Marten stayed one night with him at the bottom of the river, then went back with many presents

[p. 234]

from his nephew. He brought back his hide to Moon and said, "I hung up a salmon outside." Moon saw it and was frightened.

Moon asked him to go for wood, so he went to the north. A big snake with a horn ('e'k'u'na) came and caught Pine Marten, but Pine Marten told him that he was his uncle. Pine Marten killed him, skinned him, and brought home the skin with the wood. He told his father-in-law to go and look at the wood. He saw the hide and was frightened, did not know what to do.

"Son-in-law, go and hunt up on this mountain, kill deer," so he went to the north. Big Rain (tc'ilwa'rik!u), Hail (sabilk!e'yu), and Buzzard (ma'ts!k'ili'lla) were jealous of Pine Marten. Moon told Pine Marten to sit down, while the people circled about and drove in the animals. Pine Marten thought they were deer, but they were really grizzly bears. Pine Marten ran, and the grizzly bears ran after him and tore off his buckskin leggings. All day he ran. In the afternoon he heard a voice above, "You are nearly caught. Tell the tree to open, get in, and go through." He did so. The bear came after him but was caught by the tree as it closed. Pine Marten went back, got out the bear, and skinned him. When he returned to Moon's house, he hung up the hide. He told Moon to go out and see the squirrel. Moon did so, saw the bear-hide, and was frightened.

"Son-in-law," called Moon. Drifting Rain and Blue Racer (tci'wa) were to have a race with Pine Marten. They started, went to the south, ran a long way. Pine Marten gave out. First he killed Big Rain by pulling a log out from under him, next he killed Blue Racer. He carried home the spoils. Moon thought that Pine Marten was dead, but cried when he found what had happened.

"Son-in-law, we will play tomorrow morning." He took deer-sinew rope, and wanted Pine Marten to get on the digger pine while he pulled it down by the rope and let it snap back. Pine Marten jumped off before Moon could snap. Moon thought he had snapped him up to the sky, but he came back. Now Moon was to get up, and he did so. Pine Marten swung the tree a little, and Moon said, "Look out, my son-in-law. Be careful, do not pull too much." Pine Marten thought to himself, "I

[p. 235]

Footnotes

^233:350 In a general way this suitor tale corresponds to Curtin's "The Winning of Halai Auna," Creation Myths of Primitive America, pp. 281-294, but there are plenty of differences of detail. Some of the incidents, such as the fight with the water grizzly, recall the Damha'udju story obtained by Curtin and myself (text no. IV).

will fix him." He gave him a big swing and snapped him off into the sky, where he is the moon. Pine Marten looked and saw him. Moon said, "I shall stay here now, he gave me a good place to stay. I shall see what people do." Pine Marten went back to the house. The old woman Frog, asked, "Where is my husband?" Pine Marten said, "He wants you up there." He took them to the same place where he had snapped the old man, and snapped her up also, also the two girls. Then he went home, and told the people that he had fixed things well.

    


===== BOOK: yefb.txt =====


The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

THE YELLOW FAIRY BOOK

Edited by ANDREW LANG

London, New York: Longmans, Green, and Co.

[1894]

Dedication

TO

JOAN, TODDLES, AND TINY

 

Books Yellow, Red, and Green and Blue,
 All true, or just as good as true,
 And here's the Yellow Book for YOU!

Hard is the path from A to Z,
 And puzzling to a curly head,
 Yet leads to Books--Green, Blue, and Red.

For every child should understand
 That letters from the first were planned
 To guide us into Fairy Land

So labour at your Alphabet,
 For by that learning shall you get
 To lands where Fairies may be met.

And going where this pathway goes,
 You too, at last, may find, who knows?
 The Garden of the Singing Rose.

 

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

[p. ix]

PREFACE

The Editor thinks that children will readily forgive him for publishing another Fairy Book.  We have had the Blue, the Red, the Green, and here is the Yellow.  If children are pleased, and they are so kind as to say that they are pleased, the Editor does not care very much for what other people may say.  Now, there is one gentleman who seems to think that it is not quite right to print so many fairy tales, with pictures, and to publish them in red and blue covers.  He is named Mr. G. Laurence Gomme, and he is president of a learned body called the Folk Lore Society.  Once a year he makes his address to his subjects, of whom the Editor is one, and Mr. Joseph Jacobs (who has published many delightful fairy tales with pretty pictures) [*1] is another.  Fancy, then, the dismay of Mr. Jacobs, and of the Editor, when they heard their president say that he did not think it very nice in them to publish fairy books, above all, red, green, and blue fairy books!   They said that they did not see any harm in it, and they were ready to 'put themselves on their country,' and be tried by a jury of children.  And, indeed, they still see no harm in what they have done; nay, like Father William in the poem, they are ready 'to do it again and again.'

[p. x]

Where is the harm? The truth is that the Folk Lore Society--made up of the most clever, learned, and beautiful men and women of the country--is fond of studying the history and geography of Fairy Land.  This is contained in very old tales, such as country people tell, and savages:

'Little Sioux and little Crow,
  Little frosty Eskimo.'

[paragraph continues] These people are thought to know most about fairyland and its inhabitants.  But, in the Yellow Fairy Book, and the rest, are many tales by persons who are neither savages nor rustics, such as Madame D'Aulnoy and Herr Hans Christian Andersen.  The Folk Lore Society, or its president, say that their tales are not so true as the rest, and should not be published with the rest.  But we say that all the stories which are pleasant to read are quite true enough for us; so here they are, with pictures by Mr. Ford, and we do not think that either the pictures or the stories are likely to mislead children.

As to whether there are really any fairies or not, that is a difficult question.  Professor Huxley thinks there are none.  The Editor never saw any himself, but he knows several people who have seen them--in the Highlands--and heard their music.  If ever you are in Nether Lochaber, go to the Fairy Hill, and you may hear the music yourself, as grown-up people have done, but you must goon a fine day.  Again, if there are really no fairies, why do people believe in them, all over the world?  The ancient Greeks believed, so did the old Egyptians, and the Hindoos, and the Red Indians, and is it likely, if there are no fairies, that so many different peoples would have seen and heard them?  The Rev. Mr. Baring-Gould saw several fairies when he was a boy, and was travelling in the land of the Troubadours.  For these reasons,

[p. xi]

the Editor thinks that there are certainly fairies, but they never do anyone any harm; and, in England, they have been frightened away by smoke and schoolmasters.  As to Giants, they have died out, but real Dwarfs are common in the forests of Africa.  Probably a good many stories not perfectly true have been told about fairies, but such stories have also been told about Napoleon, Claverhouse, Julius Caesar, and Joan of Arc, all of whom certainly existed.  A wise child will, therefore, remember that, if he grows up and becomes a member of the Folk Lore Society, all the tales in this book were not offered to him as absolutely truthful, but were printed merely for his entertainment.  The exact facts he can learn later, or he can leave them alone.

There are Russian, German, French, Icelandic, Red Indian, and other stories here.  They were translated by Miss Cheape, Miss Alma, and Miss Thyra Alleyne, Miss Sellar, Mr. Craigie (he did the Icelandic tales), Miss Blackley, Mrs. Dent, and Mrs. Lang, but the Red Indian stories are copied from English versions published by the Smithsonian Bureau of Ethnology, in America.  Mr. Ford did the pictures, and it is hoped that children will find the book not less pleasing than those which have already been submitted to their consideration.  The Editor cannot say 'good-bye' without advising them, as they pursue their studies, to read The Rose and the Ring, by the late Mr. Thackeray, with pictures by the author.  This book he thinks quite indispensable in every child's library, and parents should be urged to purchase it at the first opportunity, as without it no education is complete.

A. LANG.

Footnotes

^ix:1 You may buy them from Mr. Nutt, in the Strand.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xii] [p. xiii]

CONTENTS

[*Preface]

[*The Cat and the Mouse in Partnership]

[*The Six Swans]

[*The Dragon of the North]

[*Story of the Emperor's New Clothes]

[*The Golden Crab]

[*The Iron Stove]

[*The Dragon and his Grandmother]

[*The Donkey Cabbage]

[*The Little Green Frog]

[*The Seven-headed Serpent]

[*The Grateful Beasts]

[*The Giants and the Herd-boy]

[*The Invisible Prince]

[*The Crow]

[*How Six Men travelled through the Wide World]

[*The Wizard King]

[*The Nixy]

[*The Glass Mountain]

[*Alphege, or the Green Monkey]

[*Fairer-than-a-Fairy]

[*The Three Brothers]

[*The Boy and the Wolves, or the Broken Promise]

[*The Glass Axe]

[*The Dead Wife]

[*In the Land of Souls]

[*The White Duck]

[*The Witch and her Servants]

[*The Magic Ring]

[*The Flower Queen's Daughter]

[*The Flying Ship]

[*The Snow-daughter and the Fire-son]

[*The Story of King Frost]

[*The Death of the Sun-hero]

[*The Witch]

[*The Hazel-nut Child]

[*The Story of Big Klaus and Little Klaus]

[*Prince Ring]

[*The Swineherd]

[*How to tell a True Princess]

[*The Blue Mountains]

[*The Tinder-box]

[*The Witch in the Stone Boat]

[*Thumbelina]

[*The Nightingale]

[*Hermod and Hadvor]

[*The Steadfast Tin-soldier]

[*Blockhead Hans]

[*A Story about a Darning-needle]

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

[p. 1]

THE YELLOW FAIRY BOOK

THE CAT AND THE MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A cat had made acquaintance with a mouse, and had spoken so much of the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at last the Mouse consented to live in the same house with her, and to go shares in the housekeeping.  'But we must provide for the winter or else we shall suffer hunger,' said the Cat.  'You, little Mouse, cannot venture everywhere in case you run at last into a trap.'  This good counsel was followed, and a little pot of fat was bought.  But they did not know where to put it.  At length, after long consultation, the Cat said, 'I know of no place where it could be better put than in the church.  No one will trouble to take it away from there.  We will hide it in a corner, and we won't touch it till we are in want.'  So the little pot was placed in safety; but it was not long before the Cat had a great longing for it, and said to the Mouse, 'I wanted to tell you, little Mouse, that my cousin has a little son, white with brown spots, and she wants me to be godmother to it.  Let me go out to-day, and do you take care of the house alone.'

'Yes, go certainly,' replied the Mouse, 'and when you eat anything good, think of me; I should very much like a drop of the red christening wine.'

But it was all untrue.  The Cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to be godmother.  She went straight to the church, slunk to the little pot of fat, began to lick it, and licked the top off.  Then she took a walk on the roofs of the town, looked at the view, stretched

[p. 2]

herself out in the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought of the little pot of fat.  As soon as it was evening she went home again.

'Ah, here you are again!' said the Mouse; 'you must certainly have had an enjoyable day.'

'It went off very well,' answered the Cat.

'What was the child's name?' asked the Mouse.

'Top Off,' said the Cat drily.

'Topoff!' echoed the Mouse, 'it is indeed a wonderful and curious name.  Is it in your family?'

'What is there odd about it?' said the Cat.  'It is not worse than Breadthief, as your godchild is called.'

Not long after this another great longing came over the Cat.  She said to the Mouse, 'You must again be kind enough to look after the house alone, for I have been asked a second time to stand godmother, and as this child has a white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.'

The kind Mouse agreed, but the Cat slunk under the town wall to the church, and ate up half of the pot of fat.  'Nothing tastes better,' said she, 'than what one eats by oneself,' and she was very much pleased with her day's work.  When she came home the Mouse asked, 'What was this child called?'

'Half Gone,' answered the Cat.

'Halfgone!  what a name!  I have never heard it in my life.  I don't believe it is in the calendar.'

Soon the Cat's mouth began to water once more after her licking business.  'All good things in threes,' she said to the Mouse; 'I have again to stand godmother.  The child is quite black, and has very white paws, but not a single white hair on its body.  This only happens once in two years, so you will let me go out?'

'Topoff!  Halfgone!' repeated the Mouse, 'they are such curious names; they make me very thoughtful.'

'Oh, you sit at home in your dark grey coat and your long tail,' said the Cat, 'and you get fanciful.  That comes of not going out in the day.'

[p. 3]

The Mouse had a good cleaning out while the Cat was gone, and made the house tidy; but the greedy Cat ate the fat every bit up.

'When it is all gone one can be at rest,' she said to herself, and at night she came home sleek and satisfied.  The Mouse asked at once after the third child's name.

'It won't please you any better,' said the Cat, 'he was called Clean Gone.'

'Cleangone!' repeated the Mouse.  'I do not believe that name has been printed any more than the others.  Cleangone!  What can it mean?' She shook her head, curled herself up, and went to sleep.

From this time on no one asked the Cat to stand godmother; but when the winter came and there was nothing to be got outside, the Mouse remembered their provision and said, 'Come, Cat, we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored away; it will taste very good.'

'Yes, indeed,' answered the Cat; ' it will taste as good to you as if you stretched your thin tongue out of the window.'

They started off, and when they reached it they found the pot in its place, but quite empty!

'Ah,' said the Mouse,' 'now I know what has happened!  It has all come out!  You are a true friend to me!  You have eaten it all when you stood godmother; first the top off, then half of it gone, then----'

'Will you be quiet!' screamed the Cat.  'Another word and I will eat you up.'

'Cleangone' was already on the poor Mouse's tongue, and scarcely was it out than the Cat made a spring at her, seized and swallowed her.

You see that is the way of the world.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

[p. 4]

THE SIX SWANS

A king was once hunting in a great wood, and he hunted the game so eagerly that none of his courtiers could follow him.  When evening came on he stood still and looked round him, and he saw that he had quite lost himself.  He sought a way out, but could find none.  Then he saw an old woman with a shaking head coming towards him; but she was a witch.

'Good woman,' he said to her, 'can you not show me the way out of the wood?'

'Oh, certainly, Sir King,' she replied, 'I can quite well do that, but on one condition, which if you do not fulfil you will never get out of the wood, and will die of hunger.'

'What is the condition?' asked the King.

'I have a daughter,' said the old woman, 'who is so beautiful that she has not her equal in the world, and is well fitted to be your wife; if you will make her lady-queen I will show you the way out of the wood.'

The King in his anguish of mind consented, and the old woman led him to her little house where her daughter was sitting by the fire.  She received the King as if she were expecting him, and he saw that she was certainly very beautiful; but she did not please him, and he could not look at her without a secret feeling of horror.  As soon as he had lifted the maiden on to his horse the old woman showed him the way, and the King reached his palace, where the wedding was celebrated.

The King had already been married once, and had by his first wife seven children, six boys and one girl, whom he loved more than anything in the world.  And now, because he was afraid that their stepmother might not treat them well and might do them harm, he put them in a lonely castle that stood in the middle of a wood.  It lay so hidden, and the way to it was so hard to find, that he himself could not have found it out had not

[p. 5]

a wise-woman given him a reel of thread which possessed a marvellous property: when he threw it before him it unwound itself and showed him the way.  But the King went so often to his dear children that the Queen was offended at his absence.  She grew curious, and wanted to know what he had to do quite alone in the wood.  She gave his servants a great deal of money, and they betrayed the secret to her, and also told her of the reel which alone could point out the way.  She had no rest now till she had found out where the King guarded the reel, and then she made some little white shirts, and, as she had learnt from her witch-mother, sewed an enchantment in each of them.

And when the King had ridden off she took the little shirts and went into the wood, and the reel showed her the way.  The children, who saw someone coming in the distance, thought it was their dear father coming to them, and sprang to meet him very joyfully.  Then she threw over each one a little shirt, which when it had touched their bodies changed them into swans, and they flew away over the forest.  The Queen went home quite satisfied, and thought she had got rid of her step-children; but the girl had not run to meet her with her brothers, and she knew nothing of her.

The next day the King came to visit his children, but he found no one but the girl.

'Where are your brothers?' asked the King.

'Alas!  dear father,' she answered, 'they have gone away and left me all alone.'  And she told him that looking out of her little window she had seen her brothers flying over the wood in the shape of swans, and she showed him the feathers which they had let fall in the yard, and which she had collected.  The King mourned, but he did not think that the Queen had done the wicked deed, and as he was afraid the maiden would also be taken from him, he wanted to take her with him.  But she was afraid of the stepmother, and begged the King to let her stay just one night more in the castle in the wood.  The poor maiden thought, 'My home is no longer here; I will go and seek my brothers.'  And when night came she fled away into the forest.  She ran all through the night and the next day, till she could go no farther for weariness.  Then she saw a little hut, went in, and found a room with six little beds.  She was afraid to lie down on one, so she crept under one of them, lay on the hard floor, and was going to spend the night there.  But when the sun had set she heard a noise, and

[p. 6]

saw six swans flying in at the window.  They stood on the floor and blew at one another, and blew all their feathers off, and their swan-skin came off like a shirt.  Then the maiden recognised her brothers, and overjoyed she crept out from under the bed.  Her brothers were not less delighted than she to see their little sister again, but their joy did not last long.

'You cannot stay here,' they said to her.  'This is a den of robbers; if they were to come here and find you they would kill you.'

'Could you not protect me?' asked the little sister.

'No,' they answered, 'for we can only lay aside our swan skins for a quarter of an hour every evening.  For this time we regain our human forms, but then we are changed into swans again.'

Then the little sister cried and said, 'Can you not be freed?'

'Oh, no,' they said, 'the conditions are too hard.  You must not speak or laugh for six years, and must make in that time six shirts for us out of star-flowers.  If a single word comes out of your mouth, all your labour is vain.'  And when the brothers had said this the quarter of an hour came to an end, and they flew away out of the window as swans.

But the maiden had determined to free her brothers even if it should cost her her life.  She left the hut, went into the forest, climbed a tree, and spent the night there.  The next morning she went out, collected star-flowers, and began to sew.  She could speak to no one, and she had no wish to laugh, so she sat there, looking only at her work.

When she had lived there some time, it happened that the King of the country was hunting in the forest, and his hunters came to the tree on which the maiden sat.  They called to her and said 'Who are you?'

But she gave no answer.

'Come down to us,' they said, 'we will do you no harm.'

But she shook her head silently.  As they pressed her further with questions, she threw them the golden chain from her neck.  But they did not leave off, and she threw them her girdle, and when this was no use, her garters, and then her dress.  The huntsmen would not leave her alone, but climbed the tree, lifted the maiden down, and led her to the King.  The King asked, 'Who are you?  What are you doing up that tree?'

But she answered nothing.

He asked her in all the languages he knew, but she remained

[p. 7]

as dumb as a fish.  Because she was so beautiful, however, the King's heart was touched, and he was seized with a great love for her.  He wrapped her up in his cloak, placed her before him on his horse.  and brought her to his castle.  There he had her dressed in rich clothes, and her beauty shone out as bright as day, but not a word could be drawn from her.  He set her at table by his side, and her modest ways and behaviour pleased him so much that he said, 'I will marry this maiden and none other in the world,' and after some days he married her.  But the King had a wicked mother who was displeased with the marriage, and said wicked things of the young Queen.  'Who knows who this girl is?' she said; 'she cannot speak, and is not worthy of a king.'

After a year, when the Queen had her first child, the old mother took it away from her.  Then she went to the King and said that the Queen had killed it.  The King would not believe it, and would not allow any harm to be done her.  But she sat quietly sewing at the shirts and troubling herself about nothing.  The next time she had a child the wicked mother did the same thing, but the King could not make up his mind to believe her.  He said, 'She is too sweet and good to do such a thing as that.  If she were not dumb

[p. 8]

and could defend herself, her innocence would be proved.'  But when the third child was taken away, and the Queen was again accused, and could not utter a word in her own defence, the King was obliged to give her over to the law, which decreed that she must be burnt to death.  When the day came on which the sentence was to be executed, it was the last day of the six years in which she must not speak or laugh, and now she had freed her dear brothers from the power of the enchantment.  The six shirts were done; there was only the left sleeve wanting to the last.

When she was led to the stake, she laid the shirts on her arm, and as she stood on the pile and the fire was about to be lighted, she looked around her and saw six swans flying through the air.  Then she knew that her release was at hand and her heart danced for joy.  The swans fluttered round her, and hovered low so that she could throw the shirts over them.  When they had touched them the swan-skins fell off, and her brothers stood before her living, well and beautiful.  Only the youngest had a swan's wing instead of his left arm.  They embraced and kissed each other, and the Queen went to the King, who was standing by in great astonishment, and began to speak to him, saying, 'Dearest husband, now I can speak and tell you openly that I am innocent and have been falsely accused.'

She told him of the old woman's deceit, and how she had taken the three children away and hidden them.  Then they were fetched, to the great joy of the King, and the wicked mother came to no good end.

But the King and the Queen with their six brothers lived many years in happiness and peace.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

[p. 9]

THE DRAGON OF THE NORTH [*1]

Very long ago, as old people have told me, there lived a terrible monster, who came out of the North, and laid waste whole tracts of country, devouring both men and beasts; and this monster was so destructive that it was feared that unless help came no living creature would be left on the face of the earth.  It had a body like an ox, and legs like a frog, two short fore-legs, and two long ones behind, and besides that it had a tail like a serpent, ten fathoms in length.  When it moved it jumped like a frog, and with every spring it covered half a mile of ground.  Fortunately its habit, was to remain for several years in the same place, and not to move on till the whole neighbourhood was eaten up.  Nothing could hunt it, because its whole body was covered with scales, which were harder than stone or metal; its two great eyes shone by night, and even by day, like the brightest lamps, and anyone who had the ill luck to look into those eyes became as it were bewitched, and was obliged to rush of his own accord into the monster's jaws.  In this way the Dragon was able to feed upon both men and beasts without the least trouble to itself, as it needed not to move from the spot where it was lying.  All the neighbouring kings had offered rich rewards to anyone who should be able to destroy the monster, either by force or enchantment, and many had tried their luck, but all had miserably failed.  Once a great forest in which the Dragon lay had been set on fire; the forest was burnt down, but the fire did not do the monster the least harm.  However, there was a tradition amongst the wise men of the country that the Dragon might be overcome by one who possessed King Solomon's signet-ring, upon which a secret writing was engraved.  This inscription would enable anyone who was wise enough to interpret it to find out how the Dragon could be destroyed.  Only no one knew where the ring was hidden, nor was there any sorcerer

[p. 10]

or learned man to be found who would be able to explain the inscription.

At last a young man, with a good heart and plenty of courage, set out to search for the ring.  He took his way towards the sunrising, because he knew that all the wisdom of old time comes from the East.  After some years he met with a famous Eastern magician, and asked for his advice in the matter.  The magician answered:

'Mortal men have but little wisdom, and can give you no help, but the birds of the air would be better guides to you if you could learn their language.  I can help you to understand it if you will stay with me a few days.'

The youth thankfully accepted the magician's offer, and said, 'I cannot now offer you any reward for your kindness, but should my undertaking succeed your trouble shall be richly repaid.'

Then the magician brewed a powerful potion out of nine sorts of herbs which he had gathered himself all alone by moonlight, and he gave the youth nine spoonfuls of it daily for three days, which made him able to understand the language of birds.

At parting the magician said to him.  'If you ever find Solomon's ring and get possession of it, then come back to me, that I may explain the inscription on the ring to you, for there is no one else in the world who can do this.'

From that time the youth never felt lonely as he walked along; he always had company, because he understood the language of birds; and in this way he learned many things which mere human knowledge could never have taught him.  But time went on, and he heard nothing about the ring.  It happened one evening, when he was hot and tired with walking, and had sat down under a tree in a forest to eat his supper, that he saw two gaily-plumaged birds, that were strange to him, sitting at the top of the tree talking to one another about him.  The first bird said:

'I know that wandering fool under the tree there, who has come so far without finding what he seeks.  He is trying to find King Solomon's lost ring.'

The other bird answered, 'He will have to seek help from the Witch-maiden, [*1] who will doubtless be able to put him on the right track.  If she has not got the ring herself, she knows well enough who has it.'

'But where is he to find the Witch-maiden?' said the first

[p. 11]

bird.  'She has no settled dwelling, but is here to-day and gone to-morrow.  He might as well try to catch the wind.'

The other replied, 'I do not know, certainly, where she is at present, but in three nights from now she will come to the spring to wash her face, as she does every month when the moon is full, in order that she may never grow old nor wrinkled, but may always keep the bloom of youth.'

'Well,' said the first bird, 'the spring is not far from here.  Shall we go and see how it is she does it?'

'Willingly, if you like,' said the other.

The youth immediately resolved to follow the birds to the spring, only two things made him uneasy: first, lest he might be asleep when the birds went, and secondly, lest he might lose sight of them, since he had not wings to carry him along so swiftly.  He was too tired to keep awake all night, yet his anxiety prevented him from sleeping soundly, and when with the earliest dawn he looked up to the tree-top, he was glad to see his feathered companions still asleep with their heads under their wings.  He ate his breakfast, and waited until the birds should start, but they did not leave the place all day.  They hopped about from one tree to another looking for food, all day long until the evening, when they went back to their old perch to sleep.  The next day the same thing happened, but on the third morning one bird said to the other, 'To-day we must go to the spring to see the Witch-maiden wash her face.'  They remained on the tree till noon; then they flew away and went towards the south.  The young man's heart beat with anxiety lest he should lose sight of his guides, but he managed to keep the birds in view until they again perched upon a tree.  The young man ran after them until he was quite exhausted and out of breath, and after three short rests the birds at length reached a small open space in the forest, on the edge of which they placed themselves on the top of a high tree.  When the youth had overtaken them, he saw that there was a clear spring in the middle of the space.  He sat down at the foot of the tree upon which the birds were perched, and listened attentively to what they were saying to each other.

'The sun is not down yet,' said the first bird; 'we must wait yet awhile till the moon rises and the maiden comes to the spring.  Do you think she will see that young man sitting under the tree?'

'Nothing is likely to escape her eyes, certainly not a young man, said the other bird.  'Will the youth have the sense not to let himself be caught in her toils?'

[p. 12]

'We will wait,' said the first bird, 'and see how they get on together.'

The evening light had quite faded, and the full moon was already shining down upon the forest, when the young man heard a slight rustling sound.  After a few moments there came out of the forest a maiden, gliding over the grass so lightly that her feet seemed scarcely to touch the ground, and stood beside the spring.  The youth could not turn away his eyes from the maiden, for he had never in his life seen a woman so beautiful.  Without seeming to notice anything, she went to the spring, looked up to the full moon, then knelt down and bathed her face nine times, then looked up to the moon again and walked nine times round the well, and as she walked she sang this song:

'Full-faced moon with light unshaded,
 Let my beauty ne'er be faded.
 Never let my cheek grow pale!
 While the moon is waning nightly,
 May the maiden bloom more brightly,
 May her freshness never fail!'

Then she dried her face with her long hair, and was about to go away, when her eye suddenly fell upon the spot where the young man was sitting, and she turned towards the tree.  The youth rose and stood waiting.  Then the maiden said, 'You ought to have a heavy punishment because you have presumed to watch my secret doings in the moonlight.  But I will forgive you this time, because you are a stranger and knew no better.  But you must tell me truly who you are and how you came to this place, where no mortal has ever set foot before.'

The youth answered humbly: 'Forgive me, beautiful maiden, if I have unintentionally offended you.  I chanced to come here after long wandering, and found a good place to sleep under this tree.  At your coming I did not know what to do, but stayed where I was, because I thought my silent watching could not offend you.'

The maiden answered kindly, 'Come and spend this night with us.  You will sleep better on a pillow than on damp moss.'

The youth hesitated for a little, but presently he heard the birds saying from the top of the tree, 'Go where she calls you, but take care to give no blood, or you will sell your soul.'  So the youth went with her, and soon they reached a beautiful garden, where

[p. 13]

stood a splendid house, which glittered in the moonlight as if it was all built out of gold and silver.  When the youth entered he found many splendid chambers, each one finer than the last.  Hundreds of tapers burnt upon golden candlesticks, and shed a light like the brightest day.  At length they reached a chamber where a table was spread with the most costly dishes.  At the table were placed two chairs, one of silver, the other of gold.  The maiden seated herself upon the golden chair, and offered the silver one to her companion.  They were served by maidens dressed in white, whose feet made no sound as they moved about, and not a word was spoken during the meal.  Afterwards the youth and the Witch-maiden conversed pleasantly together, until a woman, dressed in red, came in to remind them that it was bedtime.  The youth was now shown into another room, containing a silken bed with down cushions, where he slept delightfully, yet he seemed to hear a voice near his bed which repeated to him, 'Remember to give no blood!'

The next morning the maiden asked him whether he would not like to stay with her always in this beautiful place, and as he did not answer immediately, she continued: 'You see how I always remain young and beautiful, and I am under no one's orders, but can do just what I like, so that I have never thought of marrying before.  But from the moment I saw you I took a fancy to you, so if you agree, we might be married and might live together like princes, because I have great riches.'

The youth could not but be tempted with the beautiful maiden's offer, but he remembered how the birds had called her the witch, and their warning always sounded in his ears.  Therefore he answered cautiously, 'Do not be angry, dear maiden, if I do not decide immediately on this important matter.  Give me a few days to consider before we come to an understanding.'

'Why not?' answered the maiden.  'Take some weeks to consider if you like, and take counsel with your own heart.'  And to make the time pass pleasantly, she took the youth over every part of her beautiful dwelling, and showed him all her splendid treasures.  But these treasures were all produced by enchantment, for the maiden could make anything she wished appear by the help of King Solomon's signet ring; only none of these things remained fixed; they passed away like the wind without leaving a trace behind.  But the youth did not know this; he thought they were all real.

[p. 14]

One day the maiden took him into a secret chamber, where a little gold box was standing on a silver table.  Pointing to the box, she said, 'Here is my greatest treasure, whose like is not to be found in the whole world.  It is a precious gold ring.  When you marry me, I will give you this ring as a marriage gift, and it will make you the happiest of mortal men.  But in order that our love may last for ever, you must give me for the ring three drops of blood from the little finger of your left hand.'

When the youth heard these words a cold shudder ran over him, for he remembered that his soul was at stake.  He was cunning enough, however, to conceal his feelings and to make no direct answer, but he only asked the maiden, as if carelessly, what was remarkable about the ring?

She answered, 'No mortal is able entirely to understand the power of this ring, because no one thoroughly understands the secret signs engraved upon it.  But even with my half-knowledge I can work great wonders.  If I put the ring upon the little finger of my left hand, then I can fly like a bird through the air wherever I wish to go.  If I put it on the third finger of my left hand I am invisible, and I can see everything that passes around me, though no one can see me.  If I put the ring upon the middle finger of my left hand, then neither fire nor water nor any sharp weapon can hurt me.  If I put it on the forefinger of my left hand, then I can with its help produce whatever I wish.  I can in a single moment build houses or anything I desire.  Finally, as long as I wear the ring on the thumb of my left hand, that hand is so strong that it can break down rocks and walls.  Besides these, the ring has other secret signs which, as I said, no one can understand.  No doubt it contains secrets of great importance.  The ring formerly belonged to King Solomon, the wisest of kings, during whose reign the wisest men lived.  But it is not known whether this ring was ever made by mortal hands: it is supposed that an angel gave it to the wise King.'

When the youth heard all this he determined to try and get possession of the ring, though he did not quite believe in all its wonderful gifts.  He wished the maiden would let him have it in his hand, but he did not quite like to ask her to do so, and after a while she put it back into the box.  A few days after they were again speaking of the magic ring, and the youth said, 'I do not think it possible that the ring can have all the power you say it has.'

Then the maiden opened the box and took the ring out, and it

[p. 15]

glittered as she held it like the clearest sunbeam.  She put it on the middle finger of her left hand, and told the youth to take a knife and try as hard as he could to cut her with it, for he would not be able to hurt her.  He was unwilling at first, but the maiden insisted.  Then he tried, at first only in play, and then seriously, to strike her with the knife, but an invisible wall of iron seemed to be between them, and the maiden stood before him laughing and unhurt.  Then she put the ring on her third finger, and in an instant she had vanished from his eyes.  Presently she was beside him again laughing, and holding the ring between her fingers.

'Do let me try,' said the youth, 'whether I can do these wonderful things.'

The maiden, suspecting no treachery, gave him the magic ring.

The youth pretended to have forgotten what to do, and asked what finger he must put the ring on so that no sharp weapon could hurt him?'

'Oh, the middle finger of your left hand,' the maiden answered, laughing.

She took the knife and tried to strike the youth, and he even tried to cut himself with it, but found it impossible.  Then he asked the maiden to show him how to split stones and rocks with the help of the ring.  So she led him into a courtyard where stood a great boulder-stone.  'Now,' she said, 'put the ring upon the thumb of your left hand, and you will see how strong that hand has become.  The youth did so, and found to his astonishment that with a single blow of his fist the stone flew into a thousand pieces.  Then the youth bethought him that he who does not use his luck when he has it is a fool, and that this was a chance which once lost might never return.  So while they stood laughing at the shattered stone he placed the ring, as if in play, upon the third finger of his left hand.

'Now,' said the maiden, 'you are invisible to me until you take the ring off again.'

But the youth had no mind to do that; on the contrary, he went farther off, then put the ring on the little finger of his left hand, and soared into the air like a bird.

When the maiden saw him flying away she thought at first that he was still in play, and cried, 'Come back, friend, for now you see I have told you the truth.'  But the young man never came back.

Then the maiden saw she was deceived, and bitterly repented that she had ever trusted him with the ring.

[p. 16]

The young man never halted in his flight until he reached the dwelling of the wise magician who had taught him the speech of birds.  The magician was delighted to find that his search had been successful, and at once set to work to interpret the secret signs engraved upon the ring, but it took him seven weeks to make them out clearly.  Then he gave the youth the following instructions how to overcome the Dragon of the North: 'You must have an iron horse cast, which must have little wheels under each foot.  You must also be armed with a spear two fathoms long, which you will be able to wield by means of the magic ring upon your left thumb.  The spear must be as thick in the middle as a large tree, and both its ends must be sharp.  In the middle of the spear you must have two strong chains ten fathoms in length.  As soon as the Dragon has made himself fast to the spear, which you must thrust through his jaws, you must spring quickly from the iron horse and fasten the ends of the chains firmly to the ground with iron stakes, so that he cannot get away from them.  After two or three days the monster's strength will be so far exhausted that you will be able to come near him.  Then you can put Solomon's ring upon your left thumb and give him the finishing stroke, but keep the ring on your third finger until you have come close to him, so that the monster cannot see you, else he might strike you dead with his long tail.  But when all is done, take care you do not lose the ring, and that no one takes it from you by cunning.'

The young man thanked the magician for his directions, and promised, should they succeed, to reward him.  But the magician answered, 'I have profited so much by the wisdom the ring has taught me that I desire no other reward.'  Then they parted, and the youth quickly flew home through the air.  After remaining in his own home for some weeks, he heard people say that the terrible Dragon of the North was not far off, and might shortly be expected in the country.  The King announced publicly that he would give his daughter in marriage, as well as a large part of his kingdom, to whosoever should free the country from the monster.  The youth then went to the King and told him that he had good hopes of subduing the Dragon, if the King would grant him all he desired for the purpose.  The King willingly agreed, and the iron horse, the great spear, and the chains were all prepared as the youth requested.  When all was ready, it was found that the iron horse was so heavy that a hundred men could not move it from the spot, so the youth found there was nothing for it but to move it with his

[p. 17]

own strength by means of the magic ring.  The Dragon was now so near that in a couple of springs he would be over the frontier.  The youth now began to consider how he should act, for if he had to push the iron horse from behind he could not ride upon it as the sorcerer had said he must.  But a raven unexpectedly gave him this advice: 'Ride upon the horse, and push the spear against the

[p. 18]

ground, as if you were pushing off a boat from the land.'  The youth did so, and found that in this way he could easily move forwards.  The Dragon had his monstrous jaws wide open, all ready for his expected prey.  A few paces nearer, and man and horse would have been swallowed up by them!  The youth trembled with horror, and his blood ran cold, yet he did not lose his courage; but, holding the iron spear upright in his hand, he brought it down with all his might right through the monster's lower jaw.  Then quick as lightning he sprang from his horse before the Dragon had time to shut his mouth.  A fearful clap like thunder, which could be heard for miles around, now warned him that the Dragon's jaws had closed upon the spear.  When the youth turned round he saw the point of the spear sticking up high above the Dragon's upper jaw, and knew that the other end must be fastened firmly to the ground; but the Dragon had got his teeth fixed in the iron horse, which was now useless.  The youth now hastened to fasten down the chains to the ground by means of the enormous iron pegs which he had provided.  The death struggle of the monster lasted three days and three nights; in his writhing he beat his tail so violently against the ground, that at ten miles' distance the earth trembled as if with an earthquake.  When he at length lost power to move his tail, the youth with the help of the ring took up a stone which twenty ordinary men could not have moved, and beat the Dragon so hard about the head with it that very soon the monster lay lifeless before him.

You can fancy how great was the rejoicing when the news was spread abroad that the terrible monster was dead.  His conqueror was received into the city with as much pomp as if he had been the mightiest of kings.  The old King did not need to urge his daughter to marry the slayer of the Dragon; he found her already willing to bestow her hand upon this hero, who had done all alone what whole armies had tried in vain to do.  In a few days a magnificent wedding was celebrated, at which the rejoicings lasted four whole weeks, for all the neighbouring kings had met together to thank the man who had freed the world from their common enemy.  But everyone forgot amid the general joy that they ought to have buried the Dragon's monstrous body, for it began now to have such a bad smell that no one could live in the neighbourhood, and before long the whole air was poisoned, and a pestilence broke out which destroyed many hundreds of people.  In this distress, the King's son-in-law resolved to seek help once more from the Eastern

[p. 19]

magician, to whom he at once travelled through the air like a bird by the help of the ring.  But there is a proverb which says that ill-gotten gains never prosper, and the Prince found that the stolen ring brought him ill-luck after all.  The Witch-maiden had never rested night nor day until she had found out where the ring was.  As soon as she had discovered by means of magical arts that the Prince in the form of a bird was on his way to the Eastern magician, she changed herself into an eagle and watched in the air until the bird she was waiting for came in sight, for she knew him at once by the ring which was hung round his neck by a ribbon.  Then the eagle pounced upon the bird, and the moment she seized him in her talons she tore the ring from his neck before the man in bird's shape had time to prevent her.  Then the eagle flew down to the earth with her prey, and the two stood face to face once more in human form.

'Now, villain, you are in my power!' cried the Witch-maiden.  'I favoured you with my love, and you repaid me with treachery and theft.  You stole my most precious jewel from me, and do you expect to live happily as the King's son-in-law?  Now the tables are turned; you are in my power, and I will be revenged on you for your crimes.'

'Forgive me!  forgive me!' cried the Prince; 'I know too well how deeply I have wronged you, and most heartily do I repent it.'

The maiden answered, 'Your prayers and your repentance come too late, and if I were to spare you everyone would think me a fool.  You have doubly wronged me; first you scorned my love, and then you stole my ring, and you must bear the punishment.'

With these words she put the ring upon her left thumb, lifted the young man with one hand, and walked away with him under her arm.  This time she did not take him to a splendid palace, but to a deep cave in a rock, where there were chains hanging from the wall.  The maiden now chained the young man's hands and feet so that he could not escape; then she said in an angry voice, 'Here you shall remain chained up until you die.  I will bring you every day enough food to prevent you dying of hunger, but you need never hope for freedom any more.'  With these words she left him.

The old King and his daughter waited anxiously for many weeks for the Prince's return, but no news of him arrived.  The King's daughter often dreamed that her husband was going through some great suffering: she therefore begged her father to summon

[p. 20]

all the enchanters and magicians, that they might try to find out where the Prince was and how he could be set free.  But the magicians, with all their arts, could find out nothing, except that he was still living and undergoing great suffering; but none could tell where he was to be found.  At last a celebrated magician from Finland was brought before the King, who had found out that the King's son-in-law was imprisoned in the East, not by men, but by some more powerful being.  The King now sent messengers to the East to look for his son-in-law, and they by good luck met with the old magician who had interpreted the signs on King Solomon's ring, and thus was possessed of more wisdom than anyone else in the world.  The magician soon found out what he wished to know, and pointed out the place where the Prince was imprisoned, but said: 'He is kept there by enchantment, and cannot be set free without my help.  I will therefore go with you myself.'

So they all set out, guided by birds, and after some days came to the cave where the unfortunate Prince had been chained up for nearly seven years.  He recognised the magician immediately, but the old man did not know him, he had grown so thin.  However, he undid the chains by the help of magic, and took care of the Prince until he recovered and became strong enough to travel.  When he reached home he found that the old King had died that morning, so that he was now raised to the throne.  And now after his long suffering came prosperity, which lasted to the end of his life; but he never got back the magic ring, nor has it ever again been seen by mortal eyes.

Now, if you had been the Prince, would you not rather have stayed with the pretty witch-maiden?

Footnotes

^9:1 'Der Norlands Drache,' from Esthnische Mahrchen. Kreutzwald.

^10:1 Hollenmadchen.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

[p. 21]

STORY OF THE EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES [*1]

Many years ago there lived an Emperor who was so fond of new clothes that he spent all his money on them in order to be beautifully dressed.  He did not care about his soldiers, he did not care about the theatre; he only liked to go out walking to show off his new clothes.  He had a coat for every hour of the day; and just as they say of a king, 'He is in the council-chamber,' they always said here, 'The Emperor is in the wardrobe.'

In the great city in which he lived there was always something going on; every day many strangers came there.  One day two impostors arrived who gave themselves out as weavers, and said that they knew how to manufacture the most beautiful cloth imaginable.  Not only were the texture and pattern uncommonly beautiful, but the clothes which were made of the stuff possessed this wonderful property that they were invisible to anyone who was not fit for his office, or who was unpardonably stupid.

'Those must indeed be splendid clothes,' thought the Emperor.  'If I had them on I could find out which men in my kingdom are unfit for the offices they hold; I could distinguish the wise from the stupid!  Yes, this cloth must be woven for me at once.'  And he gave both the impostors much money, so that they might begin their work.

They placed two weaving-looms, and began to do as if they were working, but they had not the least thing on the looms.  They also demanded the finest silk and the best gold, which they put in their pockets, and worked at the empty looms till late into the night.

'I should like very much to know how far they have got on with the cloth,' thought the Emperor.  But he remembered when he thought about it that whoever was stupid or not fit for his office would not be able to see it.  Now he certainly believed that he had

[p. 22]

nothing to fear for himself, but he wanted first to send somebody else in order to see how he stood with regard to his office.  Everybody in the whole town knew what a wonderful power the cloth had, and they were all curious to see how bad or how stupid their neighbour was.

'I will send my old and honoured minister to the weavers,' thought the Emperor.  'He can judge best what the cloth is like, for he has intellect, and no one understands his office better than he.'

Now the good old minister went into the hall where the two impostors sat working at the empty weaving-looms.  'Dear me!' thought the old minister, opening his eyes wide, 'I can see nothing!' But he did not say so.

Both the impostors begged him to be so kind as to step closer, and asked him if it were not a beautiful texture and lovely colours.  They pointed to the empty loom, and the poor old minister went forward rubbing his eyes; but he could see nothing, for there was nothing there.

'Dear, dear!' thought he, 'can I be stupid?  I have never thought that, and nobody must know it!  Can I be not fit for my office?  No, I must certainly not say that I cannot see the cloth!'

'Have you nothing to say about it?' asked one of the men who was weaving.

'Oh, it is lovely, most lovely!' answered the old minister, looking through his spectacles.  'What a texture!  What colours!  Yes, I will tell the Emperor that it pleases me very much.'

'Now we are delighted at that,' said both the weavers, and thereupon they named the colours and explained the make of the texture.

The old minister paid great attention, so that he could tell the same to the Emperor when he came back to him, which he did.

The impostors now wanted more money, more silk, and more gold to use in their weaving.  They put it all in their own pockets, and there came no threads on the loom, but they went on as they had done before, working at the empty loom.  The Emperor soon sent another worthy statesman to see how the weaving was getting on, and whether the cloth would soon be finished.  It was the same with him as the first one; he looked and looked, but because there was nothing on the empty loom he could see nothing.

'Is it not a beautiful piece of cloth?' asked the two impostors, and they pointed to and described the splendid material which was not there.

[p. 23]

'Stupid I am not!' thought the man, 'so it must be my good office for which I am not fitted.  It is strange, certainly, but no one must be allowed to notice it.'  And so he praised the cloth which he did not see, and expressed to them his delight at the beautiful colours and the splendid texture.  'Yes, it is quite beautiful,' he said to the Emperor.  Everybody in the town was talking of the magnificent cloth.

Now the Emperor wanted to see it himself while it was still on the loom.  With a great crowd of select followers, amongst whom were both the worthy statesmen who had already been there before, he went to the cunning impostors, who were now weaving with all their might, but without fibre or thread.

'Is it not splendid!' said both the old statesmen who had already been there.  'See, your Majesty, what a texture!  What colours!' And then they pointed to the empty loom, for they believed that the others could see the cloth quite well.

'What!' thought the Emperor, 'I can see nothing!  This is indeed horrible!  Am I stupid?  Am I not fit to be Emperor?  That were the most dreadful thing that could happen to me.  Oh, it is very beautiful,' he said.  'It has my gracious approval.'  And then he nodded pleasantly, and examined the empty loom, for he would not say that he could see nothing.

His whole Court round him looked and looked, and saw no more than the others; but they said like the Emperor, 'Oh!  it is beautiful!' And they advised him to wear these new and magnificent clothes for the first time at the great procession which was soon to take place.  'Splendid!  Lovely!  Most beautiful!' went from mouth to mouth; everyone seemed delighted over them, and the Emperor gave to the impostors the title of Court weavers to the Emperor.

Throughout the whole of the night before the morning on which the procession was to take place, the impostors were up and were working by the light of over sixteen candles.  The people could see that they were very busy making the Emperor's new clothes ready.  They pretended they were taking the cloth from the loom, cut with huge scissors in the air, sewed with needles without thread, and then said at last, 'Now the clothes are finished!'

The Emperor came himself with his most distinguished knights, and each impostor held up his arm just as if he were holding something, and said, 'See!  here are the breeches!  Here is the coat!  Here the cloak!' and so on.

[p. 24]

'Spun clothes are so comfortable that one would imagine one had nothing on at all; but that is the beauty of it!'

'Yes,' said all the knights, but they could see nothing, for there was nothing there.

'Will it please your Majesty graciously to take off your clothes,' said the impostors, 'then we will put on the new clothes, here before the mirror.'

The Emperor took off all his clothes, and the impostors placed themselves before him as if they were putting on each part of his new clothes which was ready, and the Emperor turned and bent himself in front of the mirror.

[p. 25]

'How beautifully they fit!  How well they sit!' said everybody.  'What material!  What colours!  It is a gorgeous suit!'

'They are waiting outside with the canopy which your Majesty is wont to have borne over you in the procession,' announced the Master of the Ceremonies.

'Look, I am ready,' said the Emperor.  'Doesn't it sit well!' And he turned himself again to the mirror to see if his finery was on all right.

The chamberlains who were used to carry the train put their hands near the floor as if they were lifting up the train; then they did as if they were holding something in the air.  They would not have it noticed that they could see nothing.

So the Emperor went along in the procession under the splendid canopy, and all the people in the streets and at the windows said, 'How matchless are the Emperor's new clothes!  That train fastened to his dress, how beautifully it hangs!'

No one wished it to be noticed that he could see nothing, for then he would have been unfit for his office, or else very stupid.  None of the Emperor's clothes had met with such approval as these had.

'But he has nothing on!' said a little child at last.

'Just listen to the innocent child!' said the father, and each one whispered to his neighbour what the child had said.

'But he has nothing on!' the whole of the people called out at last.

This struck the Emperor, for it seemed to him as if they were right; but he thought to himself, 'I must go on with the procession now.  And the chamberlains walked along still more uprightly, holding up the train which was not there at all.

Footnotes

^21:1 Andersen.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

[p. 26]

THE GOLDEN CRAB [*1]

Once upon a time there was a fisherman who had a wife and three children.  Every morning he used to go out fishing, and whatever fish he caught he sold to the King.  One day, among the other fishes, he caught a golden crab.  When he came home he put all the fishes together into a great dish, but he kept the Crab separate because it shone so beautifully, and placed it upon a high shelf in the cupboard.  Now while the old woman, his wife, was cleaning the fish, and had tucked up her gown so that her feet were visible, she suddenly heard a voice, which said:

'Let down, let down thy petticoat
   That lets thy feet be seen.'

She turned round in surprise, and then she saw the little creature, the Golden Crab.

'What!  You can speak, can you, you ridiculous crab?' she said, for she was not quite pleased at the Crab's remarks.  Then she took him up and placed him on a dish.

When her husband came home and they sat down to dinner, they presently heard the Crab's little voice saying, 'Give me some too.'  They were all very much surprised, but they gave him something to eat.  When the old man came to take away the plate which had contained the Crab's dinner, he found it full of gold, and as the same thing happened every day he soon became very fond of the Crab.

One day the Crab said to the fisherman's wife, 'Go to the King and tell him I wish to marry his younger daughter.'

The old woman went accordingly, and laid the matter before the King, who laughed a little at the notion of his daughter marrying a crab, but did not decline the proposal altogether, because he was a prudent monarch, and knew that the Crab was likely to be a

[p. 27]

prince in disguise.  He said, therefore, to the fisherman's wife, 'Go, old woman, and tell the Crab I will give him my daughter if by to-morrow morning he can build a wall in front of my castle much higher than my tower, upon which all the flowers of the world must grow and bloom.'

The fisherman's wife went home and gave this message.

Then the Crab gave her a golden rod, and said, 'Go and strike with this rod three times upon the ground on the place which the King showed you, and to-morrow morning the wall will be there.'

The old woman did so and went away again.

The next morning, when the King awoke, what do you think he saw?  The wall stood there before his eyes, exactly as he had bespoken it!

[p. 28]

Then the old woman went back to the King and said to him, 'Your Majesty's orders have been fulfilled.'

'That is all very well,' said the King, 'but I cannot give away my daughter until there stands in front of my palace a garden in which there are three fountains, of which the first must play gold, the second diamonds, and the third brilliants.'

So the old woman had to strike again three times upon the ground with the rod, and the next morning the garden was there.  The King now gave his consent, and the wedding was fixed for the very next day.  Then the Crab said to the old fisherman, 'Now take this rod; go and knock with it on a certain mountain; then a black man [*1] will come out and ask you what you wish for.  Answer him thus: ''Your master, the King, has sent me to tell you that you must send him his golden garment that is like the sun.'' Make him give you, besides, the queenly robes of gold and precious stones which are like the flowery meadows, and bring them both to me.  And bring me also the golden cushion.'

The old man went and did his errand.  When he had brought the precious robes, the Crab put on the golden garment and then crept upon the golden cushion, and in this way the fisherman carried him to the castle, where the Crab presented the other garment to his bride.  Now the ceremony took place, and when the married pair were alone together the Crab made himself known to his young wife, and told her how he was the son of the greatest king in the world, and how he was enchanted, so that he became

[p. 29]

a crab by day and was a man only at night; and he could also change himself into an eagle as often as he wished.  No sooner had he said this than he shook himself, and immediately became a handsome youth, but the next morning he was forced to creep back again into his crab-shell.  And the same thing happened every day.  But the Princess's affection for the Crab, and the polite attention with which she behaved to him, surprised the royal family very much.  They suspected some secret, but though they spied and spied, they could not discover it.  Thus a year passed away, and the Princess had a son, whom she called Benjamin.  But her mother still thought the whole matter very strange.  At last she said to the King that he ought to ask his daughter whether she would not like to have another husband instead of the Crab?  But when the daughter was questioned she only answered:

'I am married to the Crab, and him only will I have.'

Then the King said to her, 'I will appoint a tournament in your honour, and I will invite all the princes in the world to it, and if any one of them pleases you, you shall marry him.'

In the evening the Princess told this to the Crab, who said to her, 'Take this rod, go to the garden gate and knock with it, then a black man will come out and say to you, ''Why have you called me, and what do you require of me?'' Answer him thus: 'Your master the King has sent me hither to tell you to send him his golden armour and his steed and the silver apple.'' And bring them to me.'

The Princess did so, and brought him what he desired.

The following evening the Prince dressed himself for the tournament.  Before he went he said to his wife, 'Now mind you do not say when you see me that I am the Crab.  For if you do this evil will come of it.  Place yourself at the window with your sisters; I will ride by and throw you the silver apple.  Take it in your hand, but if they ask you who I am, say that you do not know.'  So saying, he kissed her, repeated his warning once more, and went away.

The Princess went with her sisters to the window and looked on at the tournament.  Presently her husband rode by and threw the apple up to her.  She caught it in her hand and went with it to her room, and by-and-by her husband came back to her.  But her father was much surprised that she did not seem to care about any of the Princes; he therefore appointed a second tournament.

The Crab then gave his wife the same directions as before, only

[p. 30]

this time the apple which she received from the black man was of gold.  But before the Prince went to the tournament he said to his wife, 'Now I know you will betray me to-day.'

But she swore to him that she would not tell who he was.  He then repeated his warning and went away.

In the evening, while the Princess, with her mother and sisters, was standing at the window, the Prince suddenly galloped past on his steed and threw her the golden apple.

Then her mother flew into a passion, gave her a box on the ear, and cried out, 'Does not even that prince please you, you fool?'

The Princess in her fright exclaimed, 'That is the Crab himself!'

Her mother was still more angry because she had not been told sooner, ran into her daughter's room where the crab-shell was still lying, took it up and threw it into the fire.  Then the poor Princess cried bitterly, but it was of no use; her husband did not come back.

Now we must leave the Princess and turn to the other persons in the story.  One day an old man went to a stream to dip in a crust of bread which he was going to eat, when a dog came out of the water, snatched the bread from his hand, and ran away.  The old man ran after him, but the dog reached a door, pushed it open, and ran in, the old man following him.  He did not overtake the dog, but found himself above a staircase, which he descended.  Then he saw before him a stately palace, and, entering, he found in a large hall a table set for twelve persons.  He hid himself in the hall behind a great picture, that he might see what would happen.  At noon he heard a great noise, so that he trembled with fear.  When he took courage to look out from behind the picture, he saw twelve eagles flying in.  At this sight his fear became still greater.  The eagles flew to the basin of a fountain that was there and bathed themselves, when suddenly they were changed into twelve handsome youths.  Now they seated themselves at the table, and one of them took up a goblet filled with wine, and said, 'A health to my father!' And another said, 'A health to my mother!' and so the healths went round.  Then one of them said:

'A health to my dearest lady,
    Long may she live and well!
 But a curse on the cruel mother
    That burnt my golden shell!'

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] And so saying he wept bitterly.  Then the youths rose from the table, went back to the great stone fountain, turned themselves into eagles again, and flew away.

Then the old man went away too, returned to the light of day, and went home.  Soon after he heard that the Princess was ill, and that the only thing that did her good was having stories told to her.  He therefore went to the royal castle, obtained an audience of the Princess, and told her about the strange things he bad seen in the underground palace.  No sooner had he finished than the Princess asked him whether he could find the way to that palace.

'Yes,' he answered, 'certainly.'

And now she desired him to guide her thither at once.  The old man did so, and when they came to the palace he hid her behind the great picture and advised her to keep quite still, and he placed himself behind the picture also.  Presently the eagles came flying in, and changed themselves into young men, and in a moment the Princess recognised her husband amongst them all, and tried to come out of her hiding-place; but the old man held her back.  The youths seated themselves at the table; and now the Prince said again, while he took up the cup of wine:

'A health to my dearest lady,
    Long may she live and well!
 But a curse on the cruel mother
    That burnt my golden shell!'

Then the Princess could restrain herself no longer, but ran forward and threw her arms round her husband.  And immediately he knew her again, and said:

'Do you remember how I told you that day that you would betray me?  Now you see that I spoke the truth.  But all that bad time is past.  Now listen to me: I must still remain enchanted for three months.  Will you stay here with me till that time is over?'

So the Princess stayed with him, and said to the old man, 'Go back to the castle and tell my parents that I am staying here.'

Her parents were very much vexed when the old man came back and told them this, but as soon as the three months of the Prince's enchantment were over, he ceased to be an eagle and became once more a man, and they returned home together.  And then they lived happily, and we who hear the story are happier still.

Footnotes

^26:1 'Prinz Krebs,' from Griechische Mahrchen.  Schmidt.

^28:1 Ein Mohr.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

[p. 32]

THE IRON STOVE [*1]

Once upon a time when wishes came true there was a king's son who was enchanted by an old witch, so that he was obliged to sit in a large iron stove in a wood.  There he lived for many years, and no one could free him.  At last a king's daughter came into the wood; she had lost her way, and could not find her father's kingdom again.  She had been wandering round and round for nine days, and she came at last to the iron case.  A voice came from within and asked her, 'Where do you come from, and where do you want to go?' She answered, 'I have lost my way to my father's kingdom, and I shall never get home again.'  Then the voice from the iron stove said, 'I will help you to find your home again, and that in a very short time, if you will promise to do what I ask you.  I am a greater prince than you are a princess, and I will marry you.'  Then she grew frightened, and thought, 'What can a young lassie do with an iron stove?' But as she wanted very much to go home to her father, she promised to do what he wished. He said, 'You must come again, and bring a knife with you to scrape a hole in the iron.'

Then he gave her someone for a guide, who walked near her and said nothing, but he brought her in two hours to her house.  There was great joy in the castle when the Princess came back, and the old King fell on her neck and kissed her.  But she was very much troubled, and said, 'Dear father, listen to what has befallen me!  I should never have come home again out of the great wild wood if I had not come to an iron stove, to whom I have had to promise that I will go back to free him and marry him!' The old King was so frightened that he nearly fainted, for she was his only daughter.  So they consulted together, and determined that the miller's daughter, who was very beautiful, should take her place.  They took her there, gave her a knife, and said she must scrape at the iron stove.  She scraped for twenty-four

[p. 33]

hours, but did not make the least impression.  When the day broke, a voice called from the iron stove, 'It seems to me that it is day outside.'  Then she answered, 'It seems so to me; I think I hear my father's mill rattling.'

'So you are a miller's daughter!  Then go away at once, and tell the King's daughter to come.'

Then she went away, and told the old King that the thing inside the iron stove would not have her, but wanted the Princess.  The old King was frightened, and his daughter wept.  But they had a swineherd's daughter who was even more beautiful than the miller's daughter, and they gave her a piece of gold to go to the iron stove instead of the Princess.  Then she was taken out, and had to scrape for four-and-twenty hours, but she could make no impression.  As soon as the day broke the voice from the stove called out, 'It seems to be daylight outside.'  Then she answered, ' It seems so to me too; I think I hear my father blowing his horn.'  'So you are a swineherd's daughter!  Go away at once, and let the King's daughter come.  And say to her that what I foretell shall come to pass, and if she does not come everything in the kingdom shall fall into ruin, and not one stone shall be left upon another.'  When the Princess heard this she began to cry, but it was no good; she had to keep her word.  She took leave of her father, put a knife in her belt, and went to the iron stove in the wood.  As soon as she reached it she began to scrape, and the iron gave way and before two hours had passed she had made a little hole.  Then she peeped in and saw such a beautiful youth all shining with gold and precious stones that she fell in love with him on the spot.  So she scraped away harder than ever, and made the hole so large that he could get out.  Then he said, 'You are mine, and I am thine; you are my bride and have set me free!' He wanted to take her with him to his kingdom, but she begged him just to let her go once more to her father; and the Prince let her go, but told her not to say more than three words to her father, then to come back again.  So she went home, but alas!  she said more than three words; and immediately the iron stove vanished and went away over a mountain of glass and sharp swords.  But the Prince was free, and was no longer shut up in it.  Then she said good-bye to her father, and took a little money with her, and went again into the great wood to look for the iron stove; but she could not find it.  She sought it for nine days, and then her hunger became so great that she did not know how she could live any longer.  And when it was evening

[p. 34]

she climbed a little tree and wished that the night would not come, because she was afraid of the wild beasts.  When midnight came she saw afar off a little light, and thought, 'Ah!  if only I could reach that!' Then she got down from the tree and went towards the light.  She came to a little old house with a great deal of grass growing round, and stood in front of a little heap of wood.  She thought, 'Alas!  what am I coming to?' and peeped through the window; but she saw nothing inside except big and little toads, and a table beautifully spread with roast meats and wine, and all the dishes and drinking-cups were of silver.  Then she took heart and knocked.  Then a fat toad called out:

'Little green toad with leg like crook,
  Open wide the door, and look
  Who it was the latch that shook.'

And a little toad came forward and let her in.  When she entered they all bid her welcome, and made her sit down.  They asked her how she came there and what she wanted.  Then she told everything that had happened to her, and how, because she had exceeded her permission only to speak three words, the stove had disappeared with the Prince; and how she had searched a very long time, and must wander over mountain and valley till she found him.

Then the old toad said:

'Little green toad whose leg doth twist,
  Go to the corner of which you wist,
  And bring to me the large old kist.'

[paragraph continues] And the little toad went and brought out a great chest.  Then they gave her food and drink, and led her to a beautifully made bed of silk and samite, on which she lay down and slept soundly.  When the day dawned she arose, and the old toad gave her three things out of the huge chest to take with her.  She would have need of them, for she had to cross a high glass mountain, three cutting swords, and a great lake.  When she had passed these she would find her lover again.  So she was given three large needles, a plough-wheel, and three nuts, which she was to take great care of.  She set out with these things, and when she came to the glass mountain which was so slippery she stuck the three needles behind her feet and then in front, and so got over it, and when she was on the other side put them carefully away.

Then she reached the three cutting swords, and got on her

[p. 35]

plough-wheel and rolled over them.  At last she came to a great lake, and, when she had crossed that, arrived at a beautiful castle.  She went in and gave herself out as a servant, a poor maid who would gladly be engaged.  But she knew that the Prince whom she had freed from the iron stove in the great wood was in the castle.  So she was taken on as a kitchen-maid for very small wages.  Now the Prince was about to marry another princess, for he thought she was dead long ago.

[p. 36]

In the evening, when she had washed up and was ready, she felt in her pocket and found the three nuts which the old toad had given her.  She cracked one and was going to eat the kernel, when behold!  there was a beautiful royal dress inside it!  When the bride heard of this, she came and begged for the dress, and wanted to buy it, saying that it was not a dress for a serving-maid.  Then she said she would not sell it unless she was granted one favour--namely, to sleep by the Prince's door.  The bride granted her this, because the dress was so beautiful and she had so few like it.  When it was evening she said to her bridegroom, 'That stupid maid wants to sleep by your door.'

'If you are contented, I am,' he said.  But she gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a sleeping-draught.  Then they both went to his room, but he slept so soundly that she could not wake him.  The maid wept all night long, and said, 'I freed you in the wild wood out of the iron stove; I have sought you, and have crossed a glassy mountain, three sharp swords, and a great lake before I found you, and will you not hear me now?' The servants outside heard how she cried the whole night, and they told their master in the morning.

When she had washed up the next evening she bit the second nut, and there was a still more beautiful dress inside.  When the bride saw it she wanted to buy it also.  But the maid did not want money, and asked that she should sleep again by the Prince's door.  The bride, however, gave him a sleeping-draught, and he slept so soundly that he heard nothing.  But the kitchen-maid wept the whole night long, and said, 'I have freed you in a wood and from an iron stove; I sought you and have crossed a glassy mountain, three sharp swords, and a great lake to find you, and now you will not hear me!' The servants outside heard how she cried the whole night, and in the morning they told their master.

And when she had washed up on the third night she bit the third nut, and there was a still more beautiful dress inside that was made of pure gold.  When the bride saw it she wanted to have it, but the maid would only give it her on condition that she should sleep for the third time by the Prince's door.  But the Prince took care not to drink the sleeping-draught.  When she began to weep and to say, 'Dearest sweetheart, I freed you in the horrible wild wood, and from an iron stove,' he jumped up and said, 'You are right.  You are mine, and I am thine.'  Though it was still night, he got into a carriage with her, and they took the false bride's clothes away, so

[p. 37]

that she could not follow them.  When they came to the great lake they rowed across, and when they reached the three sharp swords they sat on the plough-wheel, and on the glassy mountain they stuck the three needles in.  So they arrived at last at the little old house, but when they stepped inside it turned into a large castle.  The toads were all freed, and were beautiful King's children, running about for joy.  There they were married, and they remained in the castle, which was much larger than that of the Princess's father's.  But because the old man did not like being left alone, they went and fetched him.  So they had two kingdoms and lived in great wealth.

A mouse has run,
 My story's done.

Footnotes

^32:1 Grimm.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

[p. 38]

THE DRAGON AND HIS GRANDMOTHER

There was once a great war, and the King had a great many soldiers, but he gave them so little pay that they could not live upon it.  Then three of them took counsel together and determined to desert.

One of them said to the others, 'If we are caught, we shall be hanged on the gallows; how shall we set about it?' The other said, 'Do you see that large cornfield there?  If we were to hide ourselves in that, no one could find us.  The army cannot come into it, and to-morrow it is to march on.'

They crept into the corn, but the army did not march on, but remained encamped close around them.  They sat for two days and two nights in the corn, and grew so hungry that they nearly died; but if they were to venture out, it was certain death.

They said at last, 'What use was it our deserting?  We must  perish here miserably.'

Whilst they were speaking a fiery dragon came flying through the air.  It hovered near them, and asked why they were hidden there.

They answered, 'We are three soldiers, and have deserted because our pay was so small.  Now if we remain here we shall die of hunger, and if we move out we shall be strung up on the gallows.'

'If you will serve me for seven years,' said the dragon, I will lead you through the midst of the army so that no one shall catch you.'  'We have no choice, and must take your offer,' said they.  Then the dragon seized them in his claws, took them through the air over the army, and set them down on the earth a long way from it.

He gave them a little whip, saying, 'Whip and slash with this, and as much money as you want will jump up before you.  You can then live as great lords, keep horses, and drive about in carriages.  But after seven years you are mine.'  Then he put a book before them, which he made all three of them sign.  'I will then

[p. 39]

give you a riddle,' he said; 'if you guess it, you shall be free and out of my power.'  The dragon then flew away, and they journeyed on with their little whip.  They had as much money as they wanted, wore grand clothes, and made their way into the world.  Wherever they went they lived in merrymaking and splendour, drove about with horses and carriages, ate and drank, but did nothing wrong.

The time passed quickly away, and when the seven years were nearly ended two of them grew terribly anxious and frightened, but the third made light of it, saying, 'Don't be afraid, brothers, I wasn't born yesterday; I will guess the riddle.'

They went into a field, sat down, and the two pulled long faces.  An old woman passed by, and asked them why they were so sad.  'Alas!  what have you to do with it?  You cannot help us.'  'Who knows?' she answered.  'Only confide your trouble in me.'

Then they told her that they had become the servants of the Dragon for seven long years, and how he had given them money as

[p. 40]

plentifully as blackberries; but as they had signed their names they were his, unless when the seven years had passed they could guess a riddle.  The old woman said, 'If you would help yourselves, one of you must go into the wood, and there he will come upon a tumble-down building of rocks which looks like a little house.  He must go in, and there he will find help.'

The two melancholy ones thought, 'That won't save us!' and they remained where they were.  But the third and merry one jumped up and went into the wood till he found the rock hut.  In the hut sat a very old woman, who was the Dragon's grandmother.  She asked him how he came, and what was his business there.  He told her all that happened, and because she was pleased with him she took compassion on him, and said she would help him.

She lifted up a large stone which lay over the cellar, saying, 'Hide yourself there; you can hear all that is spoken in this room.  Only sit still and don't stir.  When the Dragon comes, I will ask him what the riddle is, for he tells me everything; then listen carefully what he answers.'

At midnight the Dragon flew in, and asked for his supper.  His grandmother laid the table, and brought out food and drink till he was satisfied, and they ate and drank together.  Then in the course of the conversation she asked him what he had done in the day, and how many souls he had conquered.

'I haven't had much luck to-day,' he said, 'but I have a tight hold on three soldiers.'

'Indeed!  three soldiers!' said she.  'Who cannot escape you?'

'They are mine,' answered the Dragon scornfully, 'for I shall only give them one riddle which they will never be able to guess.'

'What sort of a riddle is it?' she asked.

'I will tell you this.  In the North Sea lies a dead sea-cat-- that shall be their roast meat; and the rib of a whale--that shall be their silver spoon; and the hollow foot of a dead horse--that shall be their wineglass.'

When the Dragon had gone to bed, his old grandmother pulled up the stone and let out the soldier.

'Did you pay attention to everything?'

'Yes,' he replied, 'I know enough, and can help myself splendidly.'

Then he went by another way through the window secretly, and in all haste back to his comrades.  He told them how the Dragon

[p. 41]

had been outwitted by his grandmother, and how he had heard from his own lips the answer to the riddle.

Then they were all delighted and in high spirits, took out their whip, and cracked so much money that it came jumping up from the ground.  When the seven years had quite gone, the Fiend came with his book, and, pointing at the signatures, said, 'I will take you underground with me; you shall have a meal there.  If you can tell me what you will get for your roast meat, you shall be free, and shall also keep the whip.'

Then said the first soldier, 'In the North Sea lies a dead sea-cat; that shall be the roast meat.'

The Dragon was much annoyed, and hummed and hawed a good deal, and asked the second, 'But what shall be your spoon?'

'The rib of a whale shall be our silver spoon.'

The Dragon made a face, and growled again three times, 'Hum, hum, hum,' and said to the third, 'Do you know what your wineglass shall be?'

'An old horse's hoof shall be our wineglass.'

Then the Dragon flew away with a loud shriek, and had no more power over them.  But the three soldiers took the little whip, whipped as much money as they wanted, and lived happily to their lives end.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

[p. 42]

THE DONKEY CABBAGE

There was once a young Hunter who went boldly into the forest.  He had a merry and light heart, and as he went whistling along there came an ugly old woman, who said to him, 'Good-day, dear hunter!  You are very merry and contented, but I suffer hunger and thirst, so give me a trifle.'  The Hunter was sorry for the poor old woman, and he felt in his pocket and gave her all he could spare.  He was going on then, but the old woman stopped him and said, 'Listen, dear hunter, to what I say.  Because of your kind heart I will make you a present.  Go on your way, and in a short time you will come to a tree on which sit nine birds who have a cloak in their claws and are quarrelling over it.  Then take aim with your gun and shoot in the middle of them; they will let the cloak fall, but one of the birds will be hit and will drop down dead.  Take the cloak with you; it is a wishing-cloak, and when you throw it on your shoulders you have only to wish yourself at a certain place, and in the twinkling of an eye you are there.  Take the heart out of the dead bird and swallow it whole, and early every morning when you get up you will find a gold piece under your pillow.'

The Hunter thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself 'These are splendid things she has promised me, if only they come to pass!'  So he walked on about a hundred yards, and then he heard above him in the branches such a screaming and chirping that he looked up, and there he saw a heap of birds tearing a cloth with their beaks and feet, shrieking, tugging, and fighting, as if each wanted it for himself.  'Well,' said the Hunter, 'this is wonderful!  It is just as the old woman said'; and he took his gun on his shoulder, pulled the trigger, and shot into the midst of them, so that their feathers flew about.  Then the flock took flight with much screaming, but one fell dead, and the cloak fluttered down.  Then the Hunter did as the old woman had told him: he cut open the bird, found its heart, swallowed it, and took the cloak home with

[p. 43]

him.  The next morning when he awoke he remembered the promise, and wanted to see if it had come true.  But when he lifted up his pillow, there sparkled the gold piece, and the next morning he found another, and so on every time he got up.  He collected a heap of gold, but at last he thought to himself, 'What good is all my gold to me if I stay at home?  I will travel and look a bit about me in the world.'  So he took leave of his parents, slung his hunting knapsack and his gun round him, and journeyed into the world.

It happened that one day he went through a thick wood, and when he came to the end of it there lay in the plain before him a large castle.  At one of the windows in it stood an old woman with a most beautiful maiden by her side, looking out.  But the old woman was a witch, and she said to the girl, 'There comes one out of the wood who has a wonderful treasure in his body which we must manage to possess ourselves of, darling daughter; we have more right to it than he.  He has a bird's heart in him, and so every morning there lies a gold piece under his pillow.'

She told her how they could get hold of it, and how she was to coax it from him, and at last threatened her angrily, saying, 'And if you do not obey me, you shall repent it!'

When the Hunter came nearer he saw the maiden, and said to himself, 'I have travelled so far now that I will rest, and turn into this beautiful castle; money I have in plenty.'  But the real reason was that he had caught sight of the lovely face.

He went into the house, and was kindly received and hospitably entertained.  It was not long before he was so much in love with the witch-maiden that he thought of nothing else, and only looked in her eyes, and whatever she wanted, that he gladly did.  Then the old witch said, 'Now we must have the bird-heart; he will not feel when it is gone.'  She prepared a drink, and when it was ready she poured it in a goblet and gave it to the maiden, who had to hand it to the hunter.

'Drink to me now, my dearest,' she said.  Then he took the goblet, and when he had swallowed the drink the bird-heart came out of his mouth.  The maiden had to get hold of it secretly and then swallow it herself, for the old witch wanted to have it.  Thenceforward he found no more gold under his pillow, and it lay under the maiden's; but he was so much in love and so much bewitched that he thought of nothing except spending all his time with the maiden.

[p. 44]

Then the old witch said, 'We have the bird-heart, but we must also get the wishing-cloak from him.'

The maiden answered, 'We will leave him that; he has already lost his wealth!'

The old witch grew angry, and said, 'Such a cloak is a wonderful thing, it is seldom to be had in the world, and have it I must and will.'  She beat the maiden, and said that if she did not obey it would go ill with her.

So she did her mother's bidding, and, standing one day by the window, she looked away into the far distance as if she were very sad.

'Why are you standing there looking so sad?' asked the Hunter.

[p. 45]

'Alas, my love,' she replied, ' over there lies the granite mountain where the costly precious stones grow.  I have a great longing to go there, so that when I think of it I am very sad.  For who can fetch them?  Only the birds who fly; a man, never.'

'If you have no other trouble,' said the Hunter, 'that one I can easily remove from your heart.'

So he wrapped her round in his cloak and wished themselves to the granite mountain, and in an instant there they were, sitting on it!  The precious stones sparkled so brightly on all sides that it was a pleasure to see them, and they collected the most beautiful and costly together.  But now the old witch had through her caused the Hunter's eyes to become heavy.

He said to the maiden, 'We will sit down for a little while and rest; I am so tired that I can hardly stand on my feet.'

So they sat down, and he laid his head on her lap and fell asleep.  As soon as he was sound asleep she unfastened the cloak from his shoulders, threw it on her own, left the granite and stones, and wished herself home again.

But when the Hunter had finished his sleep and awoke, he found that his love had betrayed him and left him alone on the wild mountain.  'Oh,' said he, 'why is faithlessness so great in the world?' and he sat down in sorrow and trouble, not knowing what to do.

But the mountain belonged to fierce and huge giants, who lived on it and traded there, and he had not sat long before he saw three of them striding towards him.  So he lay down as if he had fallen into a deep sleep.

The giants came up, and the first pushed him with his foot, and said, 'What sort of an earthworm is that?'

The second said, 'Crush him dead.'

But the third said contemptuously, 'It is not worth the trouble!  Let him live; he cannot remain here, and if he goes higher up the mountain the clouds will take him and carry him off.'

Talking thus they went away.  But the Hunter had listened to their talk, and as soon as they had gone he rose and climbed to the summit.  When he had sat there a little while a cloud swept by, and, seizing him, carried him away.  It travelled for a time in the sky, and then it sank down and hovered over a large vegetable garden surrounded by walls, so that he came safely to the ground amidst cabbages and vegetables.  The Hunter then looked about him, saying, 'If only I had something to eat!  I am so hungry,

[p. 46]

and it will go badly with me in the future, for I see here not an apple or pear or fruit of any kind--nothing but vegetables everywhere.'  At last he thought, 'At a pinch I can eat a salad; it does not taste particularly nice, but it will refresh me.'  So he looked about for a good head and ate it, but no sooner had he swallowed a couple of mouthfuls than he felt very strange, and found himself wonderfully changed.  Four legs began to grow on him, a thick head, and two long ears, and he saw with horror that he had changed into a donkey.  But as he was still very hungry and this juicy salad tasted very good to his present nature, he went on eating with a still greater appetite.  At last he got hold of another kind of cabbage, but scarcely had swallowed it when he felt another change, and he once more regained his human form.

The Hunter now lay down and slept off his weariness.  When he awoke the next morning he broke off a head of the bad and a head of the good cabbage, thinking, 'This will help me to regain my own, and to punish faithlessness.'  Then he put the heads in his pockets, climbed the wall, and started off to seek the castle of his

[p. 47]

love.  When he had wandered about for a couple of days he found it quite easily.  He then browned his face quickly, so that his own mother would not have known him, and went into the castle, where he begged for a lodging.

'I am so tired,' he said, 'I can go no farther.'

The witch asked, 'Countryman, who are you, and what is your business?'

He answered, 'I am a messenger of the King, and have been sent to seek the finest salad that grows under the sun.  I have been so lucky as to find it, and am bringing it with me; but the heat of the sun is so great that the tender cabbage threatens to grow soft, and I do not know if I shall be able to bring it any farther.'

When the old witch heard of the fine salad she wanted to eat it, and said, 'Dear countryman, just let me taste the wonderful salad.'

'Why not?' he answered; 'I have brought two heads with me, and will give you one.'

So saying, he opened his sack and gave her the bad one.  The witch suspected no evil, and her mouth watered to taste the new dish, so that she went into the kitchen to prepare it herself.  When it was ready she could not wait till it was served at the table, but she immediately took a couple of leaves and put them in her mouth.  No sooner, however, had she swallowed them than she lost human form, and ran into the courtyard in the shape of a donkey.

Now the servant came into the kitchen, and when she saw the salad standing there ready cooked she was about to carry it up, but on the way, according to her old habit, she tasted it and ate a couple of leaves.  Immediately the charm worked, and she became a donkey, and ran out to join the old witch, and the dish with the salad in it fell to the ground.  In the meantime, the messenger was sitting with the lovely maiden, and as no one came with the salad, and she wanted very much to taste it, she said, 'I don't know where the salad is.'

Then thought the Hunter, 'The cabbage must have already begun to work.'  And he said, 'I will go to the kitchen and fetch it myself.'

When he came there he saw the two donkeys running about in the courtyard, but the salad was lying on the ground.

'That's all right,' said he; 'two have had their share!' And lifting the remaining leaves up, he laid them on the dish and brought them to the maiden.

[p. 48]

'I am bringing you the delicious food my own self,' he said, 'so that you need not wait any longer.'

Then she ate, and, as the others had done, she at once lost her human form, and ran as a donkey into the yard.

When the Hunter had washed his face, so that the changed ones might know him, he went into the yard, saying, 'Now you shall receive a reward for your faithlessness.'

He tied them all three with a rope, and drove them away till he came to a mill.  He knocked at the window, and the miller put his head out and asked what he wanted.

'I have three tiresome animals,' he answered, 'which I don't want to keep any longer.  If you will take them, give them food and stabling, and do as I tell you with them, I will pay you as much as you want.'

The miller replied, 'Why not?  What shall I do with them?'

Then the Hunter said that to the old donkey, which was the witch, three beatings and one meal; to the younger one, which was the servant, one beating and three meals; and to the youngest one, which was the maiden, no beating and three meals; for he could not find it in his heart to let the maiden be beaten.

Then he went back into the castle, and he found there all that

[p. 49]

he wanted.  After a couple of days the miller came and said that he must tell him that the old donkey which was to have three beatings and only one meal had died.  'The two others,' he added, 'are certainly not dead, and get their three meals every day, but they are so sad that they cannot last much longer.'

Then the Hunter took pity on them, laid aside his anger, and told the miller to drive them back again.  And when they came he gave them some of the good cabbage to eat, so that they became human again.  Then the beautiful maiden fell on her knees before him, saying, 'Oh, my dearest, forgive me the ill I have done you!  My mother compelled me to do it; it was against my will, for I love you dearly.  Your wishing-cloak is hanging in a cupboard, and as for the bird-heart I will make a drink and give it back to you.'

But he changed his mind, and said, 'Keep it; it makes no difference, for I will take you to be my own dear true wife.'

And the wedding was celebrated, and they lived happy together till death.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

[p. 50]

THE LITTLE GREEN FROG [*1]

In a part of the world whose name I forget lived once upon a time two kings, called Peridor and Diamantino.  They were cousins as well as neighbours, and both were under the protection of the fairies; though it is only fair to say that the fairies did not love them half so well as their wives did.

Now it often happens that as princes can generally manage to get their own way it is harder for them to be good than it is for common people.  So it was with Peridor and Diamantino; but of the two, the fairies declared that Diamantino was much the worst; indeed, he behaved so badly to his wife Aglantino, that the fairies would not allow him to live any longer; and he died, leaving behind him a little daughter.  As she was an only child, of course this little girl was the heiress of the kingdom, but, being still only a baby, her mother, the widow of Diamantino, was proclaimed regent.  The Queen-dowager was wise and good, and tried her best to make her people happy.  The only thing she had to vex her was the absence of her daughter; for the fairies, for reasons of their own, determined to bring up the little Princess Serpentine among themselves.

As to the other King, he was really fond of his wife, Queen Constance, but he often grieved her by his thoughtless ways, and in order to punish him for his carelessness, the fairies caused her to die quite suddenly.  When she was gone the King felt how much he had loved her, and his grief was so great (though he never neglected his duties) that his subjects called him Peridor the Sorrowful.  It seems hardly possible that any man should live like Peridor for fifteen years plunged in such depth of grief, and most likely he would have died too if it had not been for the fairies.

The one comfort the poor King had was his son, Prince Saphir, who was only three years old at the time of his mother's death, and great care was given to his education.  By the time he was

[p. 51]

fifteen Saphir had learnt everything that a prince should know, and he was, besides, charming and agreeable.

It was about this time that the fairies suddenly took fright lest his love for his father should interfere with the plans they had made for the young prince.  So, to prevent this, they placed in a pretty little room of which Saphir was very fond a little mirror in a black frame, such as were often brought from Venice.  The Prince did not notice for some days that there was anything new in the room, but at last he perceived it, and went up to look at it more closely.  What was his surprise to see reflected in the mirror, not his own face, but that of a young girl as lovely as the morning!  And, better still, every movement of the girl, just growing out of childhood, was also reflected in the wonderful glass.

As might have been expected, the young Prince lost his heart completely to the beautiful image, and it was impossible to get him out of the room, so busy was he in watching the lovely unknown.  Certainly it was very delightful to be able to see her whom he loved at any moment he chose, but his spirits sometimes sank when he wondered what was to be the end of this adventure.

The magic mirror had been for about a year in the Prince's

[p. 52]

possession, when one day a new subject of disquiet seized upon him.  As usual, he was engaged in looking at the girl, when suddenly he thought he saw a second mirror reflected in the first, exactly like his own, and with the same power.  And in this he was perfectly right.  The young girl had only possessed it for a short time, and neglected all her duties for the sake of the mirror.  Now it was not difficult for Saphir to guess the reason of the change in her, nor why the new mirror was consulted so often; but try as he would he could never see the face of the person who was reflected in it, for the young girl's figure always came between.  All he knew was that the face was that of a man, and this was quite enough to make him madly jealous.  This was the doing of the fairies, and we must suppose that they had their reasons for acting as they did.

When these things happened Saphir was about eighteen years old, and fifteen years had passed away since the death of his mother.  King Peridor had grown more and more unhappy as time went on, and at last he fell so ill that it seemed as if his days were numbered.  He was so much beloved by his subjects that this sad news was heard with despair by the nation, and more than all by the Prince.

During his whole illness the King never spoke of anything but the Queen, his sorrow at having grieved her, and his hope of one day seeing her again.  All the doctors and all the water-cures in the kingdom had been tried, and nothing would do him any good.  At last he persuaded them to let him lie quietly in his room, where no one came to trouble him.

Perhaps the worst pain he had to bear was a sort of weight on his chest, which made it very hard for him to breathe.  So he commanded his servants to leave the windows open in order that he might get more air.  One day, when he had been left alone for a few minutes, a bird with brilliant plumage came and fluttered round the window, and finally rested on the sill.  His feathers were sky-blue and gold, his feet and his beak of such glittering rubies that no one could bear to look at them, his eyes made the brightest diamonds look dull, and on his head he wore a crown.  I cannot tell you what the crown was made of, but I am quite certain that it was still more splendid than all the rest.  As to his voice I can say nothing about that, for the bird never sang at all.  In fact, he did nothing but gaze steadily at the King, and as he gazed, the King felt his strength come back to him.  In a little while the bird flew into the room, still with his eyes fixed on the King, and at every

[p. 53]

glance the strength of the sick man became greater, till he was once more as well as he used to be before the Queen died.  Filled with joy at his cure, he tried to seize the bird to whom he owed it all, but, swifter than a swallow, it managed to avoid him.  In vain he described the bird to his attendants, who rushed at his first call; in vain they sought the wonderful creature both on horse and foot, and summoned the fowlers to their aid: the bird could nowhere be found.  The love the people bore King Peridor was so strong, and the reward he promised was so large, that in the twinkling of an eye every man, woman, and child had fled into the fields, and the towns were quite empty.

All this bustle, however, ended in nothing but confusion, and, what was worse, the King soon fell back into the same condition as he was in before.  Prince Saphir, who loved his father very dearly, was so unhappy at this that he persuaded himself that he might succeed where the others had failed, and at once prepared himself for a more distant search.  In spite of the opposition he met with, he rode away, followed by his household, trusting to chance to help him.  He had formed no plan, and there was no reason that he should choose one path more than another.  His only idea was to make straight for those spots which were the favourite haunts of birds.  But in vain he examined all the hedges and all the thickets; in vain he questioned everyone he met along the road.  The more he sought the less he found.

At last he came to one of the largest forests in all the world, composed entirely of cedars.  But in spite of the deep shadows cast by the wide-spreading branches of the trees, the grass underneath was soft and green, and covered with the rarest flowers.  It seemed to Saphir that this was exactly the place where the birds would choose to live, and he determined not to quit the wood until he had examined it from end to end.  And he did more.  He ordered some nets to be prepared and painted of the same colours as the bird's plumage, thinking that we are all easily caught by what is like ourselves.  In this he had to help him not only the fowlers by profession, but also his attendants, who excelled in this art.  For a man is not a courtier unless he can do everything.

After searching as usual for nearly a whole day Prince Saphir began to feel overcome with thirst.  He was too tired to go any farther, when happily he discovered a little way off a bubbling fountain of the clearest water.  Being an experienced traveller, he drew from his pocket a little cup (without which no one should

[p. 54]

ever take a journey), and was just about to dip it in the water, when a lovely little green frog, much prettier than frogs generally are, jumped into the cup.  Far from admiring its beauty, Saphir shook it impatiently off; but it was no good, for quick as lightning the frog jumped back again.  Saphir, who was raging with thirst, was just about to shake it off anew, when the little creature fixed upon him the most beautiful eyes in the world, and said, 'I am a friend of the bird you are seeking, and when you have quenched your thirst listen to me.'

So the Prince drank his fill, and then, by the command of the Little Green Frog, he lay down on the grass to rest himself.

'Now,' she began, 'be sure you do exactly in every respect what I tell you.  First you must call together your attendants, and order them to remain in a little hamlet close by until you want them.  Then go, quite alone, down a road that you will find on your right hand, looking southwards.  This road is planted all the way with cedars of Lebanon; and after going down it a long way you will come at last to a magnificent castle.  And now,' she went on, 'attend carefully to what I am going to say.  Take this tiny grain of sand, and put it into the ground as close as you can to the gate of the castle.  It has the virtue both of opening the gate and also of sending to sleep all the inhabitants.  Then go at once to the stable, and pay no heed to anything except what I tell you.  Choose the handsomest of all the horses, leap quickly on its back, and come to me as fast as you can.  Farewell, Prince; I wish you good luck,' and with these words the Little Frog plunged into the water and disappeared.

The Prince, who felt more hopeful than he had done since he left home, did precisely as he had been ordered.  He left his attendants in the hamlet, found the road the frog had described to him, and followed it all alone, and at last he arrived at the gate of the castle, which was even more splendid than he had expected, for it was built of crystal, and all its ornaments were of massive gold.  However, he had no thoughts to spare for its beauty, and quickly buried his grain of sand in the earth.  In one instant the gates flew open, and all the dwellers inside fell sound asleep.  Saphir flew straight to the stable, and already had his hand on the finest horse it contained, when his eye was caught by a suit of magnificent harness hanging up close by.  It occurred to him directly that the harness belonged to the horse, and without ever thinking of harm (for indeed he who steals a horse can hardly be blamed for taking

[p. 55]

his saddle), he hastily placed it on the animal's back.  Suddenly the people in the castle became broad awake, and rushed to the stable.  They flung themselves on the Prince, seized him, and dragged him before their lord; but, luckily for the Prince, who could only find very lame excuses for his conduct, the lord of the castle took a fancy to his face, and let him depart without further questions.

Very sad, and very much ashamed of himself poor Saphir crept back to the fountain, where the Frog was awaiting him with a good scolding.

'Whom do you take me for?' she exclaimed angrily.  'Do you really believe that it was just for the pleasure of talking that I gave you the advice you have neglected so abominably?'

But the Prince was so deeply grieved, and apologised so very humbly, that after some time the heart of the good little Frog was softened, and she gave him another tiny little grain, but instead of being sand it was now a grain of gold.  She directed him to do

[p. 56]

just as he had done before, with only this difference, that instead of going to the stable which had been the ruin of his hopes, he was to enter right into the castle itself, and to glide as fast as he could down the passages till he came to a room filled with perfume, where he would find a beautiful maiden asleep on a bed.  He was to wake the maiden instantly and carry her off, and to be sure not to pay any heed to whatever resistance she might make.

The Prince obeyed the Frog's orders one by one, and all went well for this second time also.  The gate opened, the inhabitants fell sound asleep, and he walked down the passage till he found the girl on her bed, exactly as he had been told he would.  He woke her, and begged her firmly, but politely, to follow him quickly.  After a little persuasion the maiden consented, but only on condition that she was allowed first to put on her dress.  This sounded so reasonable and natural that it did not enter the Prince's head to refuse her request.

But the maiden's hand had hardly touched the dress when the palace suddenly awoke from its sleep, and the Prince was seized and bound.  He was so vexed with his own folly, and so taken aback at the disaster, that he did not attempt to explain his conduct, and things would have gone badly with him if his friends the fairies had not softened the hearts of his captors, so that they once more allowed him to leave quietly.  However, what troubled him most was the idea of having to meet the Frog who had been his benefactress.  How was he ever to appear before her with this tale?  Still, after a long struggle with himself, he made up his mind that there was nothing else to be done, and that he deserved whatever she might say to him.  And she said a great deal, for she had worked herself into a terrible passion; but the Prince humbly implored her pardon, and ventured to point out that it would have been very hard to refuse the young lady's reasonable request.  'You must learn to do as you are told,' was all the Frog would reply.

But poor Saphir was so unhappy, and begged so hard for forgiveness, that at last the Frog's anger gave way, and she held up to him a tiny diamond stone.  'Go back,' she said, 'to the castle, and bury this little diamond close to the door.  But be careful not to return to the stable or to the bedroom; they have proved too fatal to you.  Walk straight to the garden and enter through a portico, into a small green wood, in the midst of which is a tree with a trunk of gold and leaves of emeralds.  Perched on this tree you will see the beautiful bird you have been seeking so long.  You

[p. 57]

must cut the branch on which it is sitting, and bring it back to me without delay.  But I warn you solemnly that if you disobey my directions, as you have done twice before, you have nothing more to expect either of me or anyone else.'

With these words she jumped into the water, and the Prince, who had taken her threats much to heart, took his departure, firmly resolved not to deserve them.  He found it all just as he had been told: the portico, the wood, the magnificent tree, and the beautiful bird, which was sleeping soundly on one of the branches.  He speedily lopped off the branch, and though he noticed a splendid golden cage hanging close by, which would have been very useful for the bird to travel in, he left it alone, and came back to the fountain, holding his breath and walking on tip-toe all the way, for fear lest he should awake his prize.  But what was his surprise, when instead of finding the fountain in the spot where he had left it, he saw in its place a little rustic palace built in the best taste, and standing in the doorway a charming maiden, at whose sight his mind seemed to give way.

'What!  Madam!' he cried, hardly knowing what he said.  'What!  Is it you?'

The maiden blushed and answered: 'Ah, my lord, it is long since I first beheld your face, but I did not think you had ever seen mine.'

'Oh, madam,' replied he, 'you can never guess the days and the hours I have passed lost in admiration of you.'  And after these words they each related all the strange things that had happened, and the more they talked the more they felt convinced of the truth of the images they had seen in their mirrors.  After some time spent in the most tender conversation, the Prince could not restrain himself from asking the lovely unknown by what lucky chance she was wandering in the forest; where the fountain had gone; and if she knew anything of the Frog to whom he owed all his happiness, and to whom he must give up the bird, which, somehow or other, was still sound asleep.

'Ah, my lord,' she replied, with rather an awkward air, 'as to the Frog, she stands before you.  Let me tell you my story; it is not a long one.  I know neither my country nor my parents, and the only thing I can say for certain is that I am called Serpentine.  The fairies, who have taken care of me ever since I was born, wished me to be in ignorance as to my family, but they have looked after my education, and have bestowed on me endless kindness.  I have

[p. 58]

always lived in seclusion, and for the last two years I have wished for nothing better.  I had a mirror'--here shyness and embarrassment choked her words--but regaining her self-control, she added, 'You know that fairies insist on being obeyed without questioning.  It was they who changed the little house you saw before you into the fountain for which you are now asking, and, having turned me into a frog, they ordered me to say to the first person who came to the fountain exactly what I repeated to you.  But, my lord, when you stood before me, it was agony to my heart, filled as it was with thoughts of you, to appear to your eyes under so monstrous a form.  However, there was no help for it, and, painful as it was, I had to submit.  I desired your success with all my soul, not only for your own sake, but also for my own, because I could not get back my proper shape till you had become master of the beautiful bird, though I am quite ignorant as to your reason for seeking it.'

On this Saphir explained about the state of his father's health, and all that has been told before.

On hearing this story Serpentine grew very sad, and her lovely eyes filled with tears.

'Ah, my lord,' she said, 'you know nothing of me but what you have seen in the mirror; and I, who cannot even name my parents, learn that you are a king's son.'

In vain Saphir declared that love made them equal; Serpentine would only reply: 'I love you too much to allow you to marry beneath your rank.  I shall be very unhappy, of course, but I shall never alter my mind.  If I do not find from the fairies that my birth is worthy of you, then, whatever be my feelings, I will never accept your hand.'

The conversation was at this point, and bid fair to last some time longer, when one of the fairies appeared in her ivory car, accompanied by a beautiful woman past her early youth.  At this moment the bird suddenly awakened, and, flying on to Saphir's shoulder (which it never afterwards left), began fondling him as well as a bird can do.  The fairy told Serpentine that she was quite satisfied with her conduct, and made herself very agreeable to Saphir, whom she presented to the lady she had brought with her, explaining that the lady was no other than his Aunt Aglantine, widow of Diamantino.

Then they all fell into each other's arms, till the fairy mounted her chariot, placed Aglantine by her side, and Saphir and Serpentine on the front seat.  She also sent a message to the Prince's

[p. 59]

attendants that they might travel slowly back to the Court of King Peridor, and that the beautiful bird had really been found.  This matter being comfortably arranged, she started off her chariot.  But in spite of the swiftness with which they flew through the air, the time passed even quicker for Saphir and Serpentine, who had so much to think about.

They were still quite confused with the pleasure of seeing each other, when the chariot arrived at King Peridor's palace.  He had had himself carried to a room on the roof, where his nurses thought that he would die at any moment.  Directly the chariot drew within sight of the castle the beautiful bird took flight, and, making straight for the dying King, at once cured him of his sickness.  Then she resumed her natural shape, and he found that the bird was no other than the Queen Constance, whom he had long believed to be dead.  Peridor was rejoiced to embrace his wife and his son once more, and with the help of the fairies began to make preparations for the marriage of Saphir and Serpentine, who turned out to be the daughter of Aglantine and Diamantino, and as much a princess as he was a prince.  The people of the kingdom were delighted, and everybody lived happy and contented to the end of their lives.

Footnotes

^50:1 Cabinet des Fees.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

[f10]

THE SEVEN-HEADED SERPENT [*1]

Once upon a time there was a king who determined to take a long voyage.  He assembled his fleet and all the seamen, and set out.  They went straight on night and day, until they came to an island which was covered with large trees, and under every tree lay a lion.  As soon as the King had landed his men, the lions all rose up together and tried to devour them.  After a long battle they managed to overcome the wild beasts, but the greater number of the men were killed.  Those who remained alive now went on through the forest and found on the other side of it a beautiful garden, in which all the plants of the world flourished together.

There were also in the garden three springs: the first flowed with silver, the second with gold, and the third with pearls.  The men unbuckled their knapsacks and filled them with those precious things.  In the middle of the garden they found a large lake, and when they reached the edge of it the Lake began to speak, and said to them, 'What men are you, and what brings you here?  Are you come to visit our king?'  But they were too much frightened to answer.

Then the Lake said, 'You do well to be afraid, for it is at your peril that you are come hither.  Our king, who has seven heads, is now asleep, but in a few minutes he will wake up and come to me to take his bath!  Woe to anyone who meets him in the garden, for it is impossible to escape from him.  This is what you must do if you wish to save your lives.  Take off your clothes and spread them on the path which leads from here to the castle.  The King will then glide over something soft, which he likes very much, and he will be so pleased with that that he will not devour you.  He will give you some punishment, but then he will let you go.'

The men did as the Lake advised them, and waited for a time.  At noon the earth began to quake, and opened in many places, and out of the openings appeared lions, tigers, and other wild beasts,

[p. 61]

which surrounded the castle, and thousands and thousands of beasts came out of the castle following their king, the Seven-headed Serpent.  The Serpent glided over the clothes which were spread for him, came to the Lake, and asked it who had strewed those soft things on the path?  The Lake answered that it had been done by people who had come to do him homage.  The King commanded that the men should be brought before him.  They came humbly on their knees, and in a few words told him their story.  Then he spoke to them with a mighty and terrible voice, and said, 'Because you have dared to come here, I lay upon you the punishment.  Every year you must bring me from among your people twelve youths and twelve maidens, that I may devour them.  If you do not do this, I will destroy your whole nation.'

Then he desired one of his beasts to show the men the way out of the garden, and dismissed them.  They then left the island and went back to their own country, where they related what had happened to them.  Soon the time came round when the king of the beasts would expect the youths and maidens to be brought to him.  The King therefore issued a proclamation inviting twelve youths and twelve maidens to offer themselves up to save their country; and immediately many young people, far more than enough, hastened to do so.  A new ship was built, and set with black sails, and in it the youths and maidens who were appointed for the king of the beasts embarked and set out for his country.  When they arrived there they went at once to the Lake, and this time the lions did not stir, nor did the springs flow, and neither did the Lake speak.  So they waited then, and it was not long before the earth quaked even more terribly than the first time.  The Seven-headed Serpent came without his train of beasts, saw his prey waiting for him, and devoured it at one mouthful.  Then the ship's crew returned home, and the same thing happened yearly until many years had passed.

Now the King of this unhappy country was growing old, and so was the Queen, and they had no children.  One day the Queen was sitting at the window weeping bitterly because she was childless, and knew that the crown would therefore pass to strangers after the King's death.  Suddenly a little old woman appeared before her, holding an apple in her hand, and said, 'Why do you weep, my Queen, and what makes you so unhappy?'

'Alas, good mother,' answered the Queen, 'I am unhappy because I have no children.'

[p. 62]

'Is that what vexes you?' said the old woman.  'Listen to me.  I am a nun from the Spinning Convent, [*1] and my mother when she died left me this apple.  Whoever eats this apple shall have a child.'

The Queen gave money to the old woman, and bought the apple from her.  Then she peeled it, ate it, and threw the rind out of the window, and it so happened that a mare that was running loose in the court below ate up the rind.  After a time the Queen had a little boy, and the mare also had a male foal.  The boy and the foal grew up together and loved each other like brothers.  In course of time the King died, and so did the Queen, and their son, who was now nineteen years old, was left alone.  One day, when he and his horse were talking together, the Horse said to him, 'Listen to me, for I love you and wish for your good and that of the country.  If you go on every year sending twelve youths and twelve maidens to the King of the Beasts, your country will very soon be ruined.  Mount upon my back: I will take you to a woman who can direct you how to kill the Seven-headed Serpent.'

Then the youth mounted his horse, who carried him far away to a mountain which was hollow, for in its side was a great underground cavern.  In the cavern sat an old woman spinning.  This was the cloister of the nuns, and the old woman was the Abbess.  They all spent their time in spinning, and that is why the convent has this name.  All round the walls of the cavern there were beds cut out of the solid rock, upon which the nuns slept, and in the middle a light was burning.  It was the duty of the nuns to watch the light in turns, that it might never go out, and if anyone of them let it go out the others put her to death.

As soon as the King's son saw the old Abbess spinning he threw himself at her feet and entreated her to tell him how he could kill the Seven-headed Serpent.

She made the youth rise, embraced him, and said, 'Know, my son, that it is I who sent the nun to your mother and caused you to be born, and with you the horse, with whose help you will be able to free the world from the monster.  I will tell you what you have to do.  Load your horse with cotton, and go by a secret passage which I will show you, which is hidden from the wild beasts, to the Serpent's palace.  You will find the King asleep upon his bed, which is all hung round with bells, and over his bed you will see a sword hanging.  With this sword only it is possible to kill the Serpent, because even if its blade breaks a new one will grow again

[p. 63]

for every head the monster has.  Thus you will be able to cut off all his seven heads.  And this you must also do in order to deceive the King: you must slip into his bed-chamber very softly, and stop up all the bells which are round his bed with cotton.  Then take down the sword gently, and quickly give the monster a blow on his tail with it.  This will make him waken up, and if he catches sight of you he will seize you.  But you must quickly cut off his first head, and then wait till the next one comes up.  Then strike it off also, and so go on till you have cut off all his seven heads.'

The old Abbess then gave the Prince her blessing, and he set out upon his enterprise, arrived at the Serpent's castle by following the secret passage which she had shown him, and by carefully attending to all her directions he happily succeeded in killing the monster.  As soon as the wild beasts heard of their king's death, they all hastened to the castle, but the youth had long since mounted his horse and was already far out of their reach.  They pursued him as fast as they could, but they found it impossible to overtake him, and he reached home in safety.  Thus he freed his country from this terrible oppression.

Footnotes

^60:1 'Die Siebenkopfige Schlange,' from Schmidt's Griechische Mahrchen.

^62:1 Convent Gnothi.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

[p. 64]

THE GRATEFUL BEASTS [*1]

There was once upon a time a man and woman who had three fine-looking sons, but they were so poor that they had hardly enough food for themselves, let alone their children.  So the sons determined to set out into the world and to try their luck.  Before starting their mother gave them each a loaf of bread and her blessing, and having taken a tender farewell of her and their father the three set forth on their travels.

The youngest of the three brothers, whose name was Ferko, was a beautiful youth, with a splendid figure, blue eyes, fair hair, and a complexion like milk and roses.  His two brothers were as jealous of him as they could be, for they thought that with his good looks he would be sure to be more fortunate than they would ever be.

One day all the three were sitting resting under a tree, for the sun was hot and they were tired of walking.  Ferko fell fast asleep, but the other two remained awake, and the eldest said to the second brother, 'What do you say to doing our brother Ferko some harm?  He is so beautiful that everyone takes a fancy to him, which is more than they do to us.  If we could only get him out of the way we might succeed better.'

'I quite agree with you,' answered the second brother, 'and my advice is to eat up his loaf of bread, and then to refuse to give him a bit of ours until he has promised to let us put out his eyes or break his legs.'

His eldest brother was delighted with this proposal, and the two wicked wretches seized Ferko's loaf and ate it all up, while the poor boy was still asleep.

When he did awake he felt very hungry and turned to eat his bread, but his brothers cried out, 'You ate your loaf in your sleep, you glutton, and you may starve as long as you like, but you won't get a scrap of ours.'

Ferko was at a loss to understand how he could have eaten

[p. 65]

in his sleep, but he said nothing, and fasted all that day and the next night.  But on the following morning he was so hungry that he burst into tears, and implored his brothers to give him a little bit of their bread.  Then the cruel creatures laughed, and repeated what they had said the day before; but when Ferko continued to beg and beseech them, the eldest said at last, 'If you will let us put out one of your eyes and break one of your legs, then we will give you a bit of our bread.'

At these words poor Ferko wept more bitterly than before, and bore the torments of hunger till the sun was high in the heavens; then he could stand it no longer, and he consented to allow his left eye to be put out and his left leg to be broken.  When this was done he stretched out his hand eagerly for the piece of bread, but his brothers gave him such a tiny scrap that the starving youth finished it in a moment and besought them for a second bit.

But the more Ferko wept and told his brothers that he was dying of hunger, the more they laughed and scolded him for his greed.  So he endured the pangs of starvation all that day, but when night came his endurance gave way, and he let his right eye be put out and his right leg broken for a second piece of bread.

After his brothers had thus successfully maimed and disfigured him for life, they left him groaning on the ground and continued their journey without him.

Poor Ferko ate up the scrap of bread they had left him and wept bitterly, but no one heard him or came to his help.  Night came on, and the poor blind youth had no eyes to close, and could only crawl along the ground, not knowing in the least where he was going.  But when the sun was once more high in the heavens, Ferko felt the blazing heat scorch him, and sought for some cool shady place to rest his aching limbs.  He climbed to the top of a hill and lay down in the grass, and as he thought under the shadow of a big tree.  But it was no tree he leant against, but a gallows on which two ravens were seated.  The one was saying to the other as the weary youth lay down, 'Is there anything the least wonderful or remarkable about this neighbourhood?'

'I should just think there was,' replied the other; 'many things that don't exist anywhere else in the world.  There is a lake down there below us, and anyone who bathes in it, though he were at death's door, becomes sound and well on the spot, and those who wash their eyes with the dew on this hill become as sharp-sighted as the eagle, even if they have been blind from their youth.'

[p. 66]

'Well,' answered the first raven, 'my eyes are in no want of this healing bath, for, Heaven be praised, they are as good as ever they were; but my wing has been very feeble and weak ever since it was shot by an arrow many years ago, so let us fly at once to the lake that I may be restored to health and strength again.'  And so they flew away.

Their words rejoiced Ferko's heart, and he waited impatiently till evening should come and he could rub the precious dew on his sightless eyes.

At last it began to grow dusk, and the sun sank behind the mountains; gradually it became cooler on the hill, and the grass grew wet with dew.  Then Ferko buried his face in the ground till his eyes were damp with dewdrops, and in a moment he saw clearer than he had ever done in his life before.  The moon was shining brightly, and lighted him to the lake where he could bathe his poor broken legs.

Then Ferko crawled to the edge of the lake and dipped his limbs in the water.  No sooner had he done so than his legs felt as sound and strong as they had been before, and Ferko thanked the kind fate that had led him to the hill where he had overheard the ravens' conversation.  He filled a bottle with the healing water, and then continued his journey in the best of spirits.

He had not gone far before he met a wolf, who was limping disconsolately along on three legs, and who on perceiving Ferko began to howl dismally.

'My good friend,' said the youth, 'be of good cheer, for I can soon heal your leg,' and with these words he poured some of the precious water over the wolf's paw, and in a minute the animal was springing about sound and well on all fours.  The grateful creature thanked his benefactor warmly, and promised Ferko to do him a good turn if he should ever need it.

Ferko continued his way till he came to a ploughed field.  Here he noticed a little mouse creeping wearily along on its hind paws, for its front paws had both been broken in a trap.

Ferko felt so sorry for the little beast that he spoke to it in the most friendly manner, and washed its small paws with the healing water.  In a moment the mouse was sound and whole, and after thanking the kind physician it scampered away over the ploughed furrows.

Ferko again proceeded on his journey, but he hadn't gone far before a queen bee flew against him, trailing one wing behind her,

[p. 67]

which had been cruelly torn in two by a big bird.  Ferko was no less willing to help her than he had been to help the wolf and the mouse, so he poured some healing drops over the wounded wing.  On the spot the queen bee was cured, and turning to Ferko she said, 'I am most grateful for your kindness, and shall reward you some day.'  And with these words she flew away humming, gaily.

Then Ferko wandered on for many a long day, and at length reached a strange kingdom.  Here, he thought to himself, he might as well go straight to the palace and offer his services to the King of the country, for he had heard that the King's daughter was as beautiful as the day.

So he went to the royal palace, and as he entered the door the first people he saw were his two brothers who had so shamefully ill-treated him.  They had managed to obtain places in the King's service, and when they recognised Ferko with his eyes and legs sound and well they were frightened to death, for they feared

[p. 68]

he would tell the King of their conduct, and that they would be hung.

No sooner had Ferko entered the palace than all eyes were turned on the handsome youth, and the King's daughter herself was lost in admiration, for she had never seen anyone so handsome in her life before.  His brothers noticed this, and envy and jealousy were added to their fear, so much so that they determined once more to destroy him.  They went to the King and told him that Ferko was a wicked magician, who had come to the palace with the intention of carrying off the Princess.

Then the King had Ferko brought before him, and said, 'You

[p. 69]

are accused of being a magician who wishes to rob me of my daughter, and I condemn you to death; but if you can fulfil three tasks which I shall set you to do your life shall be spared, on condition you leave the country; but if you cannot perform what I demand you shall be hung on the nearest tree.'

And turning to the two wicked brothers he said, 'Suggest something for him to do; no matter how difficult, he must succeed in it or die.'

They did not think long, but replied, 'Let him build your Majesty in one day a more beautiful palace than this, and if he fails in the attempt let him be hung.'

The King was pleased with this proposal, and commanded Ferko to set to work on the following day.  The two brothers were delighted, for they thought they had now got rid of Ferko for ever.  The poor youth himself was heart-broken, and cursed the hour he had crossed the boundary of the King's domain.  As he was wandering disconsolately about the meadows round the palace, wondering how he could escape being put to death, a little bee flew past, and settling on his shoulder whispered in his ear, 'What is troubling you, my kind benefactor?  Can I be of any help to you?  I am the bee whose wing you healed, and would like to show my gratitude in some way.'

Ferko recognised the queen bee, and said, 'Alas!  how could you help me?  for I have been set to do a task which no one in the whole world could do, let him be ever such a genius!  To-morrow I must build a palace more beautiful than the King's, and it must be finished before evening.'

'Is that all?' answered the bee, 'then you may comfort yourself; for before the sun goes down to-morrow night a palace shall be built unlike any that King has dwelt in before.  Just stay here till I come again and tell you that it is finished.'  Having said this she flew merrily away, and Ferko, reassured by her words, lay down on the grass and slept peacefully till the next morning.

Early on the following day the whole town was on its feet, and everyone wondered how and where the stranger would build the wonderful palace.  The Princess alone was silent and sorrowful, and had cried all night till her pillow was wet, so much did she take the fate of the beautiful youth to heart.

Ferko spent the whole day in the meadows waiting the return of the bee.  And when evening was come the queen bee flew by, and perching on his shoulder she said, 'The wonderful palace is

[p. 70]

ready.  Be of good cheer, and lead the King to the hill just outside the city walls.'  And humming gaily she flew away again.

Ferko went at once to the King and told him the palace was finished.  The whole court went out to see the wonder, and their astonishment was great at the sight which met their eyes.  A splendid palace reared itself on the hill just outside the walls of the city, made of the most exquisite flowers that ever grew in mortal garden.  The roof was all of crimson roses, the windows of lilies, the walls of white carnations, the floors of glowing auriculas and violets, the doors of gorgeous tulips and narcissi with sunflowers for knockers, and all round hyacinths and other sweet-smelling flowers bloomed in masses, so that the air was perfumed far and near and enchanted all who were present.

This splendid palace had been built by the grateful queen bee, who had summoned all the other bees in the kingdom to help her.

The King's amazement knew no bounds, and the Princess's eyes beamed with delight as she turned them from the wonderful building on the delighted Ferko.  But the two brothers had grown quite green with envy, and only declared the more that Ferko was nothing but a wicked magician.

The King, although he had been surprised and astonished at the way his commands had been carried out, was very vexed that the stranger should escape with his life, and turning to the two brothers he said, 'He has certainly accomplished the first task, with the aid no doubt of his diabolical magic; but what shall we give him to do now?  Let us make it as difficult as possible, and if he fails he shall die.'

Then the eldest brother replied, 'The corn has all been cut, but it has not yet been put into barns; let the knave collect all the grain in the kingdom into one big heap before to-morrow night, and if as much as a stalk of corn is left let him be put to death.

The Princess grew white with terror when she heard these words; but Ferko felt much more cheerful than he had done the first time, and wandered out into the meadows again, wondering how he was to get out of the difficulty.  But he could think of no way of escape.  The sun sank to rest and night came on, when a little mouse started out of the grass at Ferko's feet, and said to him, 'I'm delighted to see you, my kind benefactor; but why are you looking so sad?  Can I be of any help to you, and thus repay your great kindness to me?'

Then Ferko recognised the mouse whose front paws he had

[p. 71]

healed, and replied, 'Alas I how can you help me in a matter that is beyond any human power!  Before to-morrow night all the grain in the kingdom has to be gathered into one big heap, and if as much as a stalk of corn is wanting I must pay for it with my life.'

'Is that all?' answered the mouse; 'that needn't distress you much.  Just trust in me, and before the sun sets again you shall hear that your task is done.'  And with these words the little creature scampered away into the fields.

Ferko, who never doubted that the mouse would be as good as its word, lay down comforted on the soft grass and slept soundly till next morning.  The day passed slowly, and with the evening came the little mouse and said, 'Now there is not a single stalk of corn left in any field; they are all collected in one big heap on the hill out there.'

Then Ferko went joyfully to the King and told him that all he demanded had been done.  And the whole Court went out to see the wonder, and were no less astonished than they had been the first time.  For in a heap higher than the King's palace lay all the grain of the country, and not a single stalk of corn had been left behind in any of the fields.  And how had all this been done?  The little mouse had summoned every other mouse in the land to its help, and together they had collected all the grain in the kingdom.

The King could not hide his amazement, but at the same time his wrath increased, and he was more ready than ever to believe the two brothers, who kept on repeating that Ferko was nothing more nor less than a wicked magician.  Only the beautiful Princess rejoiced over Ferko's success, and looked on him with friendly glances, which the youth returned.

The more the cruel King gazed on the wonder before him, the more angry he became, for he could not, in the face of his promise, put the stranger to death.  He turned once more to the two brothers and said, 'His diabolical magic has helped him again, but now what third task shall we set him to do?  No matter how impossible it is, he must do it or die.'

The eldest answered quickly, 'Let him drive all the wolves of the kingdom on to this hill before to-morrow night.  If he does this he may go free; if not he shall be hung as you have said.'

At these words the Princess burst into tears, and when the King saw this he ordered her to be shut up in a high tower and carefully guarded till the dangerous magician should either have left the kingdom or been hung on the nearest tree.

[p. 72]

Ferko wandered out into the fields again, and sat down on the stump of a tree wondering what he should do next.  Suddenly a big wolf ran up to him, and standing still said, 'I'm very glad to see you again, my kind benefactor.  What are you thinking about all alone by yourself?  If I can help you in any way only say the word, for I would like to give you a proof of my gratitude.'

Ferko at once recognised the wolf whose broken leg he had healed, and told him what he had to do the following day if he wished to escape with his life.  'But how in the world,' he added, 'am I to collect all the wolves of the kingdom on to that hill over there?'

'If that's all you want done,' answered the wolf, 'you needn't worry yourself.  I'll undertake the task, and you'll hear from me again before sunset to-morrow.  Keep your spirits up.'  And with these words he trotted quickly away.

Then the youth rejoiced greatly, for now he felt that his life was safe; but he grew very sad when he thought of the beautiful Princess, and that he would never see her again if he left the country.  He lay down once more on the grass and soon fell fast asleep.

All the next day he spent wandering about the fields, and toward evening the wolf came running to him in a great hurry and said, 'I have collected together all the wolves in the kingdom, and they are waiting for you in the wood.  Go quickly to the King, and tell him to go to the hill that he may see the wonder you have done with his own eyes.  Then return at once to me and get on my back, and I will help you to drive all the wolves together.'

Then Ferko went straight to the palace and told the King that he was ready to perform the third task if he would come to the hill and see it done.  Ferko himself returned to the fields, and mounting on the wolf's back he rode to the wood close by.

Quick as lightning the wolf flew round the wood, and in a minute many hundred wolves rose up before him, increasing in number every moment, till they could be counted by thousands.  He drove them all before him on to the hill, where the King and his whole Court and Ferko's two brothers were standing.  Only the lovely Princess was not present, for she was shut up in her tower weeping bitterly.

The wicked brothers stamped and foamed with rage when they saw the failure of their wicked designs.  But the King was overcome by a sudden terror when he saw the enormous pack of wolves

[p. 73]

approaching nearer and nearer, and calling out to Ferko he said, 'Enough, enough, we don't want any more.'

But the wolf on whose back Ferko sat, said to its rider, 'Go on! go on!' and at the same moment many more wolves ran up the hill, howling horribly and showing their white teeth.

The King in his terror called out, 'Stop a moment; I will give you half my kingdom if you will drive all the wolves away.'  But Ferko pretended not to hear, and drove some more thousands before him, so that everyone quaked with horror and fear.

[p. 74]

Then the King raised his voice again and called out, 'Stop!  you shall have my whole kingdom, if you will only drive these wolves back to the places they came from.'

But the wolf kept on encouraging Ferko, and said, 'Go on!  go on!' So he led the wolves on, till at last they fell on the King and on the wicked brothers, and ate them and the whole Court up in a moment.

Then Ferko went straight to the palace and set the Princess free, and on the same day he married her and was crowned King of the country.  And the wolves all went peacefully back to their own homes, and Ferko and his bride lived for many years in peace and happiness together, and were much beloved by great and small in the land.

Footnotes

^64:1 From the Hungarian. Kletke.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

[p. 75]

THE GIANTS AND THE HERD-BOY [*1]

There was once upon a time a poor boy who had neither father nor mother.  In order to gain a living he looked after the sheep of a great Lord.  Day and night he spent out in the open fields, and only when it was very wet and stormy did he take refuge in a little hut on the edge of a big forest.  Now one night, when he was sitting on the grass beside his flocks, he heard not very far from him the sound as of some one crying.  He rose up and followed the direction of the noise.  To his dismay and astonishment he found a Giant lying at the entrance of the wood; he was about to run off as fast as his legs could carry him, when the Giant called out: 'Don't be afraid, I won't harm you.  On the contrary, I will reward you handsomely if you will bind up my foot.  I hurt it when I was trying to root up

[p. 76]

an oak-tree.'  The Herd-boy took off his shirt, and bound up the Giant's wounded foot with it.  Then the Giant rose up and said, 'Now come and I will reward you.  We are going to celebrate a marriage to-day, and I promise you we shall have plenty of fun.  Come and enjoy yourself, but in order that my brothers mayn't see you, put this band round your waist and then you'll be invisible.'  With these words he handed the Herd-boy a belt, and walking on in front he led him to a fountain where hundreds of Giants and Giantesses were assembled preparing to hold a wedding.  They danced and played different games till midnight; then one of the Giants tore up a plant by its roots, and all the Giants and Giantesses made themselves so thin that they disappeared into the earth through the hole made by the uprooting of the plant.  The wounded Giant remained behind to the last and called out, 'Herd-boy, where are you?' 'Here I am, close to you,' was the reply.  'Touch me,' said the Giant, 'so that you too may come with us under ground.'  The Herd-boy did as he was told, and before he could have believed it possible he found himself in a big hall, where even the walls were made of pure gold.  Then to his astonishment he saw that the hall was furnished with the tables and chairs that belonged to his master.  In a few minutes the company began to eat and drink.

The banquet was a very gorgeous one, and the poor youth fell to and ate and drank lustily.  When he had eaten and drunk as much as he could he thought to himself, 'Why shouldn't I put a loaf of bread in my pocket?  I shall be glad of it to-morrow.'  So he seized a loaf when no one was looking and stowed it away under his tunic.  No sooner had he done so than the wounded Giant limped up to him and whispered softly, 'Herd-boy, where are you?' 'Here I am,' replied the youth.  'Then hold on to me,' said the Giant, 'so that I may lead you up above again.'  So the Herd-boy held on to the Giant, and in a few moments he found himself on the earth once more, but the Giant had vanished.  The Herd-boy returned to his sheep, and took off the invisible belt which he hid carefully in his bag.

The next morning the lad felt hungry, and thought he would cut off a piece of the loaf he had carried away from the Giants' wedding feast, and eat it.  But although he tried with all his might, he couldn't cut off the smallest piece.  Then in despair he bit the loaf, and what was his astonishment when a piece of gold fell out of his mouth and rolled at his feet.  He bit the bread a second and third time, and each time a piece of gold fell out of his mouth; but the bread remained untouched.  The Herd-boy was

[p. 77]

very much delighted over his stroke of good fortune, and, hiding the magic loaf in his bag, he hurried off to the nearest village to buy himself something to eat, and then returned to his sheep.

Now the Lord whose sheep the Herd-boy looked after had a very lovely daughter, who always smiled and nodded to the youth when she walked with her father in his fields.  For a long time the Herd-boy had made up his mind to prepare a surprise for this beautiful creature on her birthday.  So when the day approached he put on his invisible belt, took a sack of gold pieces with him, and slipping into her room in the middle of the night, he placed the bag of gold beside her bed and returned to his sheep.  The girl's joy was great, and so was her parents' next day when they found the sack full of gold pieces.  The Herd-boy was so pleased to think what pleasure he had given that the next night he placed another bag of gold beside the girl's bed.  And this he continued to do for seven nights, and the girl and her parents made up their minds that it must be a good Fairy who brought the gold every night.  But one night they determined to watch, and see from their hiding place who the bringer of the sack of gold really was.

On the eighth night a fearful storm of wind and rain came on while the Herd-boy was on his way to bring the beautiful girl another bag of gold.  Then for the first time he noticed, just as he reached his master's house, that he had forgotten the belt which made him invisible.  He didn't like the idea of going back to his hut in the wind and wet, so he just stepped as he was into the girl's room, laid the sack of gold beside her, and was turning to leave the room, when his master confronted him and said, 'You young rogue, so you were going to steal the gold that a good Fairy brings every night, were you?'  The Herd-boy was so taken aback by his words, that he stood trembling before him, and did not dare to explain his presence.  Then his master spoke.  'As you have hitherto always behaved well in my service I will not send you to prison; but leave your place instantly and never let me see your face again.'  So the Herd-boy went back to his hut, and taking his loaf and belt with him, he went to the nearest town.  There he bought himself some fine clothes, and a beautiful coach with four horses, hired two servants, and drove back to his master.  You may imagine how astonished he was to see his Herd-boy returning to him in this manner!  Then the youth told him of the piece of good luck that had befallen him, and asked him for the hand of his beautiful daughter.  This was readily granted, and the two lived in peace and happiness to the end of their lives.

Footnotes

^75:1 From the Bukowniaer. Von Wliolocki.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

[p. 78]

THE INVISIBLE PRINCE

Once upon a time there lived a Fairy who had power over the earth, the sea, fire, and the air; and this Fairy had four sons.  The eldest, who was quick and lively, with a vivid imagination, she made Lord of Fire, which was in her opinion the noblest of all the elements.  To the second son, whose wisdom and prudence made amends for his being rather dull, she gave the government of the earth.  The third was wild and savage, and of monstrous stature; and the Fairy, his mother, who was ashamed of his defects, hoped to hide them by creating him King of the Seas.  The youngest, who was the slave of his passions and of a very uncertain temper, became Prince of the Air.

Being the youngest, he was naturally his mother's favourite; but this did not blind her to his weaknesses, and she foresaw that some day he would suffer much pain through falling in love.  So she thought the best thing she could do was to bring him up with a horror of women; and, to her great delight, she saw this dislike only increased as he grew older.  From his earliest childhood he heard nothing but stories of princes who had fallen into all sorts of troubles through love; and she drew such terrible pictures of poor little Cupid that the young man had no difficulty in believing that he was the root of all evil.

All the time that this wise mother could spare from filling her son with hatred for all womenkind she passed in giving him a love of the pleasures of the chase, which henceforth became his chief joy.  For his amusement she had made a new forest, planted with the most splendid trees, and turned loose in it every animal that could be found in any of the four quarters of the globe.  In the midst of this forest she built a palace which had not its equal for beauty in the whole world, and then she considered that she had done enough to make any prince happy.

Now it is all very well to abuse the God of Love, but a man

[p. 79]

cannot struggle against his fate.  In his secret heart the Prince got tired of his mother's constant talk on this subject; and when one day she quitted the palace to attend to some business, begging him never to go beyond the grounds, he at once jumped at the chance of disobeying her.

Left to himself the Prince soon forgot the wise counsels of his mother, and feeling very much bored with his own company, he ordered some of the spirits of the air to carry him to the court of a neighbouring sovereign.  This kingdom was situated in the Island of Roses, where the climate is so delicious that the grass is always green and the flowers always sweet.  The waves, instead of beating on the rocks, seemed to die gently on the shore; clusters of golden bushes covered the land, and the vines were bent low with grapes.

The King of this island had a daughter named Rosalie, who was more lovely than any girl in the whole world.  No sooner had the eyes of the Prince of the Air rested on her than he forgot all the terrible woes which had been prophesied to him ever since he was born, for in one single moment the plans of years are often upset.  He instantly began to think how best to make himself happy, and the shortest way that occurred to him was to have Rosalie carried off by his attendant spirits.

It is easy to imagine the feelings of the King when he found that his daughter had vanished.  He wept her loss night and day, and his only comfort was to talk over it with a young and unknown prince, who had just arrived at the Court.  Alas!  he did not know what a deep interest the stranger had in Rosalie, for he too had seen her, and had fallen a victim to her charms.

One day the King, more sorrowful than usual, was walking sadly along the sea-shore, when after a long silence the unknown Prince, who was his only companion, suddenly spoke.  'There is no evil without a remedy,' he said to the unhappy father; 'and if you will promise me your daughter in marriage, I will undertake to bring her back to you.'

'You are trying to soothe me by vain promises,' answered the King.  'Did I not see her caught up into the air, in spite of cries which would have softened the heart of any one but the barbarian who has robbed me of her?  The unfortunate girl is pining away in some unknown land, where perhaps no foot of man has ever trod, and I shall see her no more.  But go, generous stranger; bring back Rosalie if you can, and live happy with her ever after in this country, of which I now declare you heir.'

[p. 80]

Although the stranger's name and rank were unknown to Rosalie's father, he was really the son of the King of the Golden Isle, which had for capital a city that extended from one sea to another.  The walls, washed by the quiet waters, were covered with gold, which made one think of the yellow sands.  Above them was a rampart of orange and lemon trees, and all the streets were paved with gold.

The King of this beautiful island had one son, for whom a life of adventure had been foretold at his birth.  This so frightened his father and mother that in order to comfort them a Fairy, who happened to be present at the time, produced a little pebble which she told them to keep for the Prince till he grew up, as by putting it in his mouth he would become invisible, as long as he did not try to speak, for if he did the stone would lose all its virtue.  In this way the good fairy hoped that the Prince would be protected against all dangers.

No sooner did the Prince begin to grow out of boyhood than he longed to see if the other countries of the world were as splendid as the one in which he lived.  So, under pretence of visiting some small islands that belonged to his father, he set out.  But a frightful storm drove his ship on to unknown shores, where most of his followers were put to death by the savages, and the Prince himself only managed to escape by making use of his magic pebble.  By this means he passed through the midst of them unseen, and wandered on till he reached the coast, where he re-embarked on board his ship.

The first land he sighted was the Island of Roses, and he went at once to the court of the King, Rosalie's father.  The moment his eyes beheld the Princess, he fell in love with her like everyone else.

He had already spent several months in this condition when the Prince of the Air whirled her away, to the grief and despair of every man on the island.  But sad though everybody was, the Prince of the Golden Isle was perfectly inconsolable, and he passed both days and nights in bemoaning his loss.

'Alas!' he cried; 'shall I never see my lovely Princess again?' Who knows where she may be, and what fairy may have her in his keeping?  I am only a man, but I am strong in my love, and I will seek the whole world through till I find her.'

So saying, he left the court, and made ready for his journey.

He travelled many weary days without hearing a single word of

[p. 81]

the lost Princess, till one morning, as he was walking through a thick forest, he suddenly perceived a magnificent palace standing at the end of a pine avenue, and his heart bounded to think that he might be gazing on Rosalie's prison.  He hastened his steps, and quickly arrived at the gate of the palace, which was formed of a single agate.  The gate swung open to let him through, and he next passed successively three courts, surrounded by deep ditches filled with running water, with birds of brilliant plumage flying about the banks.  Everything around was rare and beautiful, but the Prince scarcely raised his eyes to all these wonders.  He thought only of the Princess and where he should find her, but in vain he opened every door and searched in every corner; he neither saw Rosalie nor anyone else.  At last there was no place left for him to search but a little wood, which contained in the centre a sort of hall built entirely of orange-trees, with four small rooms opening out of the corners.  Three of these were empty except for statues and wonderful things, but in the fourth the Invisible Prince caught sight of Rosalie.  His joy at beholding her again was, however, somewhat lessened by seeing that the Prince of the Air was kneeling at her feet, and pleading his own cause.  But it was in vain that he implored her to listen; she only shook her head.  'No,' was all she would say; 'you snatched me from my father whom I loved, and all the splendour in the world can never console me.  Go!  I can never feel anything towards you but hate and contempt.'  With these words she turned away and entered her own apartments.

Unknown to herself the Invisible Prince had followed her, but fearing to be discovered by the Princess in the presence of others, he made up his mind to wait quietly till dark; and employed the long hours in writing a poem to the Princess, which he laid on the bed beside her.  This done, he thought of nothing but how best to deliver Rosalie, and he resolved to take advantage of a visit which the Prince of the Air paid every year to his mother and brothers in order to strike the blow.

One day Rosalie was sitting alone in her room thinking of her troubles when she suddenly saw a pen get up from off the desk and begin to write all by itself on a sheet of white paper.  As she did not know that it was guided by an invisible hand she was very much astonished, and the moment that the pen had ceased to move she instantly went over to the table, where she found some lovely verses, telling her that another shared her distresses, whatever they might be, and loved her with all his heart; and that he would never

[p. 82]

rest until he had delivered her from the hands of the man she hated.  Thus encouraged, she told him all her story, and of the arrival of a young stranger in her father's palace, whose looks had so charmed her that since that day she had thought of no one else.  At these words the Prince could contain himself no longer.  He took the pebble from his mouth, and flung himself at Rosalie's feet.

When they had got over the first rapture of meeting they began

[p. 83]

to make plans to escape from the power of the Prince of the Air.  But this did not prove easy, for the magic stone would only serve for one person at a time, and in order to save Rosalie the Prince of the Golden Isle would have to expose himself to the fury of his enemy.  But Rosalie would not hear of this.

'No, Prince,' she said; 'since you are here this island no longer feels a prison.  Besides, you are under the protection of a Fairy, who always visits your father's court at this season.  Go instantly and seek her, and when she is found implore the gift of another stone with similar powers.  Once you have that, there will be no further difficulty in the way of escape.'

The Prince of the Air returned a few days later from his mother's palace, but the Invisible Prince had already set out.  He had, however, entirely forgotten the road by which he had come, and lost himself for so long in the forest, that when at last he reached home the Fairy had already left, and, in spite of all his grief, there was nothing for it but to wait till the Fairy's next visit, and allow Rosalie to suffer three months longer.  This thought drove him to despair, and he had almost made up his mind to return to the place of her captivity, when one day, as he was strolling along an alley in the woods, he saw a huge oak open its trunk, and out of it step two Princes in earnest conversation.  As our hero had the magic stone in his mouth they imagined themselves alone, and did not lower their voices.

'What!' said one, 'are you always going to allow yourself to be tormented by a passion which can never end happily, and in your whole kingdom can you find nothing else to satisfy you?'

'What is the use,' replied the other, 'of being Prince of the Gnomes, and having a mother who is queen over all the four elements, if I cannot win the love of the Princess Argentine?  From the moment that I first saw her, sitting in the forest surrounded by flowers, I have never ceased to think of her night and day, and, although I love her, I am quite convinced that she will never care for me.  You know that I have in my palace the cabinets of the years.  In the first, great mirrors reflect the past; in the second, we contemplate the present; in the third, the future can be read.  It was here that I fled after I had gazed on the Princess Argentine, but instead of love I only saw scorn and contempt.  Think how great must be my devotion, when, in spite of my fate, I still love on!'

Now the Prince of the Golden Isle was enchanted with this

[p. 84]

conversation, for the Princess Argentine was his sister, and he hoped, by means of her influence over the Prince of the Gnomes, to obtain from his brother the release of Rosalie.  So he joyfully returned to his father's palace, where he found his friend the Fairy, who at once presented him with a magic pebble like his own.  As may be imagined, he lost no time in setting out to deliver Rosalie, and travelled so fast that he soon arrived at the forest, in the midst of which she lay a captive.  But though he found the palace he did not find Rosalie.  He hunted high and low, but there was no sign of her, and his despair was so great that he was ready, a thousand times over, to take his own life.  At last he remembered the conversation of the two Princes about the cabinets of the years, and that if he could manage to reach the oak tree, he would be certain to discover what had become of Rosalie.  Happily, he soon found out the secret of the passage and entered the cabinet of the present, where he saw reflected in the mirrors the unfortunate Rosalie sitting on the floor weeping bitterly, and surrounded with genii, who never left her night or day.

This sight only increased the misery of the Prince, for he did not know where the castle was, nor how to set about finding it.  However, he resolved to seek the whole world through till he came to the right place.  He began by setting sail in a favourable wind, but his bad luck followed him even on the sea.  He had scarcely lost sight of the land when a violent storm arose, and after several hours of beating about, the vessel was driven on to some rocks, on which it dashed itself to bits.  The Prince was fortunate enough to be able to lay hold of a floating spar, and contrived to keep himself afloat; and, after a long struggle with the winds and waves, he was cast upon a strange island.  But what was his surprise, on reaching the shore, to hear sounds of the most heartrending distress, mingled with the sweetest songs which had ever charmed him!  His curiosity was instantly roused, and he advanced cautiously till he saw two huge dragons guarding the gate of a wood.  They were terrible indeed to look upon.  Their bodies were covered with glittering scales; their curly tails extended far over the land; flames darted from their mouths and noses, and their eyes would have made the bravest shudder; but as the Prince was invisible and they did not see him, he slipped past them into the wood.  He found himself at once in a labyrinth, and wandered about for a long time without meeting anyone; in fact, the only sight he saw was a circle of human hands, sticking out of the ground above the

[p. 85]

wrist, each with a bracelet of gold, on which a name was written.  The farther he advanced in the labyrinth the more curious he became, till he was stopped by two corpses lying in the midst of a cypress alley, each with a scarlet cord round his neck and a bracelet on his arm on which were engraved their own names, and those of two Princesses.

[p. 86]

The invisible Prince recognised these dead men as Kings of two large islands near his own home, but the names of the Princesses were unknown to him.  He grieved for their unhappy fate, and at once proceeded to bury them; but no sooner had he laid them in their graves, than their hands started up through the earth and remained sticking up like those of their fellows.

The Prince went on his way, thinking about this strange adventure, when suddenly at the turn of the walk he perceived a tall man whose face was the picture of misery, holding in his hands a silken cord of the exact colour of those round the necks of the dead men.  A few steps further this man came up with another as miserable to the full as he himself; they silently embraced, and then without a word passed the cords round their throats, and fell dead side by side.  In vain the Prince rushed to their assistance and strove to undo the cord.  He could not loosen it; so he buried them like the others and continued his path.

He felt, however, that great prudence was necessary, or he himself might become the victim of some enchantment; and he was thankful to slip past the dragons, and enter a beautiful park, with clear streams and sweet flowers, and a crowd of men and maidens.  But he could not forget the terrible things he had seen, and hoped eagerly for a clue to the mystery.  Noticing two young people talking together, he drew near thinking that he might get some explanation of what puzzled him.  And so he did.

'You swear,' said the Prince, 'that you will love me till you die, but I fear your faithless heart, and I feel that I shall soon have to seek the Fairy Despair, ruler of half this island.  She carries off the lovers who have been cast away by their mistresses, and wish to have done with life.  She places them in a labyrinth where they are condemned to walk for ever, with a bracelet on their arms and a cord round their necks, unless they meet another as miserable as themselves.  Then the cord is pulled and they lie where they fall, till they are buried by the first passer by.  Terrible as this death would be,' added the Prince, 'it would be sweeter than life if I had lost your love.'

The sight of all these happy lovers only made the Prince grieve the more, and he wandered along the seashore spending his days; but one day he was sitting on a rock bewailing his fate, and the impossibility of leaving the island, when all in a moment the sea appeared to raise itself nearly to the skies, and the caves echoed with hideous screams.  As he looked a woman rose from the depths

[p. 87]

of the sea, flying madly before a furious giant.  The cries she uttered softened the heart of the Prince; he took the stone from his mouth, and drawing his sword he rushed after the giant, so as to give the lady time to escape.  But hardly had he come within reach of the enemy, than the giant touched him with a ring that he held in his hand, and the Prince remained immovable where he stood.  The giant then hastily rejoined his prey, and, seizing her in his arms, he plunged her into the sea.  Then he sent some tritons to bind chains about the Prince of the Golden Isle, and he too felt himself borne to the depths of the ocean, and without the hope of ever again seeing the Princess.

Now the giant whom the invisible had so rashly attacked was the Lord of the Sea, and the third son of the Queen of the Elements, and he had touched the youth with a magic ring which enabled a mortal to live under water.  So the Prince of the Golden Isle found, when bound in chains by the tritons, he was carried through the homes of strange monsters and past immense seaweed forests, till he reached a vast sandy space, surrounded by huge rocks.  On the tallest of the rocks sat the giant as on a throne.

'Rash mortal,' said he, when the Prince was dragged before him, 'you have deserved death, but you shall live only to suffer more cruelly.  Go, and add to the number of those whom it is my pleasure to torture.'

At these words the unhappy Prince found himself tied to a rock; but he was not alone in his misfortunes, for all round him were chained Princes and Princesses, whom the giant had led captive.  Indeed, it was his chief delight to create a storm, in order to add to the list of his prisoners.

As his hands were fastened, it was impossible for the Prince of the Golden Isle to make use of his magic stone, and he passed his nights and days dreaming of Rosalie.  But at last the time came when the giant took it into his head to amuse himself by arranging fights between some of his captives.  Lots were drawn, and one fell upon our Prince, whose chains were immediately loosened.  The moment he was set free, he snatched up his stone, and became invisible.

The astonishment of the giant at the sudden disappearance of the Prince may well be imagined.  He ordered all the passages to be watched, but it was too late, for the Prince had already glided between two rocks.  He wandered for a long while through the forests, where he met nothing but fearful monsters; he climbed rock

[p. 88]

after rock, steered his way from tree to tree, till at length he arrived at the edge of the sea, at the foot of a mountain that he remembered to have seen in the cabinet of the present, where Rosalie was held captive.

Filled with joy, he made his way to the top of the mountain which pierced the clouds, and there he found a palace.  He entered, and in the middle of a long gallery he discovered a crystal room, in the midst of which sat Rosalie, guarded night and day by genii.  There was no door anywhere, nor any window.  At this sight the Prince became more puzzled than ever, for he did not know how he was to warn Rosalie of his return.  Yet it broke his heart to see her weeping from dawn till dark.

One day, as Rosalie was walking up and down her room, she was surprised to see that the crystal which served for a wall had grown cloudy, as if some one had breathed on it, and, what was more, wherever she moved the brightness of the crystal always became clouded.  This was enough to cause the Princess to suspect that her lover had returned.  In order to set the Prince of the Air's mind at rest she began by being very gracious to him, so that when she begged that her captivity might be a little lightened she should not be refused.  At first the only favour she asked was to be allowed to walk for one hour every day up and down the long gallery.  This was granted, and the Invisible Prince speedily took the opportunity of handing her the stone, which she at once slipped into her mouth.  No words can paint the fury of her captor at her disappearance.  He ordered the spirits of the air to fly through all space, and to bring back Rosalie wherever she might be.  They instantly flew off to obey his commands, and spread themselves over the whole earth.

Meantime Rosalie and the Invisible Prince had reached, hand in hand, a door of the gallery which led through a terrace into the gardens.  In silence they glided along, and thought themselves already safe, when a furious monster dashed itself by accident against Rosalie and the Invisible Prince, and in her fright she let go his hand.  No one can speak as long as he is invisible, and besides, they knew that the spirits were all around them, and at the slightest sound they would be recognised; so all they could do was to feel about in the hope that their hands might once more meet.

But, alas!  the joy of liberty lasted but a short time.  The Princess, having wandered in vain up and down the forest, stopped at last on the edge of a fountain.  As she walked she wrote on the

[p. 89]

trees: 'If ever the Prince, my lover, comes this way, let him know that it is here I dwell, and that I sit daily on the edge of this fountain, mingling my tears with its waters.'

These words were read by one of the genii, who repeated them to his master.  The Prince of the Air, in his turn making himself invisible, was led to the fountain, and waited for Rosalie.  When she drew near he held out his hand, which she grasped eagerly, taking it for that of her lover; and, seizing his opportunity, the Prince passed a cord round her arms, and throwing off his invisibility cried to his spirits to drag her into the lowest pit.

It was at this moment that the Invisible Prince appeared, and at the sight of the Prince of the Genii mounting into the air, holding a silken cord, he guessed instantly that he was carrying off Rosalie.

He felt so overwhelmed by despair that he thought for an instant of putting an end to his life.  'Can I survive my misfortunes?' he cried.  'I fancied I had come to an end of my troubles, and now they are worse than ever.  What will become of me?  Never can I discover the place where this monster will hide Rosalie.'

The unhappy youth had determined to let himself die, and indeed his sorrow alone was enough to kill him, when the thought that by means of the cabinets of the years he might find out where the Princess was imprisoned, gave him a little ray of comfort.  So he continued to walk on through the forest, and after some hours he arrived at the gate of a temple, guarded by two huge lions.  Being invisible, he was able to enter unharmed.  In the middle of the temple was an altar, on which lay a book, and behind the altar hung a great curtain.  The Prince approached the altar and opened the book, which contained the names of all the lovers in the world: and in it he read that Rosalie had been carried off by the Prince of the Air to an abyss which had no entrance except the one that lay by way of the Fountain of Gold.

Now, as the Prince had not the smallest idea where this fountain was to be found, it might be thought that he was not much nearer Rosalie than before.  This was not, however, the view taken by the Prince.

'Though every step that I take may perhaps lead me further from her,' he said to himself, 'I am still thankful to know that she is alive somewhere.'

On leaving the temple the Invisible Prince saw six paths lying before him, each of which led through the wood.  He was

[p. 90]

hesitating which to choose, when he suddenly beheld two people coming towards him, down the track which lay most to his right.  They turned out to be the Prince Gnome and his friend, and the sudden desire to get some news of his sister, Princess Argentine, caused the Invisible Prince to follow them and to listen to their conversation.

'Do you think,' the Prince Gnome was saying, 'do you think that I would not break my chains if I could?  I know that the Princess Argentine will never love me, yet each day I feel her dearer still.  And as if this were not enough, I have the horror of feeling that she probably loves another.  So I have resolved to put myself out of my pain by means of the Golden Fountain.  A single drop of its water falling on the sand around will trace the name of my rival in her heart.  I dread the test, and yet this very dread convinces me of my misfortune.'

It may be imagined that after listening to these words the Invisible Prince followed Prince Gnome like his shadow, and after walking some time they arrived at the Golden Fountain.  The unhappy lover stooped down with a sigh, and dipping his finger in the water let fall a drop on the sand.  It instantly wrote the name of Prince Flame, his brother.  The shock of this discovery was so real, that Prince Gnome sank fainting into the arms of his friend.

Meanwhile the Invisible Prince was turning over in his mind how he could best deliver Rosalie.  As, since he had been touched by the Giant's ring, he had the power to live in the water as well as on land, he at once dived into the fountain.  He perceived in one corner a door leading into the mountain, and at the foot of the mountain was a high rock on which was fixed an iron ring with a cord attached.  The Prince promptly guessed that the cord was used to chain the Princess, and drew his sword and cut it.  In a moment he felt the Princess's hand in his, for she had always kept her magic pebble in her mouth, in spite of the prayers and entreaties of the Prince of the Air to make herself visible.

So hand in hand the invisible Prince and Rosalie crossed the mountain; but as the Princess had no power of living under water, she could not pass the Golden Fountain.  Speechless and invisible they clung together on the brink, trembling at the frightful tempest the Prince of the Air had raised in his fury.  The storm had already lasted many days when tremendous heat began to make itself felt.  The lightning flashed, the thunder rattled, fire bolts fell from heaven, burning up the forests and even the fields of corn.  In one

[p. 91]

instant the very streams were dried up, and the Prince, seizing his opportunity, carried the Princess over the Golden Fountain.

It took them a long time still to reach the Golden Isle, but at last they got there, and we may be quite sure they never wanted to leave it any more.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

[p. 92]

THE CROW [*1]

Once upon a time there were three Princesses who were all three young and beautiful; but the youngest, although she was not fairer than the other two, was the most loveable of them all.

About half a mile from the palace in which they lived there stood a castle, which was uninhabited and almost a ruin, but the garden which surrounded it was a mass of blooming flowers, and in this garden the youngest Princess used often to walk.

One day when she was pacing to and fro under the lime trees, a black crow hopped out of a rose-bush in front of her.  The poor beast was all torn and bleeding, and the kind little Princess was quite unhappy about it.  When the crow saw this it turned to her and said:

'I am not really a black crow, but an enchanted Prince, who has been doomed to spend his youth in misery.  If you only liked, Princess, you could save me.  But you would have to say good-bye to all your own people and come and be my constant companion in this ruined castle.  There is one habitable room in it, in which there is a golden bed; there you will have to live all by yourself, and don't forget that whatever you may see or hear in the night you must not scream out, for if you give as much as a single cry my sufferings will be doubled.'

The good-natured Princess at once left her home and her family and hurried to the ruined castle, and took possession of the room with the golden bed.

When night approached she lay down, but though she shut her eyes tight sleep would not come.  At midnight she heard to her great horror some one coming along the passage, and in a minute her door was flung wide open and a troop of strange beings entered the room.  They at once proceeded to light a fire in the huge fireplace;

[p. 93]

then they placed a great cauldron of boiling water on it.  When they had done this, they approached the bed on which the trembling girl lay, and, screaming and yelling all the time, they dragged her towards the cauldron.  She nearly died with fright, but she never uttered a sound.  Then of a sudden the cock crew, and all the evil spirits vanished.

At the same moment the crow appeared and hopped all round the room with joy.  It thanked the Princess most heartily for her goodness, and said that its sufferings had already been greatly lessened.

Now one of the Princess's elder sisters, who was very inquisitive, had found out about everything, and went to pay her youngest sister a visit in the ruined castle.  She implored her so urgently to let her spend the night with her in the golden bed, that at last the good-natured little Princess consented.  But at midnight, when the odd folk appeared, the elder sister screamed with terror, and from this time on the youngest Princess insisted always on keeping watch alone.

So she lived in solitude all the daytime, and at night she would have been frightened, had she not been so brave; but every

[p. 94]

day the crow came and thanked her for her endurance, and assured her that his sufferings were far less than they had been.

And so two years passed away, when one day the crow came to the Princess and said: 'In another year I shall be freed from the spell I am under at present, because then the seven years will be over.  But before I can resume my natural form, and take possession of the belongings of my forefathers, you must go out into the world and take service as a maidservant.'

The young Princess consented at once, and for a whole year she served as a maid; but in spite of her youth and beauty she was very badly treated, and suffered many things.  One evening, when she was spinning flax, and had worked her little white hands weary, she heard a rustling beside her and a cry of joy.  Then she saw a handsome youth standing beside her; who knelt down at her feet and kissed the little weary white hands.

'I am the Prince,' he said, 'who you in your goodness, when I was wandering about in the shape of a black crow, freed from the most awful torments.  Come now to my castle with me, and let us live there happily together.'

So they went to the castle where they had both endured so much.  But when they reached it, it was difficult to believe that it was the same, for it had all been rebuilt and done up again.  And there they lived for a hundred years, a hundred years of joy and happiness.

Footnotes

^92:1 From the Polish. Kletke.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

[p. 95]

HOW SIX MEN TRAVELLED THROUGH THE WIDE WORLD

There was once upon a time a man who understood all sorts of arts; he served in the war, and bore himself bravely and well; but when the war was over, he got his discharge, and set out on his travels with three farthings of his pay in his pocket.  'Wait,' he said; 'that does not please me; only let me find the right people, and the King shall yet give me all the treasures of his kingdom.'  He strode angrily into the forest, and there he saw a man standing who had uprooted six trees as if they were straws.  He said to him, 'Will you be my servant and travel with me?'

'Yes,' he answered; 'but first of all I will take this little bundle of sticks home to my mother,' and he took one of the trees and wound it round the other five, raised the bundle on his shoulders and bore it off.  Then he came back and went with his master, who said, 'We two ought to be able to travel through the wide world!'  And when they had gone a little way they came upon a hunter, who was on his knees, his gun on his shoulder, aiming at something.  The master said to him, 'Hunter, what are you aiming at?'

He answered, 'Two miles from this place sits a fly on a branch of an oak; I want to shoot out its left eye.'

'Oh, go with me,' said the man; 'if we three are together we shall easily travel through the wide world.'

The hunter agreed and went with him, and they came to seven windmills whose sails were going round quite fast, and yet there was not a breath of wind, nor was a leaf moving.  The man said, 'I don't know what is turning those windmills; there is not the slightest breeze blowing.'  So he walked on with his servants, and when they had gone two miles they saw a man sitting on a tree, holding one of his nostrils and blowing out of the other.

'Fellow, what are you puffing at up there?' asked the man.

[p. 96]

He replied, 'Two miles from this place are standing seven windmills; see, I am blowing to drive them round.'

'Oh, go with me,' said the man; 'if we four are together we shall easily travel through the wide world.'

So the blower got down and went with him, and after a time they saw a man who was standing on one leg, and had unstrapped the other and laid it near him.  Then said the master, 'You have made yourself very comfortable to rest!'

'I am a runner,' answered he; 'and so that I shall not go too quickly, I have unstrapped one leg; when I run with two legs, I go faster than a bird flies.'

'Oh, go with me; if we five are together, we shall easily travel through the wide world.'  So he went with him, and, not long afterwards, they met a man who wore a little hat, but he had it slouched over one ear.

'Manners, manners!' said the master to him; 'don't hang your hat over one ear; you look like a madman!'

'I dare not,' said the other, 'for if I were to put my hat on straight, there would come such a frost that the very birds in the sky would freeze and fall dead on the earth.'

'Oh, go with me,' said the master; 'if we six are together, we shall easily travel through the wide world.

Now the Six came to a town in which the King had proclaimed that whoever should run with his daughter in a race, and win, should become her husband; but if he lost, he must lose his head.  This was reported to the man who declared he would compete, 'but,' he said, 'I shall let my servant run for me.'

The King replied, 'Then both your heads must be staked, and your head and his must be guaranteed for the winner.'

When this was agreed upon and settled, the man strapped on the runner's other leg, saying to him, 'Now be nimble, and see that we win!'  It was arranged that whoever should first bring water out of a stream a long way off, should be the victor.  Then the runner got a pitcher, and the King's daughter another, and they began to run at the same time; but in a moment, when the King's daughter was only just a little way off, no spectator could see the runner, and it seemed as if the wind had whistled past.  In a short time he reached the stream, filled his pitcher with water, and turned round again.  But, half way home, a great drowsiness came over him; he put down his pitcher, lay down, and fell asleep.  He had, however, put a horse's skull which was lying on the ground, for

[p. 97]

his pillow, so that he should not be too comfortable and might soon wake up.

In the meantime the King's daughter, who could also run well, as well as an ordinary man could, reached the stream, and hastened back with her pitcher full of water.  When she saw the runner lying there asleep, she was delighted, and said, 'My enemy is given into my hands!' She emptied his pitcher and ran on.

Everything now would have been lost, if by good luck the hunter had not been standing on the castle tower and had seen everything with his sharp eyes.

'Ah,' said he, 'the King's daughter shall not overreach us;' and, loading his gun, he shot so cleverly, that he shot away the horse's skull from under the runner's head, without its hurting him.  Then the runner awoke, jumped up, and saw that his pitcher was empty and the King's daughter far ahead.  But he did not lose courage, and ran back to the stream with his pitcher, filled it once more with water, and was home ten minutes before the King's daughter arrived.

'Look,' said he, 'I have only just exercised my legs; that was nothing of a run.'

[p. 98]

But the King was angry, and his daughter even more so, that she should be carried away by a common, discharged soldier.  They consulted together how they could destroy both him and his companions.

'Then,' said the King to her, 'I have found a way.  Don't be frightened; they shall not come home again.'  He said to them, 'You must now make merry together, and eat and drink,' and he led them into a room which had a floor of iron; the doors were also of iron, and the windows were barred with iron.  In the room was a table spread with delicious food.  The King said to them, 'Go in and enjoy yourselves,' and as soon as they were inside he had the doors shut and bolted.  Then he made the cook come, and ordered him to keep up a large fire under the room until the iron was red-hot.  The cook did so, and the Six sitting round the table felt it grow very warm, and they thought this was because of their good fare; but when the heat became still greater and they wanted to go out, but found the doors and windows fastened, then they knew that the King meant them harm and was trying to suffocate them.

'But he shall not succeed,' cried he of the little hat, 'I will make a frost come which shall make the fire ashamed and die out!' So he put his hat on straight, and at once there came such a frost that all the heat disappeared and the food on the dishes began to freeze.  When a couple of hours had passed, and the King thought they must be quite dead from the heat, he had the doors opened and went in himself to see.

But when the doors were opened, there stood all Six, alive and well, saying they were glad they could come out to warm themselves, for the great cold in the room had frozen all the food hard in the dishes.  Then the King went angrily to the cook, and scolded him, and asked him why he had not done what he was told.

But the cook answered, 'There is heat enough there; see for yourself.'  Then the King saw a huge fire burning under the iron room, and understood that he could do no harm to the Six in this way.  The King now began again to think how he could free himself from his unwelcome guests.  He commanded the master to come before him, and said, 'If you will take gold, and give up your right to my daughter, you shall have as much as you like.'

'Oh, yes, your Majesty,' answered he, 'give me as much as my servant can carry, and I will give up your daughter.'

The King was delighted, and the man said, 'I will come and fetch it in fourteen days.'

[p. 98a]

Then he called all the tailors in the kingdom together, and made them sit down for fourteen days sewing at a sack.  When it was finished, he made the strong man who had uprooted the trees take the sack on his shoulder and go with him to the King.  Then the King said, 'What a powerful fellow that is, carrying that bale of linen as large as a house on

[p. 99]

his shoulder!' and he was much frightened, and thought 'What a lot of gold he will make away with!'  Then he had a ton of gold brought, which sixteen of the strongest men had to carry; but the strong man seized it with one hand, put it in the sack, saying, 'Why don't you bring me more?  That scarcely covers the bottom!'  Then the King had to send again and again to fetch his treasures, which the strong man shoved into the sack, and the sack was only half full.

'Bring more,' he cried, 'these crumbs don't fill it.'  So seven thousand waggons of the gold of the whole kingdom were driven up; these the strong man shoved into the sack, oxen and all.

'I will no longer be particular,' he said, 'and will take what comes, so that the sack shall be full.'

When everything was put in and there was not yet enough, he said, 'I will make an end of this; it is easy to fasten a sack when it is not full.'  Then he threw it on his back and went with his companions.

Now, when the King saw how a single man was carrying away the wealth of the whole country he was very angry, and made his cavalry mount and pursue the Six, and bring back the strong man with the sack.  Two regiments soon overtook them, and called to them, 'You are prisoners! lay down the sack of gold or you shall be cut down.'

'What do you say?' said the blower, 'we are prisoners?  Before that, you shall dance in the air!'  And he held one nostril and blew with the other at the two regiments; they were separated and blown away in the blue sky over the mountains, one this way, and the other that.  A sergeant-major cried for mercy, saying he had nine wounds, and was a brave fellow, and did not deserve this disgrace.  So the blower let him off, and he came down without hurt.  Then he said to him, 'Now go home to the King, and say that if he sends any more cavalry I will blow them all into the air.'

When the King received the message, he said, 'Let the fellows go; they are bewitched.'  Then the Six brought the treasure home, shared it among themselves, and lived contentedly till the end of their days.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

[p. 100]

THE WIZARD KING [*1]

In very ancient times there lived a King, whose power lay not only in the vast extent of his dominions, but also in the magic secrets of which he was master.  After spending the greater part of his early youth in pleasure, he met a Princess of such remarkable beauty that he at once asked her hand in marriage, and, having obtained it, considered himself the happiest of men.

After a year's time a son was born, worthy in every way of such distinguished parents, and much admired by the whole Court.  As soon as the Queen thought him strong enough for a journey she set out with him secretly to visit her Fairy godmother.  I said secretly, because the Fairy had warned the Queen that the King was a magician; and as from time immemorial there had been a standing feud between the Fairies and the Wizards, he might not have approved of his wife's visit.

The Fairy godmother, who took the deepest interest in all the Queen's concerns, and who was much pleased with the little Prince, endowed him with the power of pleasing everybody from his cradle, as well as with a wonderful ease in learning everything which could help to make him a perfectly accomplished Prince.  Accordingly, to the delight of his teachers, he made the most rapid progress in his education, constantly surpassing everyone's expectations.  Before he was many years old, however, he had the great sorrow of losing his mother, whose last words were to advise him never to undertake anything of importance without consulting the Fairy under whose protection she had placed him.

The Prince's grief at the death of his mother was great, but it was nothing compared to that of the King, his father, who was quite inconsolable for the loss of his dear wife.  Neither time nor reason seemed to lighten his sorrow, and the sight of all the familiar faces and things about him only served to remind him of his loss.

[p. 101]

[paragraph continues] He therefore resolved to travel for change, and by means of his magic art was able to visit every country he came to see under different shapes, returning every few weeks to the place where he had left a few followers.

Having travelled from land to land in this fashion without finding anything to rivet his attention, it occurred to him to take the form of an eagle, and in this shape he flew across many countries and arrived at length in a new and lovely spot, where the air seemed filled with the scent of jessamine and orange flowers with which the ground was thickly planted.  Attracted by the sweet perfume he flew lower, and perceived some large and beautiful gardens filled with the rarest flowers, and with fountains throwing up their clear waters into the air in a hundred different shapes.  A wide stream flowed through the garden, and on it floated richly ornamented barges and gondolas filled with people dressed in the most elegant manner and covered with jewels.

In one of these barges sat the Queen of that country with her only daughter, a maiden more beautiful than the Day Star, and attended by the ladies of the Court.  No more exquisitely lovely mortal was ever seen than this Princess, and it needed all an eagle's strength of sight to prevent the King being hopelessly dazzled.  He perched on the top of a large orange tree, whence he was able to survey the scene and to gaze at pleasure on the Princess's charms.

Now, an eagle with a King's heart in his breast is apt to be bold, and accordingly he instantly made up his mind to carry off the lovely damsel, feeling sure that having once seen her he could not live without her.

He waited till he saw her in the act of stepping ashore, when, suddenly swooping down, he carried her off before her equerry in attendance had advanced to offer her his hand.  The Princess, on finding herself in an eagle's talons, uttered the most heart-breaking shrieks and cries; but her captor, though touched by her distress, would not abandon his lovely prey, and continued to fly through the air too fast to allow of his saying anything to comfort her.

At length, when he thought they had reached a safe distance, he began to lower his flight, and gradually descending to earth, deposited his burden in a flowery meadow.  He then entreated her pardon for his violence, and told her that he was about to carry her to a great kingdom over which he ruled, and where he desired she should rule with him, adding many tender and consoling expressions.

[p. 102]

For some time the Princess remained speechless; but recovering herself a little, she burst into a flood of tears.  The King, much moved, said, 'Adorable Princess, dry your tears.  I implore you.  My only wish is to make you the happiest person in the world.'

'If you speak truth, my lord,' replied the Princess, 'restore to me the liberty you have deprived me of.  Otherwise I can only look on you as my worst enemy.'  The King retorted that her opposition filled him with despair, but that he hoped to carry her to a place where all around would respect her, and where every pleasure would surround her.  So saying, he seized her once more, and in spite of all her cries he rapidly bore her off to the neighbourhood of his capital.  Here he gently placed her on a lawn, and as he did so she saw a magnificent palace spring up at her feet.  The architecture was imposing, and in the interior the rooms were handsome and furnished in the best possible taste.

The Princess, who expected to be quite alone, was pleased at

[p. 103]

finding herself surrounded by a number of pretty girls, all anxious to wait on her, whilst a brilliantly-coloured parrot said the most agreeable things in the world.

On arriving at this palace the King had resumed his own form, and though no longer young, he might well have pleased any other than this Princess, who had been so prejudiced against him by his violence that she could only regard him with feelings of hatred, which she was at no pains to conceal.  The King hoped, however, that time might not only soften her anger, but accustom her to his sight.  He took the precaution of surrounding the palace with a dense cloud, and then hastened to his Court, where his prolonged absence was causing much anxiety.

The Prince and all the courtiers were delighted to see their beloved King again, but they had to submit themselves to more frequent absences than ever on his part.  He made business a pretext for shutting himself up in his study, but it was really in order to spend the time with the Princess, who remained inflexible.

Not being able to imagine what could be the cause of so much obstinacy the King began to fear, lest, in spite of all his precautions, she might have heard of the charms of the Prince his son, whose goodness, youth and beauty, made him adored at Court.  This idea made him horribly uneasy, and he resolved to remove the cause of his fears by sending the Prince on his travels escorted by a magnificent retinue.

The Prince, after visiting several Courts, arrived at the one where the lost Princess was still deeply mourned.  The King and Queen received him most graciously, and some festivities were revived to do him honour.

One day when the Prince was visiting the Queen in her own apartments he was much struck by a most beautiful portrait.  He eagerly inquired whose it was, and the Queen, with many tears, told him it was all that was left her of her beloved daughter, who had suddenly been carried off, she knew neither where nor how.

The Prince was deeply moved, and vowed that he would search the world for the Princess, and take no rest till he had found and restored her to her mother's arms.  The Queen assured him of her eternal gratitude, and promised, should he succeed, to give him her daughter in marriage, together with all the estates she herself owned.

The Prince, far more attracted by the thoughts of possessing the

[p. 104]

[paragraph continues] Princess than her promised dower, set forth in his quest after taking leave of the King and Queen, the latter giving him a miniature of her daughter which she was in the habit of wearing.  His first act was to seek the Fairy under whose protection he had been placed, and he implored her to give him all the assistance of her art and counsel in this important matter.

After listening attentively to the whole adventure, the Fairy asked for time to consult her books.  After due consideration she informed the Prince that the object of his search was not far distant, but that it was too difficult for him to attempt to enter the enchanted palace where she was, as the King his father had surrounded it with a thick cloud, and that the only expedient she could think of would be to gain possession of the Princess's parrot.  This, she added, did not appear impossible, as it often flew about to some distance in the neighbourhood.

Having told the Prince all this, the Fairy went out in hopes of seeing the parrot, and soon returned with the bird in her hand.  She promptly shut it up in a cage, and, touching the Prince with her wand, transformed him into an exactly similar parrot; after which, she instructed him how to reach the Princess.

The Prince reached the palace in safety, but was so dazzled at first by the Princess's beauty, which far surpassed his expectations, that he was quite dumb for a time.  The Princess was surprised and anxious, and fearing the parrot, who was her greatest comfort, had fallen ill, she took him in her hand and caressed him.  This soon reassured the Prince, and encouraged him to play his part well, and he began to say a thousand agreeable things which charmed the Princess.

Presently the King appeared, and the parrot noticed with joy how much he was disliked.  As soon as the King left, the Princess retired to her dressing-room, the parrot flew after her and overheard her lamentations at the continued persecutions of the King, who had pressed her to consent to their marriage.  The parrot said so many clever and tender things to comfort her that she began to doubt whether this could indeed be her own parrot.

When he saw her well-disposed towards him, he exclaimed: 'Madam, I have a most important secret to confide to you, and I beg you not to be alarmed by what I am about to say.  I am here on behalf of the Queen your mother, with the object of delivering your Highness; to prove which, behold this portrait which she gave me herself.'  So saying he drew forth the miniature from under

[p. 105]

his wing.  The Princess's surprise was great, but after what she had seen and heard it was impossible not to indulge in hope, for she had recognised the likeness of herself which her mother always wore.

The parrot, finding she was not much alarmed, told her who he was, all that her mother had promised him and the help he had already received from a Fairy who had assured him that she would give him means to transport the Princess to her mother's arms.

[p. 106]

When he found her listening attentively to him, he implored the Princess to allow him to resume his natural shape.  She did not speak, so he drew a feather from his wing, and she beheld before her a Prince of such surpassing beauty that it was impossible not to hope that she might owe her liberty to so charming a person.

Meantime the Fairy had prepared a chariot, to which she harnessed two powerful eagles; then placing the cage, with the parrot in it, she charged the bird to conduct it to the window of the Princess's dressing-room.  This was done in a few minutes, and the Princess, stepping into the chariot with the Prince, was delighted to find her parrot again.

As they rose through the air the Princess remarked a figure mounted on an eagle's back flying in front of the chariot.  She was rather alarmed, but the Prince reassured her, telling her it was the good Fairy to whom she owed so much, and who was now conducting her in safety to her mother.

That same morning the King woke suddenly from a troubled sleep.  He had dreamt that the Princess was being carried off from him, and, transforming himself into an eagle, he flew to the palace.  When he failed to find her he flew into a terrible rage, and hastened home to consult his books, by which means he discovered that it was his son who had deprived him of this precious treasure.  Immediately he took the shape of a harpy, and, filled with rage, was determined to devour his son, and even the Princess too, if only he could overtake them.

He set out at full speed; but he started too late, and was further delayed by a strong wind which the Fairy raised behind the young couple so as to baffle any pursuit.

You may imagine the rapture with which the Queen received the daughter she had given up for lost, as well as the amiable Prince who had rescued her.  The Fairy entered with them, and warned the Queen that the Wizard King would shortly arrive, infuriated by his loss, and that nothing could preserve the Prince and Princess from his rage and magic unless they were actually married.

The Queen hastened to inform the King her husband, and the wedding took place on the spot.

As the ceremony was completed the Wizard King arrived.  His despair at being so late bewildered him so entirely that he appeared in his natural form and attempted to sprinkle some black liquid over the bride and bridegroom, which was intended to kill them, but the Fairy stretched out her wand and the liquid dropped on the Magician

[p. 107]

himself.  He fell down senseless, and the Princess's father, deeply offended at the cruel revenge which had been attempted, ordered him to be removed and locked up in prison.

Now as magicians lose all their power as soon as they are in prison, the King felt himself much embarrassed at being thus at the mercy of those he had so greatly offended.  The Prince implored and obtained his father's pardon, and the prison doors were opened.

No sooner was this done than the Wizard King was seen in the air under the form of some unknown bird, exclaiming as he flew off that he would never forgive either his son or the Fairy the cruel wrong they had done him.

Everyone entreated the Fairy to settle in the kingdom where she now was, to which she consented.  She built herself a magnificent palace, to which she transported her books and fairy secrets, and where she enjoyed the sight of the perfect happiness she had helped to bestow on the entire royal family.

Footnotes

^100:1 From Les Fees illustres.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

[p. 108]

THE NIXY [*1]

There was once upon a time a miller who was very well off, and had as much money and as many goods as he knew what to do with.  But sorrow comes in the night, and the miller all of a sudden became so poor that at last he could hardly call the mill in which he sat his own.  He wandered about all day full of despair and misery, and when he lay down at night he could get no rest, but lay awake all night sunk in sorrowful thoughts.

One morning he rose up before dawn and went outside, for he thought his heart would be lighter in the open air.  As he wandered up and down on the banks of the mill-pond he heard a rustling in the water, and when he looked near he saw a white woman rising up from the waves.

He realised at once that this could be none other than the nixy of the mill-pond, and in his terror he didn't know if he should fly away or remain where he was.  While he hesitated the nixy spoke, called him by his name, and asked him why he was so sad.

When the miller heard how friendly her tone was, he plucked up heart and told her how rich and prosperous he had been all his life up till now, when he didn't know what he was to do for want and misery.

Then the nixy spoke comforting words to him, and promised that she would make him richer and more prosperous than he had ever been in his life before, if he would give her in return the youngest thing in his house.

The miller thought she must mean one of his puppies or kittens, so promised the nixy at once what she asked, and returned to his mill full of hope.  On the threshold he was greeted by a servant with the news that his wife had just given birth to a boy.

The poor miller was much horrified by these tidings, and went in to his wife with a heavy heart to tell her and his relations of the

[p. 109]

fatal bargain he had just struck with the nixy.  'I would gladly give up all the good fortune she promised me,' he said, 'if I could only save my child.'  But no one could think of any advice to give him, beyond taking care that the child never went near the mill-pond.

[p. 110]

So the boy throve and grew big, and in the meantime all prospered with the miller, and in a few years he was richer than he had ever been before.  But all the same he did not enjoy his good fortune, for he could not forget his compact with the nixy, and he knew that sooner or later she would demand his fulfilment of it.  But year after year went by, and the boy grew up and became a great hunter, and the lord of the land took him into his service, for he was as smart and bold a hunter as you would wish to see.  In a short time he married a pretty young wife, and lived with her in great peace and happiness.

One day when he was out hunting a hare sprang up at his feet, and ran for some way in front of him in the open field.  The hunter pursued it hotly for some time, and at last shot it dead.  Then he proceeded to skin it, never noticing that he was close to the mill-pond, which from childhood up he had been taught to avoid.  He soon finished the skinning, and went to the water to wash the blood off his hands.  He had hardly dipped them in the pond when the nixy rose up in the water, and seizing him in her wet arms she dragged him down with her under the waves.

When the hunter did not come home in the evening his wife grew very anxious, and when his game bag was found close to the mill-pond she guessed at once what had befallen him.  She was nearly beside herself with grief, and roamed round and round the pond calling on her husband without ceasing.  At last, worn out with sorrow and fatigue, she fell asleep and dreamt that she was wandering along a flowery meadow, when she came to a hut where she found an old witch, who promised to restore her husband to her.

When she awoke next morning she determined to set out and find the witch; so she wandered on for many a day, and at last she reached the flowery meadow and found the hut where the old witch lived.  The poor wife told her all that had happened and how she had been told in a dream of the witch's power to help her.

The witch counselled her to go to the pond the first time there was a full moon, and to comb her black hair with a golden comb, and then to place the comb on the bank.  The hunter's wife gave the witch a handsome present, thanked her heartily, and returned home.

Time dragged heavily till the time of the full moon, but it passed at last, and as soon as it rose the young wife went to the pond, combed her black hair with a golden comb, and when she had finished, placed the comb on the bank; then she watched the water

[p. 111]

impatiently.  Soon she heard a rushing sound, and a big wave rose suddenly and swept the comb off the bank, and a minute after the head of her husband rose from the pond and gazed sadly at her.  But immediately another wave came, and the head sank back into the water without having said a word.  The pond lay still and motionless, glittering in the moonshine, and the hunter's wife was not a bit better off than she had been before.

In despair she wandered about for days and nights, and at last, worn out by fatigue, she sank once more into a deep sleep, and dreamt exactly the same dream about the old witch.  So next morning she went again to the flowery meadow and sought the witch in her hut, and told her of her grief.  The old woman counselled her to go to the mill-pond the next full moon and play upon a golden flute, and then to lay the flute on the bank.

As soon as the next moon was full the hunter's wife went to the mill-pond, played on a golden flute, and when she had finished placed it on the bank.  Then a rushing sound was heard, and a wave swept the flute off the bank, and soon the head of the hunter appeared and rose up higher and higher till he was half out of the water.  Then he gazed sadly at his wife and stretched out his arms towards her.  But another rushing wave arose and dragged him under once more.  The hunter's wife, who had stood on the bank full of joy and hope, sank into despair when she saw her husband snatched away again before her eyes.

But for her comfort she dreamt the same dream a third time, and betook herself once more to the old witch's hut in the flowery meadow.  This time the old woman told her to go the next full moon to the mill-pond, and to spin there with a golden spinning-wheel, and then to leave the spinning-wheel on the bank.

The hunter's wife did as she was advised, and the first night the moon was full she sat and spun with a golden spinning-wheel, and then left the wheel on the bank.  In a few minutes a rushing sound was heard in the waters, and a wave swept the spinning-wheel from the bank.  Immediately the head of the hunter rose up from the pond, getting higher and higher each moment, till at length he stepped on to the bank and fell on his wife's neck.

But the waters of the pond rose up suddenly, overflowed the bank where the couple stood, and dragged them under the flood.  In her despair the young wife called on the old witch to help her, and in a moment the hunter was turned into a frog and his wife into a toad.  But they were not able to remain together,

[p. 112]

for the water tore them apart, and when the flood was over they both resumed their own shapes again, but the hunter and the hunter's wife found themselves each in a strange country, and neither knew what had become of the other.

The hunter determined to become a shepherd, and his wife too became a shepherdess.  So they herded their sheep for many years in solitude and sadness.

Now it happened once that the shepherd came to the country where the shepherdess lived.  The neighbourhood pleased him, and he saw that the pasture was rich and suitable for his flocks.  So he brought his sheep there, and herded them as before.  The shepherd and shepherdess became great friends, but they did not recognise each other in the least.

[p. 113]

But one evening when the moon was full they sat together watching their flocks, and the shepherd played upon his flute.  Then the shepherdess thought of that evening when she had sat at the full moon by the mill-pond and had played on the golden flute; the recollection was too much for her, and she burst into tears.  The shepherd asked her why she was crying, and left her no peace till she told him all her story.  Then the scales fell from the shepherd's eyes, and he recognised his wife, and she him.  So they returned joyfully to their own home, and lived in peace and happiness ever after.

Footnotes

^108:1 From the German. Kletke.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

[p. 114]

THE GLASS MOUNTAIN [*1]

Once upon a time there was a Glass Mountain at the top of which stood a castle made of pure gold, and in front of the castle there grew an apple-tree on which there were golden apples.

Anyone who picked an apple gained admittance into the golden castle, and there in a silver room sat an enchanted Princess of surpassing fairness and beauty.  She was as rich too as she was beautiful, for the cellars of the castle were full of precious stones, and great chests of the finest gold stood round the walls of all the rooms.

Many knights had come from afar to try their luck, but it was in vain they attempted to climb the mountain.  In spite of having their horses shod with sharp nails, no one managed to get more than half-way up, and then they all fell back right down to the bottom of the steep slippery hill.  Sometimes they broke an arm, sometimes a leg, and many a brave man had broken his neck even.

The beautiful Princess sat at her window and watched the bold knights trying to reach her on their splendid horses.  The sight of her always gave men fresh courage, and they flocked from the four quarters of the globe to attempt the work of rescuing her.  But all in vain, and for seven years the Princess had sat now and waited for some one to scale the Glass Mountain.

A heap of corpses both of riders and horses lay round the mountain, and many dying men lay groaning there unable to go any farther with their wounded limbs.  The whole neighbourhood had the appearance of a vast churchyard.  In three more days the seven years would be at an end, when a knight in golden armour and mounted on a spirited steed was seen making his way towards the fatal hill.

Sticking his spurs into his horse he made a rush at the mountain, and got up half-way, then he calmly turned his horse's head and came down again without a slip or stumble.  The following

[p. 115]

day he started in the same way; the horse trod on the glass as if it had been level earth, and sparks of fire flew from its hoofs.  All the other knights gazed in astonishment, for he had almost gained the summit, and in another moment he would have reached the apple-tree; but of a sudden a huge eagle rose up and spread its mighty wings, hitting as it did so the knight's horse in the eye.

The beast shied, opened its wide nostrils and tossed its mane, then rearing high up in the air, its hind feet slipped and it fell with its rider down the steep mountain side.  Nothing was left of either of them except their bones, which rattled in the battered golden armour like dry peas in a pod.

And now there was only one more day before the close of the seven years.  Then there arrived on the scene a mere schoolboy--a merry, happy-hearted youth, but at the same time strong and well-grown.  He saw how many knights had broken their necks in vain, but undaunted he approached the steep mountain on foot and began the ascent.

For long he had heard his parents speak of the beautiful Princess who sat in the golden castle at the top of the Glass Mountain.  He listened to all he heard, and determined that he too would try his luck.  But first he went to the forest and caught a lynx, and cutting off the creature's sharp claws, he fastened them on to his own hands and feet.

Armed with these weapons he boldly started up the Glass Mountain.

The sun was nearly going down, and the youth had not got more than half-way up.  He could hardly draw breath he was so worn out, and his mouth was parched by thirst.  A huge black cloud passed over his head, but in vain did he beg and beseech her to let a drop of water fall on him.  He opened his mouth, but the black cloud sailed past and not as much as a drop of dew moistened his dry lips.

His feet were torn and bleeding, and he could only hold on now with his hands.  Evening closed in, and he strained his eyes to see if he could behold the top of the mountain.  Then he gazed beneath him, and what a sight met his eyes!  A yawning abyss, with certain and terrible death at the bottom, reeking with half-decayed bodies of horses and riders!  And this had been the end of all the other brave men who like himself had attempted the ascent.

It was almost pitch dark now, and only the stars lit up the Glass Mountain.  The poor boy still clung on as if glued to the glass by his blood-stained hands.  He made no struggle to get higher, for all

[p. 116]

his strength had left him, and seeing no hope he calmly awaited death.  Then all of a sudden he fell into a deep sleep, and forgetful of his dangerous position, he slumbered sweetly.  But all the same, although he slept, he had stuck his sharp claws so firmly into the glass that he was quite safe not to fall.

[p. 117]

Now the golden apple-tree was guarded by the eagle which had overthrown the golden knight and his horse.  Every night it flew round the Glass Mountain keeping a careful look-out, and no sooner had the moon emerged from the clouds than the bird rose up from the apple-tree, and circling round in the air, caught sight of the sleeping youth.

Greedy for carrion, and sure that this must be a fresh corpse, the bird swooped down upon the boy.  But he was awake now, and perceiving the eagle, he determined by its help to save himself.

The eagle dug its sharp claws into the tender flesh of the youth, but he bore the pain without a sound, and seized the bird's two feet with his hands.  The creature in terror lifted him high up into the air and began to circle round the tower of the castle.  The youth held on bravely.  He saw the glittering palace, which by the pale rays of the moon looked like a dim lamp; and he saw the high windows, and round one of them a balcony in which the beautiful Princess sat lost in sad thoughts.  Then the boy saw that he was close to the apple-tree, and drawing a small knife from his belt, he cut off both the eagle's feet.  The bird rose up in the air in its agony and vanished into the clouds, and the youth fell on to the broad branches of the apple-tree.

Then he drew out the claws of the eagle's feet that had remained in his flesh, and put the peel of one of the golden apples on the wound, and in one moment it was healed and well again.  He pulled several of the beautiful apples and put them in his pocket; then he entered the castle.  The door was guarded by a great dragon, but as soon as he threw an apple at it, the beast vanished.

At the same moment a gate opened, and the youth perceived a courtyard full of flowers and beautiful trees, and on a balcony sat the lovely enchanted Princess with her retinue.

As soon as she saw the youth, she ran towards him and greeted him as her husband and master.  She gave him all her treasures, and the youth became a rich and mighty ruler.  But he never returned to the earth, for only the mighty eagle, who had been the guardian of the Princess and of the castle, could have carried on his wings the enormous treasure down to the world.  But as the eagle had lost its feet it died, and its body was found in a wood on the Glass Mountain.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .

One day when the youth was strolling about in the palace garden with the Princess, his wife, he looked down over the edge of the

[p. 118]

[paragraph continues] Glass Mountain and saw to his astonishment a great number of people gathered there.  He blew his silver whistle, and the swallow who acted as messenger in the golden castle flew past.

'Fly down and ask what the matter is,' he said to the little bird, who sped off like lightning and soon returned saying:

'The blood of the eagle has restored all the people below to life.  All those who have perished on this mountain are awakening up to-day, as it were from a sleep, and are mounting their horses, and the whole population are gazing on this unheard-of wonder with joy and amazement.'

Footnotes

^114:1 From the Polish.  Kletke.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

[p. 119]

ALPHEGE, OR THE GREEN MONKEY

Many years ago there lived a King, who was twice married.  His first wife, a good and beautiful woman, died at the birth of her little son, and the King her husband was so overwhelmed with grief at her loss that his only comfort was in the sight of his heir.

When the time for the young Prince's christening came the King chose as godmother a neighbouring Princess, so celebrated for her wisdom and goodness that she was commonly called 'the Good Queen.'  She named the baby Alphege, and from that moment took him to her heart.

Time wipes away the greatest griefs, and after two or three years the King married again.  His second wife was a Princess of undeniable beauty, but by no means of so amiable a disposition as the first Queen.  In due time a second Prince was born, and the Queen was devoured with rage at the thought that Prince Alphege came between her son and the throne.  She took care however to conceal her jealous feelings from the King.

At length she could control herself no longer, so she sent a trusty servant to her old and faithful friend the Fairy of the Mountain, to beg her to devise some means by which she might get rid of her stepson.

The Fairy replied that, much as she desired to be agreeable to the Queen in every way, it was impossible for her to attempt anything against the young Prince, who was under the protection of some greater Power than her own.

The 'Good Queen' on her side watched carefully over her godson.  She was obliged to do so from a distance, her own country being a remote one, but she was well informed of all that went on and knew all about the Queen's wicked designs.  She therefore sent the Prince a large and splendid ruby, with injunctions to wear it night and day as it would protect him from all attacks, but added that the talisman only retained its power as long as the Prince remained

[p. 120]

within his father's dominions.  The Wicked Queen knowing this made every attempt to get the Prince out of the country, but her efforts failed, till one day accident did what she was unable to accomplish.

The King had an only sister who was deeply attached to him, and who was married to the sovereign of a distant country.  She had always kept up a close correspondence with her brother, and the accounts she heard of Prince Alphege made her long to become acquainted with so charming a nephew.  She entreated the King to allow the Prince to visit her, and after some hesitation which was overruled by his wife, he finally consented.

Prince Alphege was at this time fourteen years old, and the handsomest and most engaging youth imaginable.  In his infancy he had been placed in the charge of one of the great ladies of the Court, who, according to the prevailing custom, acted first as his head nurse and then as his governess.  When he outgrew her care her husband was appointed as his tutor and governor, so that he had never been separated from this excellent couple, who loved him as tenderly as they did their only daughter Zayda, and were warmly loved by him in return.

When the Prince set forth on his travels it was but natural that this devoted couple should accompany him, and accordingly he started with them and attended by a numerous retinue.

For some time he travelled through his father's dominions and all went well; but soon after passing the frontier they had to cross a desert plain under a burning sun.  They were glad to take shelter under a group of trees near, and here the Prince complained of burning thirst.  Luckily a tiny stream ran close by and some water was soon procured, but no sooner had he tasted it than he sprang from his carriage and disappeared in a moment.  In vain did his anxious followers seek for him, he was nowhere to be found.

As they were hunting and shouting through the trees a black monkey suddenly appeared on a point of rock and said: 'Poor sorrowing people, you are seeking your Prince in vain.  Return to your own country and know that he will not be restored to you till you have for some time failed to recognise him.'

With these words he vanished, leaving the courtiers sadly perplexed; but as all their efforts to find the Prince were useless they had no choice but to go home, bringing with them the sad news, which so greatly distressed the King that he fell ill and died not long after.

[p. 121]

The Queen, whose ambition was boundless, was delighted to see the crown on her son's head and to have the power in her own hands.  Her hard rule made her very unpopular, and it was commonly believed that she had made away with Prince Alphege.  Indeed, had the King her son not been deservedly beloved a revolution would certainly have arisen.

Meantime the former governess of the unfortunate Alphege, who had lost her husband soon after the King's death, retired to her own house with her daughter, who grew up a lovely and most loveable girl, and both continued to mourn the loss of their dear Prince.

The young King was devoted to hunting, and often indulged in his favourite pastime, attended by the noblest youths in his kingdom. One day, after a long morning's chase he stopped to rest near a brook in the shade of a little wood, where a splendid tent had been prepared for him.  Whilst at luncheon he suddenly spied a little monkey of the brightest green sitting on a tree and gazing

[p. 122]

so tenderly at him that he felt quite moved.  He forbade his courtiers to frighten it, and the monkey, noticing how much attention was being paid him, sprang from bough to bough, and at length gradually approached the King, who offered him some food.  The monkey took it very daintily and finally came to the table.  The King took him on his knees, and, delighted with his capture, brought him home with him.  He would trust no one else with its care, and the whole Court soon talked of nothing but the pretty green monkey.

One morning, as Prince Alphege's governess and her daughter were alone together, the little monkey sprang in through an open window.  He had escaped from the palace, and his manners were so gentle and caressing that Zayda and her mother soon got over the first fright he had given them.  He had spent some time with them and quite won their hearts by his insinuating ways, when the King discovered where he was and sent to fetch him back.  But the monkey made such piteous cries, and seemed so unhappy when anyone attempted to catch him, that the two ladies begged the King to leave him a little longer with them, to which he consented.

One evening, as they sat by the fountain in the garden, the little monkey kept gazing at Zayda with such sad and loving eyes that she and her mother could not think what to make of it, and they were still more surprised when they saw big tears rolling down his cheeks.

Next day both mother and daughter were sitting in a jessamine bower in the garden, and they began to talk of the green monkey and his strange ways.  The mother said, 'My dear child, I can no longer hide my feelings from you.  I cannot get the thought out of my mind that the green monkey is no other than our beloved Prince Alphege, transformed in this strange fashion.  I know the idea sounds wild, but I cannot get it out of my heart, and it leaves me no peace.'

As she spoke she glanced up, and there sat the little monkey, whose tears and gestures seemed to confirm her words.

The following night the elder lady dreamt that she saw the Good Queen, who said, 'Do not weep any longer but follow my directions.  Go into your garden and lift up the little marble slab at the foot of the great myrtle tree.  You will find beneath it a crystal vase filled with a bright green liquid.  Take it with you and place the thing which is at present most in your thoughts into a bath filled with roses and rub it well with the green liquid.'

[p. 123]

At these words the sleeper awoke, and lost no time in rising and hurrying to the garden, where she found all as the Good Queen had described.  Then she hastened to rouse her daughter and together they prepared the bath, for they would not let their women know what they were about.  Zayda gathered quantities of roses, and when all was ready they put the monkey into a large jasper bath, where the mother rubbed him all over with the green liquid.

Their suspense was not long, for suddenly the monkey skin dropped off, and there stood Prince Alphege, the handsomest and most charming of men.  The joy of such a meeting was beyond

[p. 124]

words.  After a time the ladies begged the Prince to relate his adventures, and he told them of all his sufferings in the desert when he was first transformed.  His only comfort had been in visits from the Good Queen, who had at length put him in the way of meeting his brother.

Several days were spent in these interesting conversations, but at length Zayda's mother began to think of the best means for placing the Prince on the throne, which was his by right.

The Queen on her side was feeling very anxious.  She had felt sure from the first that her son's pet monkey was no other than Prince Alphege, and she longed to put an end to him.  Her suspicions were confirmed by the Fairy of the Mountain, and she hastened in tears to the King, her son.

'I am informed,' she cried, 'that some ill-disposed people have raised up an impostor in the hopes of dethroning you.  You must at once have him put to death.'

The King, who was very brave, assured the Queen that he would soon punish the conspirators.  He made careful inquiries into the matter, and thought it hardly probable that a quiet widow and a young girl would think of attempting anything of the nature of a revolution.

He determined to go and see them, and to find out the truth for himself; so one night, without saying anything to the Queen or his ministers, he set out for the palace where the two ladies lived, attended only by a small band of followers.

The two ladies were at the moment deep in conversation with Prince Alphege, and hearing a knocking so late at night begged him to keep out of sight for a time.  What was their surprise when the door was opened to see the King and his suite.

'I know,' said the King, 'that you are plotting against my crown and person, and I have come to have an explanation with you.'

As she was about to answer Prince Alphege, who had heard all, came forward and said, 'It is from me you must ask an explanation, brother.'  He spoke with such grace and dignity that everyone gazed at him with mute surprise.

At length the King, recovering from his astonishment at recognising the brother who had been lost some years before, exclaimed, 'Yes, you are indeed my brother, and now that I have found you, take the throne to which I have no longer a right.'  So saying, he respectfully kissed the Prince's hand.

[p. 125]

Alphege threw himself into his arms, and the brothers hastened to the royal palace, where in the presence of the entire court he received the crown from his brother's hand.  To clear away any possible doubt, he showed the ruby which the Good Queen had given him in his childhood.  As they were gazing at it, it suddenly split with a loud noise, and at the same moment the Wicked Queen expired.

King Alphege lost no time in marrying his dear and lovely Zayda, and his joy was complete when the Good Queen appeared at his wedding.  She assured him that the Fairy of the Mountain had henceforth lost all power over him, and after spending some time with the young couple, and bestowing the most costly presents on them, she retired to her own country.

King Alphege insisted on his brother sharing his throne, and they all lived to a good old age, universally beloved and admired.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

[p. 126]

FAIRER-THAN-A-FAIRY

Once there lived a King who had no children for many years after his marriage.  At length heaven granted him a daughter of such remarkable beauty that he could think of no name so appropriate for her as 'Fairer-than-a-Fairy.'

It never occurred to the good-natured monarch that such a name was certain to call down the hatred and jealousy of the fairies in a body on the child, but this was what happened.  No sooner had they heard of this presumptuous name than they resolved to gain possession of her who bore it, and either to torment her cruelly, or at least to conceal her from the eyes of all men.

The eldest of their tribe was entrusted to carry out their revenge.  This Fairy was named Lagree; she was so old that she only had one eye and one tooth left, and even these poor remains she had to keep all night in a strengthening liquid.  She was also so spiteful that she gladly devoted all her time to carrying out all the mean or ill-natured tricks of the whole body of fairies.

With her large experience, added to her native spite, she found but little difficulty in carrying off Fairer-than-a-Fairy.  The poor child, who was only seven years old, nearly died of fear on finding herself in the power of this hideous creature.  However, when after an hour's journey underground she found herself in a splendid palace with lovely gardens, she felt a little reassured, and was further cheered when she discovered that her pet cat and dog had followed her.

The old Fairy led her to a pretty room which she said should be hers, at the same time giving her the strictest orders never to let out the fire which was burning brightly in the grate.  She then gave two glass bottles into the Princess's charge, desiring her to take the greatest care of them, and having enforced her orders with the most awful threats in case of disobedience, she vanished, leaving the little girl at liberty to explore the palace and grounds and a

[p. 127]

good deal relieved at having only two apparently easy tasks set her.

Several years passed, during which time the Princess grew accustomed to her lonely life, obeyed the Fairy's orders, and by degrees forgot all about the court of the King her father.

One day, whilst passing near a fountain in the garden, she noticed that the sun's rays fell on the water in such a manner as to produce a brilliant rainbow.  She stood still to admire it, when, to her great surprise, she heard a voice addressing her which seemed to come from the centre of its rays.  The voice was that of a young man, and its sweetness of tone and the agreeable things it uttered, led one to infer that its owner must be equally charming; but this had to be a mere matter of fancy, for no one was visible.

The beautiful Rainbow informed Fairer-than-a-Fairy that he was young, the son of a powerful king, and that the Fairy, Lagree, who owed his parents a grudge, had revenged herself by depriving him of his natural shape for some years; that she had imprisoned him in the palace, where he had found his confinement hard to bear

[p. 128]

for some time, but now, he owned, he no longer sighed for freedom since he had seen and learned to love Fairer-than-a-Fairy.

He added many other tender speeches to this declaration, and the Princess, to whom such remarks were a new experience, could not help feeling pleased and touched by his attentions.

The Prince could only appear or speak under the form of a Rainbow, and it was therefore necessary that the sun should shine on water so as to enable the rays to form themselves.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy lost no moment in which she could meet her lover, and they enjoyed many long and interesting interviews.  One day, however, their conversation became so absorbing and time passed so quickly that the Princess forgot to attend to the fire, and it went out.  Lagree, on her return, soon found out the neglect, and seemed only too pleased to have the opportunity of showing her spite to her lovely prisoner.  She ordered Fairer-than-a-Fairy to start next day at dawn to ask Locrinos for fire with which to relight the one she had allowed to go out.

Now this Locrinos was a cruel monster who devoured everyone he came across, and especially enjoyed a chance of catching and eating any young girls.  Our heroine obeyed with great sweetness, and without having been able to take leave of her lover she set off to go to Locrinos as to certain death.  As she was crossing a wood a bird sang to her to pick up a shining pebble which she would find in a fountain close by, and to use it when needed.  She took the bird's advice, and in due time arrived at the house of Locrinos.  Luckily she only found his wife at home, who was much struck by the Princess's youth and beauty and sweet gentle manners, and still further impressed by the present of the shining pebble.

She readily let Fairer-than-a-Fairy have the fire, and in return for the stone she gave her another, which, she said, might prove useful some day.  Then she sent her away without doing her any harm.

Lagree was as much surprised as displeased at the happy result of this expedition, and Fairer-than-a Fairy waited anxiously for an opportunity of meeting Prince Rainbow and telling him her adventures.  She found, however, that he had already been told all about them by a Fairy who protected him, and to whom he was related.

The dread of fresh dangers to his beloved Princess made him devise some more convenient way of meeting than by the garden fountain, and Fairer-than-a-Fairy carried out his plan daily with entire success.  Every morning she placed a large basin full of

[p. 129]

water on her window-sill, and as soon as the sun's rays fell on the water the Rainbow appeared as clearly as it had ever done in the fountain.  By this means they were able to meet without losing sight of the fire or of the two bottles in which the old Fairy kept her eye and her tooth at night, and for some time the lovers enjoyed every hour of sunshine together.

One day Prince Rainbow appeared in the depths of woe.  He had just heard that he was to be banished from this lovely spot, but he had no idea where he was to go.  The poor young couple were in despair, and only parted with the last ray of sunshine, and in hopes of meeting next morning.  Alas! next day was dark and gloomy, and it was only late in the afternoon that the sun broke through the clouds for a few minutes.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy eagerly ran to the window, but in her haste she upset the basin, and spilt all the water with which she had carefully filled it overnight.  No other water was at hand except that in the two bottles.  It was the only chance of seeing her lover before they were separated, and she did not hesitate to break the bottle and pour their contents into the basin, when the Rainbow appeared at once.  Their farewells were full of tenderness; the Prince made the most ardent and sincere protestations, and promised to neglect nothing which might help to deliver his dear Fairer-than-a-Fairy from her captivity, and implored her to consent to their marriage as soon as they should both be free.  The Princess, on her side, vowed to have no other husband, and declared herself willing to brave death itself in order to rejoin him.

They were not allowed much time for their adieus; the Rainbow vanished, and the Princess, resolved to run all risks, started off at once, taking nothing with her but her dog, her cat, a sprig of myrtle, and the stone which the wife of Locrinos gave her.

When Lagree became aware of her prisoner's flight she was furious, and set off at full speed in pursuit.  She overtook her just as the poor girl, overcome by fatigue, had lain down to rest in a cave which the stone had formed itself into to shelter her.  The little dog who was watching her mistress promptly flew at Lagree and bit her so severely that she stumbled against a corner of the cave and broke off her only tooth.  Before she had recovered from the pain and rage this caused her, the Princess had time to escape, and was some way on her road.  Fear gave her strength for some time, but at last she could go no further, and sank down to rest.  As she did so, the sprig of myrtle she carried touched the ground,

[p. 130]

and immediately a green and shady bower sprang up round her, in which she hoped to sleep in peace.

But Lagree had not given up her pursuit, and arrived just as Fairer-than-a-Fairy had fallen fast asleep.  This time she made sure of catching her victim, but the cat spied her out, and, springing from one of the boughs of the arbour she flew at Lagree's face and tore out her only eye, thus delivering the Princess for ever from her persecutor.

[p. 131]

One might have thought that all would now be well, but no sooner had Lagree been put to fight than our heroine was overwhelmed with hunger and thirst.  She felt as though she should certainly expire, and it was with some difficulty that she dragged herself as far as a pretty little green and white house, which stood at no great distance.  Here she was received by a beautiful lady dressed in green and white to match the house, which apparently belonged to her, and of which she seemed the only inhabitant.

She greeted the fainting Princess most kindly, gave her an excellent supper, and after a long night's rest in a delightful bed told her that after many troubles she should finally attain her desire.

As the green and white lady took leave of the Princess she gave her a nut, desiring her only to open it in the most urgent need.

After a long and tiring journey Fairer-than-a-Fairy was once more received in a house, and by a lady exactly like the one she had quitted.  Here again she received a present with the same injunctions, but instead of a nut this lady gave her a golden pomegranate.  The mournful Princess had to continue her weary way, and after many troubles and hardships she again found rest and shelter in a third house exactly similar to the two others.

These houses belonged to three sisters, all endowed with fairy gifts, and all so alike in mind and person that they wished their houses and garments to be equally alike.  Their occupation consisted in helping those in misfortune, and they were as gentle and benevolent as Lagree had been cruel and spiteful.

The third Fairy comforted the poor traveller, begged her not to lose heart, and assured her that her troubles should be rewarded.

She accompanied her advice by the gift of a crystal smelling-bottle, with strict orders only to open it in case of urgent need.  Fairer-than-a-Fairy thanked her warmly, and resumed her way cheered by pleasant thoughts.

After a time her road led through a wood, full of soft airs and sweet odours, and before she had gone a hundred yards she saw a wonderful silver Castle suspended by strong silver chains to four of the largest trees.  It was so perfectly hung that a gentle breeze rocked it sufficiently to send you pleasantly to sleep.

Fairer-than-a-Fairy felt a strong desire to enter this Castle, but besides being hung a little above the ground there seemed to be neither doors nor windows.  She had no doubt (though really I cannot think why) that the moment had come in which to use the

[p. 132]

nut which had been given her.  She opened it, and out came a diminutive hall porter at whose belt hung a tiny chain, at the end of which was a golden key half as long as the smallest pin you ever saw.

The Princess climbed up one of the silver chains, holding in her hand the little porter who, in spite of his minute size, opened a secret door with his golden key and let her in.  She entered a magnificent room which appeared to occupy the entire Castle, and which was lighted by gold and jewelled stars in the ceiling.  In the midst of this room stood a couch, draped with curtains of all the colours of the rainbow, and suspended by golden cords so that it swayed with the Castle in a manner which rocked its occupant delightfully to sleep.

On this elegant couch lay Prince Rainbow, looking more beautiful than ever, and sunk in profound slumber, in which he had been held ever since his disappearance.

Fairy-than-a-Fairy, who now saw him for the first time in his real shape, hardly dared to gaze at him, fearing lest his appearance might not be in keeping with the voice and language which had won her heart.  At the same time she could not help feeling rather hurt at the apparent indifference with which she was received.

She related all the dangers and difficulties she had gone through, and though she repeated the story twenty times in a loud clear voice, the Prince slept on and took no heed.  She then had recourse to the golden pomegranate, and on opening it found that all the seeds were as many little violins which flew up in the vaulted roof and at once began playing melodiously.

The Prince was not completely roused, but he opened his eyes a little and looked all the handsomer.

Impatient at not being recognised, Fairer-than-a-Fairy now drew out her third present, and on opening the crystal scent-bottle a little syren flew out, who silenced the violins and then sang close to the Prince's ear the story of all his lady love had suffered in her search for him.  She added some gentle reproaches to her tale, but before she had got far he was wide awake, and transported with joy threw himself at the Princess's feet.  At the same moment the walls of the room expanded and opened out, revealing a golden throne covered with jewels.  A magnificent Court now began to assemble, and at the same time several elegant carriages filled with ladies in magnificent dresses drove up.  In the first and most splendid of these carriages sat Prince Rainbow's mother.  She

[p. 133]

fondly embraced her son, after which she informed him that his father had been dead for some years, that the anger of the Fairies was at length appeased, and that he might return in peace to reign over his people, who were longing for his presence.

The Court received the new King with joyful acclamations which would have delighted him at any other time, but all his thoughts were full of Fairer-than-a-Fairy.  He was just about to present her to his mother and the Court, feeling sure that her charms would win all hearts, when the three green and white sisters appeared.

They declared the secret of Fairy-than-a-Fairy's royal birth, and the Queen taking the two lovers in her carriage set off with them for the capital of the kingdom.

Here they were received with tumultuous joy.  The wedding was celebrated without delay, and succeeding years diminished neither the virtues, beauty, nor the mutual affection of King Rainbow and his Queen, Fairer-than-a-Fairy.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

[p. 134]

THE THREE BROTHERS [*1]

There was once upon a time a witch, who in the shape of a hawk used every night to break the windows of a certain village church.  In the same village there lived three brothers, who were all determined to kill the mischievous hawk.  But in vain did the two eldest mount guard in the church with their guns; as soon as the bird appeared high above their heads, sleep overpowered them, and they only awoke to hear the windows crashing in.

Then the youngest brother took his turn of guarding the windows, and to prevent his being overcome by sleep he placed a lot of thorns under his chin, so that if he felt drowsy and nodded his head, they would prick him and keep him awake.

The moon was already risen, and it was as light as day, when suddenly he heard a fearful noise, and at the same time a terrible desire to sleep overpowered him.

His eyelids closed, and his head sank on his shoulders, but the thorns ran into him and were so painful that he awoke at once.  He saw the hawk swooping down upon the church, and in a moment he had seized his gun and shot at the bird.  The hawk fell heavily under a big stone, severely wounded in its right wing.  The youth ran to look at it, and saw that a huge abyss had opened below the stone.  He went at once to fetch his brothers, and with their help dragged a lot of pine-wood and ropes to the spot.  They fastened some of the burning pine-wood to the end of the rope, and let it slowly down to the bottom of the abyss.  At first it was quite dark, and the flaming torch only lit up dirty grey stone walls.  But the youngest brother determined to explore the abyss, and letting himself down by the rope he soon reached the bottom.  Here he found a lovely meadow full of green trees and exquisite flowers.

In the middle of the meadow stood a huge stone castle, with an iron gate leading to it, which was wide open.  Everything in the

[p. 135]

castle seemed to be made of copper, and the only inhabitant he could discover was a lovely girl, who was combing her golden hair; and he noticed that whenever one of her hairs fell on the ground it rang out like pure metal.  The youth looked at her more closely, and saw that her skin was smooth and fair, her blue eyes bright and sparkling, and her hair as golden as the sun.  He fell in love with her on the spot, and kneeling at her feet, he implored her to become his wife.

The lovely girl accepted his proposal gladly; but at the same time she warned him that she could never come up to the world above till her mother, the old witch, was dead.  And she went on to tell him that the only way in which the old creature could be killed was with the sword that hung up in the castle; but the sword was so heavy that no one could lift it.

Then the youth went into a room in the castle where everything was made of silver, and here he found another beautiful girl, the sister of his bride.  She was combing her silver hair, and every hair that fell on the ground rang out like pure metal.  The second girl handed him the sword, but though he tried with all his strength he could not lift it.  At last a third sister came to him and gave him a drop of something to drink, which she said would give him the needful strength.  He drank one drop, but still he could not lift the sword; then he drank a second, and the sword began to move; but only after he had drunk a third drop was he able to swing the sword over his head.

Then he hid himself in the castle and awaited the old witch's arrival.  At last as it was beginning to grow dark she appeared.  She swooped down upon a big apple-tree, and after shaking some golden apples from it, she pounced down upon the earth.  As soon as her feet touched the ground she became transformed from a hawk into a woman.  This was the moment the youth was waiting for, and he swung his mighty sword in the air with all his strength and the witch's head fell off, and her blood spurted up on the walls.

Without fear of any further danger, he packed up all the treasures of the castle into great chests, and gave his brothers a signal to pull them up out of the abyss.  First the treasures were attached to the rope and then the three lovely girls.  And now everything was up above and only he himself remained below.  But as he was a little suspicious of his brothers, he fastened a heavy stone on to the rope and let them pull it up.  At first they heaved

[p. 136]

with a will, but when the stone was half way up they let it drop suddenly, and it fell to the bottom broken into a hundred pieces.

'So that's what would have happened to my bones had I trusted myself to them,' said the youth sadly; and he began to cry bitterly, not because of the treasures, but because of the lovely girl with her swanlike neck and golden hair.

For a long time he wandered sadly all through the beautiful underworld, and one day he met a magician who asked him the cause of his tears.  The youth told him all that had befallen him, and the magician said:

'Do not grieve, young man!  If you will guard the children who are hidden in the golden apple-tree, I will bring you at once

[p. 137]

up to the earth.  Another magician who lives in this land always eats my children up.  It is in vain that I have hidden them under the earth and locked them into the castle.  Now I have hidden them in the apple-tree; hide yourself there too, and at midnight you will see my enemy.'

The youth climbed up the tree, and picked some of the beautiful golden apples, which he ate for his supper.

At midnight the wind began to rise, and a rustling sound was heard at the foot of the tree.  The youth looked down and beheld a long thick serpent beginning to crawl up the tree.  It wound itself round the stem and gradually got higher and higher.  It stretched its huge head, in which the eyes glittered fiercely, among the branches, searching for the nest in which the little children lay.  They trembled with terror when they saw the hideous creature, and hid themselves beneath the leaves.

Then the youth swung his mighty sword in the air, and with one blow cut off the serpent's head.  He cut up the rest of the body into little bits and strewed them to the four winds.

The father of the rescued children was so delighted over the death of his enemy that he told the youth to get on his back, and in this way he carried him up to the world above.

With what joy did he hurry now to his brothers' house!  He burst into a room where they were all assembled, but no one knew who he was.  Only his bride, who was serving as cook to her sisters, recognised her lover at once.

His brothers, who had quite believed he was dead, yielded him up his treasures at once, and flew into the woods in terror.  But the good youth forgave them all they had done, and divided his treasures with them.  Then he built himself a big castle with golden windows, and there he lived happily with his golden-haired wife till the end of their lives.

Footnotes

^134:1 From the Polish. Kletke.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

[p. 138]

THE BOY AND THE WOLVES, OR THE BROKEN PROMISE [*1]

Once upon a time an Indian hunter built himself a house in the middle of a great forest, far away from all his tribe; for his heart was gentle and kind, and he was weary of the treachery and cruel deeds of those who had been his friends.  So he left them, and took his wife and three children, and they journeyed on until they found a spot near to a clear stream, where they began to cut down trees, and to make ready their wigwam.  For many years they lived peacefully and happily in this sheltered place, never leaving it except to hunt the wild animals, which served them both for food and clothes.  At last, however, the strong man felt sick, and before long he knew he must die.

So he gathered his family round him, and said his last words to them.  'You, my wife, the companion of my days, will follow me ere many moons have waned to the island of the blest.  But for you, O my children, whose lives are but newly begun, the wickedness, unkindness, and ingratitude from which I fled are before you.  Yet I shall go hence in peace, my children, if you will promise always to love each other, and never to forsake your youngest brother.

'Never!' they replied, holding out their hands.  And the hunter died content.

Scarcely eight moons had passed when, just as he had said, the wife went forth, and followed her husband; but before leaving her children she bade the two elder ones think of their promise never to forsake the younger, for he was a child, and weak.  And while the snow lay thick upon the ground, they tended him and cherished him; but when the earth showed green again, the heart of the young man stirred within him, and he longed to see the wigwams of the village where his father's youth was spent.

[p. 139]

Therefore he opened all his heart to his sister, who answered: 'My brother, I understand your longing for our fellow-men, whom here we cannot see.  But remember our father's words.  Shall we not seek our own pleasures, and forget the little one?'

But he would not listen, and, making no reply, he took his bow and arrows and left the hut.  The snows fell and melted, yet he never returned; and at last the heart of the girl grew cold and hard, and her little boy became a burden in her eyes, till one day she spoke thus to him: 'See, there is food for many days to come.  Stay here within the shelter of the hut.  I go to seek our brother, and when I have found him I shall return hither.'

But when, after hard journeying, she reached the village where her brother dwelt, and saw that he had a wife and was happy, and

[p. 140]

when she, too, was sought by a young brave, then she also forgot the boy alone in the forest, and thought only of her husband.

Now as soon as the little boy had eaten all the food which his sister had left him, he went out into the woods, and gathered berries and dug up roots, and while the sun shone he was contented and had his fill.  But when the snows began and the wind howled, then his stomach felt empty and his limbs cold, and he hid in trees all the night, and only crept out to eat what the wolves had left behind.  And by-and-by, having no other friends, he sought their company, and sat by while they devoured their prey, and they grew to know him, and gave him food.  And without them he would have died in the snow.

But at last the snows melted, and the ice upon the great lake, and as the wolves went down to the shore, the boy went after them.  And it happened one day that his big brother was fishing in his canoe near the shore, and he heard the voice of a child singing in the Indian tone--

'My brother, my brother!
  I am becoming a wolf,
  I am becoming a wolf!'

[paragraph continues] And when he had so sung he howled as wolves howl.  Then the heart of the elder sunk, and he hastened towards him, crying, 'Brother, little brother, come to me;' but he, being half a wolf, only continued his song.  And the louder the elder called him, 'Brother, little brother, come to me,' the swifter he fled after his brothers the wolves, and the heavier grew his skin, till, with a long howl, he vanished into the depths of the forest.

So, with shame and anguish in his soul, the elder brother went back to his village, and, with his sister, mourned the little boy and the broken promise till the end of his life.

Footnotes

^138:1 A North American Indian story.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

[p. 141]

THE GLASS AXE [*1]

There was once upon a time a King and Queen who had everything they could possibly wish for in this world except a child.  At last, after twelve years, the Queen gave birth to a son; but she did not live long to enjoy her happiness, for on the following day she died.  But before her death she called her husband to her and said, 'Never let the child put his feet on the ground, for as soon as he does so he will fall into the power of a wicked Fairy, who will do him much harm.'  And these were the last words the poor Queen spoke.

The boy throve and grew big, and when he was too heavy for his nurse to carry, a chair was made for him on little wheels, in which he could wander through the palace gardens without help; at other times he was carried about on a litter, and he was always carefully watched and guarded for fear he should at any time put his feet to the ground.

But as this sort of life was bad for his health, the doctors ordered him horse exercise, and he soon became a first-rate rider, and used to go out for long excursions on horseback, accompanied always by his father's stud-groom and a numerous retinue.

Every day he rode through the neighbouring fields and woods, and always returned home in the evening safe and well.  In this way many years passed, and the Prince grew to manhood, and hardly anyone remembered the Queen's warning, though precautions were still taken, more from use and wont than for any other reason.

One day the Prince and his suite went out for a ride in a wood where his father sometimes held a hunt.  Their way led through a stream whose banks were overgrown with thick brushwood.  Just as the horsemen were about to ford the river, a hare, startled by the sound of the horses' hoofs, started up from the grass and ran

[p. 142]

towards the thicket.  The young Prince pursued the little creature, and had almost overtaken it, when the girth of his saddle suddenly broke in two and he fell heavily to the ground.  No sooner had his foot touched the earth than he disappeared before the eyes of the horrified courtiers.

They sought for him far and near, but all in vain, and they were forced to recognise the power of the evil Fairy, against which the Queen had warned them on her death-bed.  The old King was much grieved when they brought him the news of his son's disappearance, but as he could do nothing to free him from his fate, he gave himself up to an old age of grief and loneliness, cherishing at the same time the hope that some lucky chance might one day deliver the youth out of the hands of his enemy.

Hardly had the Prince touched the ground than he felt himself violently seized by an unseen power, and hurried away he knew not whither.  A whole new world stretched out before him, quite unlike the one he had left.  A splendid castle surrounded by a huge lake was the abode of the Fairy, and the only approach to it was over a bridge of clouds.  On the other side of the lake high mountains rose up, and dark woods stretched along the banks; over all hung a thick mist, and deep silence reigned everywhere.

No sooner had the Fairy reached her own domain than she made herself visible, and turning to the Prince she told him that unless he obeyed all her commands down to the minutest detail he would be severely punished.  Then she gave him an axe made of glass, and bade him cross the bridge of clouds and go into the wood beyond and cut down all the trees there before sunset.  At the same time she cautioned him with many angry words against speaking to a black girl he would most likely meet in the wood.

The Prince listened to her words meekly, and when she had finished took up the glass axe and set out for the forest.  At every step he seemed to sink into the clouds, but fear gave wings to his feet, and he crossed the lake in safety and set to work at once.

But no sooner had he struck the first blow with his axe than it broke into a thousand pieces against the tree.  The poor youth was so terrified he did not know what to do, for he was in mortal dread of the punishment the wicked old Fairy would inflict on him.  He wandered to and fro in the wood, not knowing where he was going, and at last, worn out by fatigue and misery, he sank on the ground and fell fast asleep.

He did not know how long he had slept when a sudden sound

[p. 143]

awoke him, and opening his eyes he saw a black girl standing beside him.  Mindful of the Fairy's warning he did not dare to address her, but she on her part greeted him in the most friendly manner, and asked him at once if he were under the power of the wicked Fairy.  The Prince nodded his head silently in answer.

Then the black girl told him that she too was in the power of the Fairy, who had doomed her to wander about in her present guise until some youth should take pity on her and bear her in safety to the other side of the river which they saw in the distance, and on the other side of which the Fairy's domain and power ended.

The girl's words so inspired the Prince with confidence that he told her all his tale of woe, and ended up by asking her advice as to how he was to escape the punishment the Fairy would be sure to inflict on him when she discovered that he had not cut down the trees in the wood and that he had broken her axe.

'You must know,' answered the black girl, 'that the Fairy in whose power we both are is my own mother, but you must not betray this secret, for it would cost me my life.  If you will only promise to try and free me I will stand by you, and will accomplish for you all the tasks which my mother sets you.'

The Prince promised joyfully all she asked; then having once more warned him not to betray her confidence, she handed him a draught to drink which very soon sunk his senses in a deep slumber.

His astonishment was great when he awoke to find the glass axe whole and unbroken at his side, and all the trees of the wood lying felled around him!

He made all haste across the bridge of clouds, and told the Fairy that her commands were obeyed.  She was much amazed when she heard that all the wood was cut down, and saw the axe unbroken in his hand, and since she could not believe that he had done all this by himself, she questioned him narrowly if he had seen or spoken to the black girl.  But the Prince lied manfully, and swore he had never looked up from his work for a moment.  Seeing she could get nothing more out of him, she gave him a little bread and water, and showing him to a small dark cupboard she told him he might sleep there.

Morning had hardly dawned when the Fairy awoke the Prince, and giving him the glass axe again she told him to cut up all the wood he had felled the day before, and to put it in bundles ready

[p. 144]

for firewood; at the same time she warned him once more against approaching or speaking a word to the black girl if he met her in the wood.

Although his task was no easier than that of the day before, the youth set out much more cheerfully, because he knew he could count an the help of the black girl.  With quicker and lighter step he crossed the bridge of clouds, and hardly had he reached the other side than his friend stood before him and greeted him cheerfully.  When she heard what the Fairy demanded this time, she answered smilingly, 'Never fear,' and handed him another draught, which very soon caused the Prince to sink into a deep sleep.

When he awoke everything, was done.  All the trees of the wood were cut up into firewood and arranged in bundles ready for use.

He returned to the castle as quickly as he could, and told the Fairy that her commands were obeyed.  She was even more amazed than she had been before, and asked him again if he had either seen or spoken to the black girl; but the Prince knew better than to betray his word, and once more lied freely.

On the following day the Fairy set him a third task to do, even harder than the other two.  She told him he must build a castle on the other side of the lake, made of nothing but gold, silver, and precious stones, and unless he could accomplish this within an hour, the most frightful doom awaited him.

The Prince heard her words without anxiety, so entirely did he rely on the help of his black friend.  Full of hope he hurried across the bridge, and recognised at once the spot where the castle was to stand, for spades, hammers, axes, and every other building implement lay scattered on the ground ready for the workman's hand, but of gold, silver, and precious stones there was not a sign.  But before the Prince had time to feel despondent the black girl beckoned to him in the distance from behind a rock, where she had hidden herself for fear her mother should catch sight of her.  Full of joy the youth hurried towards her, and begged her aid and counsel in the new piece of work he had been given to do.

But this time the Fairy had watched the Prince's movements from her window, and she saw him hiding himself behind the rock with her daughter.  She uttered a piercing shriek so that the mountains re-echoed with the sound of it, and the terrified pair had hardly dared to look out from their hiding-place when the enraged woman, with her dress and hair flying in the wind, hurried over the

[p. 145]

bridge of clouds.  The Prince at once gave himself up for lost, but the girl told him to be of good courage and to follow her as quickly as he could.  But before they left their shelter she broke off a little bit of the rock, spoke some magic words over it, and threw it in the direction her mother was coming from.  In a moment a glittering palace arose before the eyes of the Fairy which blinded her with its dazzling splendour, and with its many doors and passages prevented her for some time from finding her way out of it.

In the meantime the black girl hurried on with the Prince, hastening to reach the river, where once on the other side they would for ever be out of the wicked Fairy's power.  But before they had accomplished half the way they heard again the rustle of her garments and her muttered curses pursuing them closely.

The Prince was terrified; he dared not look back, and he felt his strength giving way.  But before he had time to despair the girl uttered some more magic words, and immediately she herself was changed into a pond, and the Prince into a duck swimming on its surface.

When the Fairy saw this her rage knew no bounds, and she used all her magic wits to make the pond disappear; she caused a hill of sand to arise at her feet, meaning it to dry up the water at once.  But the sand hill only drove the pond a little farther away, and its waters seemed to increase instead of diminishing.  When the old woman saw that the powers of her magic were of so little avail, she had recourse to cunning.  She threw a lot of gold nuts into the pond, hoping in this way to catch the duck, but all her efforts were fruitless, for the little creature refused to let itself be caught.

Then a new idea struck the wicked old woman, and hiding herself behind the rock which had sheltered the fugitives, she waited behind it, watching carefully for the moment when the Prince and her daughter should resume their natural forms and continue their journey.

She had not to wait long, for as soon as the girl thought her mother was safely out of the way, she changed herself and the Prince once more into their human shape, and set out cheerfully for the river.

But they had not gone many steps when the wicked Fairy hurried after them, a drawn dagger in her hand, and was close upon them, when suddenly, instead of the Prince and her daughter,

[p. 146]

she found herself in front of a great stone church, whose entrance was carefully guarded by a huge monk.

Breathless with rage and passion, she tried to plunge her dagger into the monk's heart, but it fell shattered in pieces at her feet.  In her desperation she determined to pull down the church, and thus to destroy her two victims for ever.  She stamped three times on the ground, and the earth trembled, and both the church and the monk began to shake.  As soon as the Fairy saw this she retreated to some distance from the building, so as not to be hurt herself by its fall.  But once more her scheme was doomed to failure, for hardly had she gone a yard from the church than both it and the monk disappeared, and she found herself in a wood black as night, and full of wolves and bears and wild animals of all sorts and descriptions.

Then her wrath gave place to terror, for she feared every moment to be torn in pieces by the beasts who one and all seemed to defy her power.  She thought it wisest to make her way as best she could out of the forest, and then to pursue the fugitives once more and accomplish their destruction either by force or cunning.

In the meantime the Prince and the black girl had again assumed their natural forms, and were hurrying on as fast as they could to reach the river.  But when they got there they found that there was no way in which they could cross it, and the girl's magic art seemed no longer to have any power.  Then turning to the Prince she said, 'The hour for my deliverance has not yet come, but as you promised to do all you could to free me, you must do exactly as I bid you now.  Take this bow and arrow and kill every beast you see with them, and be sure you spare no living creature.'

With these words she disappeared, and hardly had she done so than a huge wild boar started out of the thicket near and made straight for the Prince.  But the youth did not lose his presence of mind, and drawing his bow he pierced the beast with his arrow right through the skull.  The creature fell heavily on the ground, and out of its side sprang a little hare, which ran like the wind along the river bank.  The Prince drew his bow once more, and the hare lay dead at his feet; but at the same moment a dove rose up in the air, and circled round the Prince's head in the most confiding manner.  But mindful of the black girl's commands, he dared not spare the little creature's life, and taking another arrow from his quiver he laid it as dead as the boar and the hare.  But

[p. 147]

when he went to look at the body of the bird he found instead of the dove a round white egg lying on the ground.

While he was gazing on it and wondering what it could mean, he heard the sweeping of wings above him, and looking up he saw a huge vulture with open claws swooping down upon him.  In a moment he seized the egg and flung it at the bird with all his might, and lo and behold!  instead of the ugly monster the most beautiful girl he had ever seen stood before the astonished eyes of the Prince.

But while all this was going on the wicked old Fairy had managed to make her way out of the wood, and was now using the last resource in her power to overtake her daughter and the Prince.  As soon as she was in the open again she mounted her chariot, which was drawn by a fiery dragon, and flew through the air in it.  But just as she got to the river she saw the two lovers in each other's arms swimming through the water as easily as two fishes.

Quick as lightning, and forgetful of every danger, she flew down upon them.  But the waters seized her chariot and sunk it in the

[p. 148]

lowest depths, and the waves bore the wicked old woman down the stream till she was caught in some thorn bushes, where she made a good meal for all the little fishes that were swimming about.

And so at last the Prince and his lovely Bride were free.  They hurried as quickly as they could to the old King, who received them with joy and gladness.  On the following day a most gorgeous wedding feast was held, and as far as we know the Prince and his bride lived happily for ever afterwards.

Footnotes

^141:1 From the Hungarian. Kletke.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

[p. 149]

THE DEAD WIFE [*1]

Once upon a time there were a man and his wife who lived in the forest, very far from the rest of the tribe.  Very often they spent the day in hunting together, but after a while the wife found that she had so many things to do that she was obliged to stay at home; so he went alone, though he found that when his wife was not with him he never had any luck.  One day, when he was away hunting, the woman fell ill, and in a few days she died.

Her husband grieved bitterly, and buried her in the house where she had passed her life; but as the time went on he felt so lonely without her that he made a wooden doll about her height and size for company, and dressed it in her clothes.  He seated it in front of the fire, and tried to think he had his wife back again.  The next day he went out to hunt, and when he came home the first thing he did was to go up to the doll and brush off some of the ashes from the fire which had fallen on its face.  But he was very busy now, for he had to cook and mend, besides getting food, for there was no one to help him.  And so a whole year passed away.

At the end of that time he came back from hunting one night and found some wood by the door and a fire within.  The next night there was not only wood and fire, but a piece of meat in the kettle, nearly ready for eating.  He searched all about to see who could have done this, but could find no one.  The next time he went to hunt he took care not to go far, and came in quite early.  And while he was still a long way off he saw a woman going into the house with wood on her shoulders.  So he made haste, and opened the door quickly, and instead of the wooden doll, his wife sat in front of the fire.

Then she spoke to him and said, 'The Great Spirit felt sorry for you, because you would not be comforted, so he let me come back to you, but you must not stretch out your hand to touch me till we have seen the rest of our people.  If you do, I shall die.'

[p. 150]

So the man listened to her words, and the woman dwelt there, and brought the wood and kindled the fire, till one day her husband said to her, 'It is now two years since you died.  Let us now go back to our tribe.  Then you will be well, and I can touch you.'

And with that he prepared food for the journey, a string of deer's flesh for her to carry, and one for himself; and so they started.  Now the camp of the tribe was distant six days' journey, and when they were yet one day's journey off it began to snow, and they felt weary and longed for rest.  Therefore

[p. 151]

they made a fire, cooked some food, and spread out their skins to sleep.

Then the heart of the man was greatly stirred, and he stretched out his arms to his wife, but she waved her hands and said, 'We have seen no one yet; it is too soon.'

But he would not listen to her, and caught her to him, and behold!  he was clasping the wooden doll.  And when he saw it was the doll he pushed it from him in his misery and rushed away to the camp, and told them all his story.  And some doubted, and they went back with him to the place where he and his wife had stopped to rest, and there lay the doll, and besides, they saw in the snow the steps of two people, and the foot of one was like the foot of the doll.  And the man grieved sore all the days of his life.

Footnotes

^149:1 From the Iroquois.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

[p. 152]

IN THE LAND OF SOULS [*1]

Far away, in North America, where the Red Indians dwell, there lived a long time ago a beautiful maiden, who was lovelier than any other girl in the whole tribe.  Many of the young braves sought her in marriage, but she would listen to one only--a handsome chief, who had taken her fancy some years before.  So they were to be married, and great rejoicings were made, and the two looked forward to a long life of happiness together, when the very night before the wedding feast a sudden illness seized the girl, and, without a word to her friends who were weeping round her, she passed silently away.

The heart of her lover had been set upon her, and the thought of her remained with him night and day.  He put aside his bow, and went neither to fight nor to hunt, but from sunrise to sunset he sat by the place where she was laid, thinking of his happiness that was buried there.  At last, after many days, a light seemed to come to him out of the darkness.  He remembered having heard from the old, old people of the tribe, that there was a path that led to the Land of Souls--that if you sought carefully you could find it.

So the next morning he got up early, and put some food in his pouch and slung an extra skin over his shoulders, for he knew not how long his journey would take, nor what sort of country he would have to go through.  Only one thing he knew, that if the path was there, he would find it.  At first he was puzzled, as there seemed no reason he should go in one direction more than another.  Then all at once he thought he had heard one of the old men say that the Land of Souls lay to the south, and so, filled with new hope and courage, he set his face southwards.  For many, many miles the country looked the same as it did round his own home.  The forests, the hills, and the rivers all seemed exactly like the ones

[p. 153]

he had left.  The only thing that was different was the snow, which had lain thick upon the hills and trees when he started, but grew less and less the farther he went south, till it disappeared altogether.  Soon the trees put forth their buds, and flowers sprang up under his feet, and instead of thick clouds there was blue sky over his head, and everywhere the birds were singing.  Then he knew that he was in the right road.

The thought that he should soon behold his lost bride made his heart beat for joy, and he sped along lightly and swiftly.  Now his way led through a dark wood, and then over some steep cliffs, and on the top of these he found a hut or wigwam.  An old man clothed in skins, and holding a staff in his hand, stood in the doorway; and he said to the young chief who was beginning to tell his story, 'I was waiting for you, wherefore you have come I know.  It is but a short while since she whom you seek was here.  Rest in my hut, as she also rested, and I will tell you what you ask, and whither you should go.'

On hearing these words, the young man entered the hut, but his heart was too eager within him to suffer him to rest, and when he arose, the old man rose too, and stood with him at the door.  'Look,' he said, 'at the water which lies far out yonder, and the plains which stretch beyond.  That is the Land of Souls, but no man enters it without leaving his body behind him.  So, lay down your body here; your bow and arrows, your skin and your dog.  They shall be kept for you safely.'

Then he turned away, and the young chief, light as air, seemed hardly to touch the ground; and as he flew along the scents grew sweeter and the flowers more beautiful, while the animals rubbed their noses against him, instead of hiding as he approached, and birds circled round him, and fishes lifted up their heads and looked as he went by.  Very soon he noticed with wonder, that neither rocks nor trees barred his path.  He passed through them without knowing it, for indeed, they were not rocks and trees at all, but only the souls of them; for this was the Land of Shadows.

So he went on with winged feet till he came to the shores of a great lake, with a lovely island in the middle of it; while on the bank of the lake was a canoe of glittering stone, and in the canoe were two shining paddles.

The chief jumped straight into the canoe, and seizing the paddles pushed off from the shore, when to his joy and wonder he saw following him in another canoe exactly like his own the maiden

[p. 154]

for whose sake he had made this long journey.  But they could not touch each other, for between them rolled great waves, which looked as if they would sink the boats, yet never did.  And the young man and the maiden shrank with fear, for down in the depths of the water they saw the bones of those who had died before, and in the waves themselves men and women were struggling, and but few passed over.  Only the children had no fear, and reached the other side in safety.  Still, though the chief and the young girl quailed in terror at these horrible sights and sounds, no harm came to them, for their lives had been free from evil, and the Master of Life had said that no evil should happen unto them.  So they reached unhurt the shore of the Happy Island, and wandered through the flowery fields and by the banks of rushing streams, and they knew not hunger nor thirst; neither cold nor heat.  The air fed them and the sun warmed them, and they forgot the dead, for they saw no graves, and the young man's thoughts turned not to wars, neither to the hunting of animals.  And gladly would these two have walked thus for ever, but in the murmur of the wind he heard the Master of Life saying to him, 'Return whither you came, for I have work for you to do, and your people need you, and for many years you shall rule over them.  At the gate my messenger awaits you, and you shall take again your body which you left behind, and he will show you what you are to do.  Listen to him, and have patience, and in time to come you shall rejoin her whom you must now leave, for she is accepted, and will remain ever young and beautiful, as when I called her hence from the Land of Snows.'

Footnotes

^152:1 From the Red Indian.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

[p. 155]

THE WHITE DUCK

Once upon a time a great and powerful King married a lovely Princess.  No couple were ever so happy; but before their honeymoon was over they were forced to part, for the King had to go on a warlike expedition to a far country, and leave his young wife alone at home.  Bitter were the tears she shed, while her husband sought in vain to soothe her with words of comfort and counsel, warning her, above all things, never to leave the castle, to hold no intercourse with strangers, to beware of evil counsellors, and especially to be on her guard against strange women.  And the Queen promised faithfully to obey her royal lord and master in these four matters.

So when the King set out on his expedition she shut herself up with her ladies in her own apartments, and spent her time in spinning and weaving, and in thinking of her royal husband.  Often she was very sad and lonely, and it happened that one day while she was seated at the window, letting salt tears drop on her work, an old woman, a kind, homely-looking old body, stepped up to the window, and, leaning upon her crutch, addressed the Queen in friendly, flattering tones, saying:

'Why are you sad and cast down, fair Queen?  You should not mope all day in your rooms, but should come out into the green garden, and hear the birds sing with joy among the trees, and see the butterflies fluttering above the flowers, and hear the bees and insects hum, and watch the sunbeams chase the dew-drops through the rose-leaves and in the lily-cups.  All the brightness outside would help to drive away your cares, O Queen.'

For long the Queen resisted her coaxing words, remembering the promise she had given the King, her husband; but at last she thought to herself:  After all, what harm would it do if I were to go into the garden for a short time and enjoy myself among the trees and flowers, and the singing birds and fluttering butterflies and

[p. 156]

humming insects, and look at the dew-drops hiding from the sunbeams in the hearts of the roses and lilies, and wander about in the sunshine, instead of remaining all day in this room?  For she had no idea that the kind-looking old woman leaning on her crutch was

[p. 157]

in reality a wicked witch, who envied the Queen her good fortune, and was determined to ruin her.  And so, in all ignorance, the Queen followed her out into the garden and listened to her smooth, flattering words.  Now, in the middle of the garden there was a pond of water, clear as crystal, and the old woman said to the Queen:

'The day is so warm, and the sun's rays so scorching, that the water in the pond looks very cool and inviting.  Would you not like to bathe in it, fair Queen?'

'No, I think not,' answered the Queen; but the next moment she regretted her words, and thought to herself:  Why shouldn't I bathe in that cool, fresh water?  No harm could come of it.  And, so saying, she slipped off her robes and stepped into the water.  But scarcely had her tender feet touched the cool ripples when she felt a great shove on her shoulders, and the wicked witch had pushed her into the deep water, exclaiming:

'Swim henceforth, White Duck!'

And the witch herself assumed the form of the Queen, and decked herself out in the royal robes, and sat among the Court ladies, awaiting the King's return.  And suddenly the tramp of horses' hoofs was heard, and the barking of dogs, and the witch hastened forward to meet the royal carriages, and, throwing her arms round the King's neck, kissed him.  And in his great joy the King did not know that the woman he held in his arms was not his own dear wife, but a wicked witch.

In the meantime, outside the palace walls, the poor White Duck swam up and down the pond; and near it laid three eggs, out of which there came one morning two little fluffy ducklings and a little ugly drake.  And the White Duck brought the little creatures up, and they paddled after her in the pond, and caught gold-fish, and hopped upon the bank and waddled about, ruffling their feathers and saying 'Quack, quack' as they strutted about on the green banks of the pond.  But their mother used to warn them not to stray too far, telling them that a wicked witch lived in the castle beyond the garden, adding, 'She has ruined me, and she will do her best to ruin you.'  But the young ones did not listen to their mother, and, playing about the garden one day, they strayed close up to the castle windows.  The witch at once recognised them by their smell, and ground her teeth with anger; but she hid her feelings, and, pretending to be very kind she called them to her and joked with them, and led them into a beautiful room, where she gave them

[p. 158]

food to eat, and showed them a soft cushion on which they might sleep.  Then she left them and went down into the palace kitchens, where she told the servants to sharpen the knives, and to make a great fire ready, and hang a large kettleful of water over it.

In the meantime the two little ducklings had fallen asleep, and the little drake lay between them, covered up by their wings, to be kept warm under their feathers.  But the little drake could not go to sleep, and as he lay there wide awake in the night he heard the witch come to the door and say:

'Little ones, are you asleep?'

And the little drake answered for the other two:

'We cannot sleep, we wake and weep,
  Sharp is the knife, to take our life;
  The fire is hot, now boils the pot,
  And so we wake, and lie and quake.'

'They are not asleep yet,' muttered the witch to herself; and she walked up and down in the passage, and then came back to the door, and said:

'Little ones, are you asleep?'

And again the little drake answered for his sisters:

'We cannot sleep, we wake and weep,
  Sharp is the knife, to take our life;
  The fire is hot, now boils the pot,
  And so we wake, and lie and quake.'

'Just the same answer,' muttered the witch; 'I think I'll go in and see.'  So she opened the door gently, and seeing the two little ducklings sound asleep, she there and then killed them.

The next morning the White Duck wandered round the pond in a distracted manner, looking for her little ones; she called and she searched, but could find no trace of them.  And in her heart she had a foreboding that evil had befallen them, and she fluttered up out of the water and flew to the palace.  And there, laid out on the marble floor of the court, dead and stone cold, were her three children.  The White Duck threw herself upon them, and, covering up their little bodies with her wings, she cried:

'Quack, quack--my little loves!
  Quack, quack--my turtle-doves!
  I brought you up with grief and pain,
  And now before my eyes you're slain. [p. 159]

 I gave you always of the best;
  I kept you warm in my soft nest.
  I loved and watched you day and night--
  You were my joy, my one delight.'

The King heard the sad complaint of the White Duck, and called to the witch: 'Wife, what a wonder is this?  Listen to that White Duck.'

[p. 160]

But the witch answered, 'My dear husband, what do you mean?  There is nothing wonderful in a duck's quacking.  Here, servants!  Chase that duck out of the courtyard.'  But though the servants chased and chevied, they could not get rid of the duck; for she circled round and round, and always came back to the spot where her children lay, crying:

'Quack, quack--my little loves!
  Quack, quack--my turtle-doves!
  The wicked witch your lives did take--
  The wicked witch, the cunning snake.
  First she stole my King away,
  Then my children did she slay.
  Changed me, from a happy wife,
  To a duck for all my life.
  Would I were the Queen again;
  Would that you had never been slain.'

And as the King heard her words he began to suspect that he had been deceived, and he called out to the servants, 'Catch that duck, and bring it here.'  But, though they ran to and fro, the duck always fled past them, and would not let herself be caught.  So the King himself stepped down amongst them, and instantly the duck fluttered down into his hands.  And as he stroked her wings she was changed into a beautiful woman, and he recognised his dear wife.  And she told him that a bottle would be found in her nest in the garden, containing some drops from the spring of healing.  And it was brought to her; and the ducklings and little drake were sprinkled with the water, and from the little dead bodies three lovely children arose.  And the King and Queen were overjoyed when they saw their children, and they all lived happily together in the beautiful palace.  But the wicked witch was taken by the King's command, and she came to no good end.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

[p. 161]

THE WITCH AND HER SERVANTS [*1]

Long time ago there lived a King who had three sons; the eldest was called Szabo, the second Warza, and the youngest Iwanich.

One beautiful spring morning the King was walking through his gardens with these three sons, gazing with admiration at the various fruit-trees, some of which were a mass of blossom, whilst others were bowed to the ground laden with rich fruit.  During their wanderings they came unperceived on a piece of waste land where three splendid trees grew.  The King looked on them for a moment, and then, shaking his head sadly, he passed on in silence.

The sons, who could not understand why he did this, asked him the reason of his dejection, and the King told them as follows:

'These three trees, which I cannot see without sorrow, were planted by me on this spot when I was a youth of twenty.  A celebrated magician, who had given the seed to my father, promised him that they would grow into the three finest trees the world had ever seen.  My father did not live to see his words come true; but on his death-bed he bade me transplant them here, and to look after them with the greatest care, which I accordingly did.  At last, after the lapse of five long years, I noticed some blossoms on the branches, and a few days later the most exquisite fruit my eyes had ever seen.

'I gave my head-gardener the strictest orders to watch the trees carefully, for the magician had warned my father that if one unripe fruit were plucked from the tree, all the rest would become rotten at once.  When it was quite ripe the fruit would become a golden yellow.

'Every day I gazed on the lovely fruit, which became gradually more and more tempting-looking, and it was all I could do not to break the magician's commands.

[p. 162]

'One night I dreamt that the fruit was perfectly ripe; I ate some of it, and it was more delicious than anything I had ever tasted in real life.  As soon as I awoke I sent for the gardener and asked him if the fruit on the three trees had not ripened in the night to perfection.

'But instead of replying, the gardener threw himself at my feet and swore that he was innocent.  He said that he had watched by the trees all night, but in spite of it, and as if by magic, the beautiful trees had been robbed of all their fruit.

'Grieved as I was over the theft, I did not punish the gardener, of whose fidelity I was well assured, but I determined to pluck off all the fruit in the following year before it was ripe, as I had not much belief in the magician's warning.

'I carried out my intention, and had all the fruit picked off the tree, but when I tasted one of the apples it was bitter and unpleasant, and the next morning the rest of the fruit had all rotted away.

'After this I had the beautiful fruit of these trees carefully guarded by my most faithful servants; but every year, on this very night, the fruit was plucked and stolen by an invisible hand, and next morning not a single apple remained on the trees.  For some time past I have given up even having the trees watched.'

When the King had finished his story, Szabo, his eldest son, said to him: 'Forgive me, father, if I say I think you are mistaken.  I am sure there are many men in your kingdom who could protect these trees from the cunning arts of a thieving magician; I myself, who as your eldest son claim the first right to do so, will mount guard over the fruit this very night.'

The King consented, and as soon as evening drew on Szabo climbed up on to one of the trees, determined to protect the fruit even if it cost him his life.  So he kept watch half the night; but a little after midnight he was overcome by an irresistible drowsiness, and fell fast asleep.  He did not awake till it was bright daylight, and all the fruit on the trees had vanished.

The following year Warza, the second brother, tried his luck, but with the same result.  Then it came to the turn of the third and youngest son.

Iwanich was not the least discouraged by the failure of his elder brothers, though they were both much older and stronger than he was, and when night came climbed up the tree as they had done, The moon had risen, and with her soft light lit up the whole

[p. 163]

neighbourhood, so that the observant Prince could distinguish the smallest object distinctly.

At midnight a gentle west wind shook the tree, and at the same moment a snow-white swan-like bird sank down gently on his breast.  The Prince hastily seized the bird's wings in his hands,

[p. 164]

when, lo! to his astonishment he found he was holding in his arms not a bird but the most beautiful girl he had ever seen.

'You need not fear Militza,' said the beautiful girl, looking at the Prince with friendly eyes.  'An evil magician has not robbed you of your fruit, but he stole the seed from my mother, and thereby caused her death.  When she was dying she bade me take the fruit, which you have no right to possess, from the trees every year as soon as it was ripe.  This I would have done to-night too, if you had not seized me with such force, and so broken the spell I was under.'

Iwanich, who had been prepared to meet a terrible magician and not a lovely girl, fell desperately in love with her.  They spent the rest of the night in pleasant conversation, and when Militza wished to go away he begged her not to leave him.

'I would gladly stay with you longer,' said Militza, 'but a wicked witch once cut off a lock of my hair when I was asleep, which has put me in her power, and if morning were still to find me here she would do me some harm, and you, too, perhaps.'

Having said these words, she drew a sparkling diamond ring

[p. 165]

from her finger, which she handed to the Prince, saying: 'Keep this ring in memory of Militza, and think of her sometimes if you never see her again.  But if your love is really true, come and find me in my own kingdom.  I may not show you the way there, but this ring will guide you.

'If you have love and courage enough to undertake this journey, whenever you come to a cross-road always look at this diamond before you settle which way you are going to take.  If it sparkles as brightly as ever go straight on, but if its lustre is dimmed choose another path.'

Then Militza bent over the Prince and kissed him on his forehead, and before he had time to say a word she vanished through the branches of the tree in a little white cloud.

Morning broke, and the Prince, still full of the wonderful apparition, left his perch and returned to the palace like one in a dream, without even knowing if the fruit had been taken or not; for his whole mind was absorbed by thoughts of Militza and how he was to find her.

As soon as the head-gardener saw the Prince going towards the palace he ran to the trees, and when he saw them laden with ripe fruit he hastened to tell the King the joyful news.  The King was beside himself for joy, and hurried at once to the garden and made the gardener pick him some of the fruit.  He tasted it, and found the apple quite as luscious as it had been in his dream.  He went at once to his son Iwanich, and after embracing him tenderly and heaping praises on him, he asked him how he had succeeded in protecting the costly fruit from the power of the magician.

This question placed Iwanich in a dilemma.  But as he did not want the real story to be known, he said that about midnight a huge wasp had flown through the branches, and buzzed incessantly round him.  He had warded it off with his sword, and at dawn, when he was becoming quite worn out, the wasp had vanished as suddenly as it had appeared.

The King, who never doubted the truth of this tale, bade his son go to rest at once and recover from the fatigues of the night; but he himself went and ordered many feasts to be held in honour of the preservation of the wonderful fruit.

The whole capital was in a stir, and everyone shared in the King's joy; the Prince alone took no part in the festivities.

While the King was at a banquet, Iwanich took some purses of gold, and mounting the quickest horse in the royal stable,

[p. 166]

he sped off like the wind without a single soul being any the wiser.

It was only on the next day that they missed him; the King was very distressed at his disappearance, and sent search-parties all over the kingdom to look for him, but in vain; and after six months they gave him up as dead, and in another six months they had forgotten all about him.  But in the meantime the Prince, with the help of his ring, had had a most successful journey, and no evil had befallen him.

At the end of three months he came to the entrance of a huge forest, which looked as if it had never been trodden by human foot before, and which seemed to stretch out indefinitely.  The Prince was about to enter the wood by a little path he had discovered, when he heard a voice shouting to him: 'Hold, youth!  Whither are you going?'

Iwanich turned round, and saw a tall, gaunt-looking man, clad in miserable rags, leaning on a crooked staff and seated at the foot of an oak tree, which was so much the same colour as himself that it was little wonder the Prince had ridden past the tree without noticing him.

'Where else should I be going,' he said, 'than through the wood?'

'Through the wood?' said the old man in amazement.  'It's easily seen that you have heard nothing of this forest, that you rush so blindly to meet your doom.  Well, listen to me before you ride any further; let me tell you that this wood hides in its depths a countless number of the fiercest tigers, hyenas, wolves, bears, and snakes, and all sorts of other monsters.  If I were to cut you and your horse up into tiny morsels and throw them to the beasts, there wouldn't be one bit for each hundred of them.  Take my advice, therefore, and if you wish to save your life follow some other path.'

The Prince was rather taken aback by the old man's words, and considered for a minute what he should do; then looking at his ring, and perceiving that it sparkled as brightly as ever, he called out: 'If this wood held even more terrible things than it does, I cannot help myself, for I must go through it.'

Here he spurred his horse and rode on; but the old beggar screamed so loudly after him that the Prince turned round and rode back to the oak tree.

'I am really sorry for you,' said the beggar, 'but if you are quite determined to brave the dangers of the forest, let me at least

[p. 167]

give you a piece of advice which will help you against these monsters.

'Take this bagful of bread-crumbs and this live hare.  I will make you a present of them both, as I am anxious to save your life; but you must leave your horse behind you, for it would stumble over the fallen trees or get entangled in the briers and thorns.  When you have gone about a hundred yards into the wood the wild beasts will surround you.  Then you must instantly seize your bag, and scatter the bread-crumbs among them.  They will rush to eat them up greedily, and when you have scattered the last crumb you must lose no time in throwing the hare to them; as soon as the hare feels itself on the ground it will run away as quickly as possible, and the wild beasts will turn to pursue it.  In this way you will be able to get through the wood unhurt.'

Iwanich thanked the old man for his counsel, dismounted from his horse, and, taking the bag and the hare in his arms, he entered the forest.  He had hardly lost sight of his gaunt grey friend when he heard growls and snarls in the thicket close to him, and before he had time to think he found himself surrounded by the most dreadful-looking creatures.  On one side he saw the glittering eye of a cruel tiger, on the other the gleaming teeth of a great she-wolf; here a huge bear growled fiercely, and there a horrible snake coiled itself in the grass at his feet.

But Iwanich did not forget the old man's advice, and quickly put his hand into the bag and took out as many bread-crumbs as he could hold in his hand at a time.  He threw them to the beasts, but soon the bag grew lighter and lighter, and the Prince began to feel a little frightened.  And now the last crumb was gone, and the hungry beasts thronged round him, greedy for fresh prey.  Then he seized the hare and threw it to them.

No sooner did the little creature feel itself on the ground than it lay back its ears and flew through the wood like an arrow from a bow, closely pursued by the wild beasts, and the Prince was left alone.  He looked at his ring, and when he saw that it sparkled as brightly as ever he went straight on through the forest.

He hadn't gone very far when he saw a most extraordinary looking man coming towards him.  He was not more than three feet high, his legs were quite crooked, and all his body was covered with prickles like a hedgehog.  Two lions walked with him, fastened to his side by the two ends of his long beard.

He stopped the Prince and asked him in a harsh voice: 'Are you the man who has just fed my body-guard?'

[p. 168]

Iwanich was so startled that he could hardly reply, but the little man continued: 'I am most grateful to you for your kindness; what can I give you as a reward?'

'All I ask,' replied Iwanich, 'is, that I should be allowed to go through this wood in safety.'

'Most certainly,' answered the little man; 'and for greater security I will give you one of my lions as a protector.  But when you leave this wood and come near a palace which does not belong to my domain, let the lion go, in order that he may not fall into the hands of an enemy and be killed.'

With these words he loosened the lion from his beard and bade the beast guard the youth carefully.

With this new protector Iwanich wandered on through the forest, and though he came upon a great many more wolves, hyenas, leopards, and other wild beasts, they always kept at a respectful distance when they saw what sort of an escort the Prince had with him.

Iwanich hurried through the wood as quickly as his legs would carry him, but, nevertheless, hour after hour went by and not a trace of a green field or a human habitation met his eyes.  At

[p. 169]

length, towards evening, the mass of trees grew more transparent, and through the interlaced branches a wide plain was visible.

At the exit of the wood the lion stood still, and the Prince took leave of him, having first thanked him warmly for his kind protection.  It had become quite dark, and Iwanich was forced to wait for daylight before continuing his journey.

He made himself a bed of grass and leaves, lit a fire of dry branches, and slept soundly till the next morning.

Then he got up and walked towards a beautiful white palace which he saw gleaming in the distance.  In about an hour he reached the building, and opening the door he walked in.

After wandering through many marble halls, he came to a huge staircase made of porphyry, leading down to a lovely garden.

The Prince burst into a shout of joy when he suddenly perceived Militza in the centre of a group of girls who were weaving wreaths of flowers with which to deck their mistress.

As soon as Militza saw the Prince she ran up to him and embraced him tenderly; and after he had told her all his adventures, they went into the palace, where a sumptuous meal awaited them.  Then the Princess called her court together, and introduced Iwanich to them as her future husband.

Preparations were at once made for the wedding, which was held soon after with great pomp and magnificence.

Three months of great happiness followed, when Militza received one day an invitation to visit her mother's sister.

Although the Princess was very unhappy at leaving her husband, she did not like to refuse the invitation, and, promising to return in seven days at the latest, she took a tender farewell of the Prince, and said: 'Before I go I will hand you over all the keys of the castle.  Go everywhere and do anything you like; only one thing I beg and beseech you, do not open the little iron door in the north tower, which is closed with seven locks and seven bolts; for if you do, we shall both suffer for it.'

Iwanich promised what she asked, and Militza departed, repeating her promise to return in seven days.

When the Prince found himself alone he began to be tormented by pangs of curiosity as to what the room in the tower contained.  For two days he resisted the temptation to go and look, but on the third he could stand it no longer, and taking a torch in his hand he hurried to the tower, and unfastened one lock after the other of the little iron door until it burst open.

[p. 170]

What an unexpected sight met his gaze!  The Prince perceived a small room black with smoke, lit up feebly by a fire from which issued long blue flames.  Over the fire hung a huge cauldron full of boiling pitch, and fastened into the cauldron by iron chains stood a wretched man screaming with agony.

Iwanich was much horrified at the sight before him, and asked the man what terrible crime he had committed to be punished in this dreadful fashion.

'I will tell you everything,' said the man in the cauldron; 'but first relieve my torments a little, I implore you.'

'And how can I do that?' asked the Prince.

'With a little water,' replied the man; 'only sprinkle a few drops over me and I shall feel better.'

The Prince, moved by pity, without thinking what he was doing, ran to the courtyard of the castle, and filled a jug with water, which he poured over the man in the cauldron.

In a moment a most fearful crash was heard, as if all the pillars of the palace were giving way, and the palace itself, with towers and doors, windows and the cauldron, whirled round the bewildered Prince's head.  This continued for a few minutes, and then everything vanished into thin air, and Iwanich found himself suddenly alone upon a desolate heath covered with rocks and stones.

The Prince, who now realised what his heedlessness had done, cursed too late his spirit of curiosity.  In his despair he wandered on over the heath, never looking where he put his feet, and full of sorrowful thoughts.  At last he saw a light in the distance, which came from a miserable-looking little hut.

The owner of it was none other than the kind-hearted gaunt grey beggar who had given the Prince the bag of bread-crumbs and the hare.  Without recognising Iwanich, he opened the door when he knocked and gave him shelter for the night.

On the following morning the Prince asked his host if he could get him any work to do, as he was quite unknown in the neighbourhood, and had not enough money to take him home.

'My son,' replied the old man, 'all this country round here is uninhabited; I myself have to wander to distant villages for my living, and even then I do not very often find enough to satisfy my hunger.  But if you would like to take service with the old witch Corva, go straight up the little stream which flows below my hut for about three hours, and you will come to a sand-hill on the left-hand side; that is where she lives.'

[p. 171]

Iwanich thanked the gaunt grey beggar for his information, and went on his way.

After walking for about three hours the Prince came upon a dreary-looking grey stone wall; this was the back of the building and did not attract him; but when he came upon the front of the house he found it even less inviting, for the old witch had surrounded her dwelling with a fence of spikes, on every one of which a man's skull was stuck.  In this horrible enclosure stood a small black house, which had only two grated windows, all covered with cobwebs, and a battered iron door.

The Prince knocked, and a rasping woman's voice told him to enter.

Iwanich opened the door, and found himself in a smoke-begrimed kitchen, in the presence of a hideous old woman who was warming her skinny hands at a fire.  The Prince offered to become her servant, and the old hag told him she was badly in want of one, and he seemed to be just the person to suit her.

When Iwanich asked what his work, and how much his wages would be, the witch bade him follow her, and led the way through a narrow damp passage into a vault, which served as a stable.  Here he perceived two pitch-black horses in a stall.

'You see before you,' said the old woman, 'a mare and her foal; you have nothing to do but to lead them out to the fields every day, and to see that neither of them runs away from you.  If you look after them both for a whole year I will give you anything you like to ask; but if, on the other hand, you let either of the animals escape you, your last hour is come, and your head shall be stuck on the last spike of my fence.  The other spikes, as you see, are already adorned, and the skulls are all those of different servants I have had who have failed to do what I demanded.'

Iwanich, who thought he could not be much worse off than he was already, agreed to the witch's proposal.  At daybreak nest morning he drove his horses to the field, and brought them back in the evening without their ever having attempted to break away from him.  The witch stood at her door and received him kindly, and set a good meal before him.

So it continued for some time, and all went well with the Prince.

Early every morning he led the horses out to the fields, and brought them home safe and sound in the evening.

One day, while he was watching the horses, he came to the banks of a river, and saw a big fish, which through some mischance

[p. 172]

had been cast on the land, struggling hard to get back into the water.

Iwanich, who felt sorry for the poor creature, seized it in his arms and flung it into the stream.  But no sooner did the fish find itself in the water again, than, to the Prince's amazement, it swam up to the bank and said:

'My kind benefactor, how can I reward you for your goodness?'

'I desire nothing,' answered the Prince.  'I am quite content to have been able to be of some service to you.'

'You must do me the favour,' replied the fish, 'to take a scale from my body, and keep it carefully.  If you should ever need my help, throw it into the river, and I will come to your aid at once.'

Iwanich bowed, loosened a scale from the body of the grateful beast, put it carefully away, and returned home.

A short time after this, when he was going early one morning to the usual grazing place with his horses, he noticed a flock of birds assembled together making a great noise and flying wildly backwards and forwards.

Full of curiosity, Iwanich hurried up to the spot, and saw that a large number of ravens had attacked an eagle, and although the eagle was big and powerful and was making a brave fight, it was overpowered at last by numbers, and had to give in.

But the Prince, who was sorry for the poor bird, seized the branch of a tree and hit out at the ravens with it; terrified at this unexpected onslaught they flew away, leaving many of their number dead or wounded on the battlefield.

As soon as the eagle saw itself free from its tormentors it plucked a feather from its wing, and, handing it to the Prince, said: 'Here, my kind benefactor, take this feather as a proof of my gratitude; should you ever be in need of my help blow this feather into the air, and I will help you as much as is in my power.'

Iwanich thanked the bird, and placing the feather beside the scale he drove the horses home.

Another day he had wandered farther than usual, and came close to a farmyard; the place pleased the Prince, and as there was plenty of good grass for the horses he determined to spend the day there.  Just as he was sitting down under a tree he heard a cry close to him, and saw a fox which had been caught in a trap placed there by the farmer.

In vain did the poor beast try to free itself; then the good-natured

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] Prince came once more to the rescue, and let the fox out of the trap.

The fox thanked him heartily, tore two hairs out of his bushy tail, and said: 'Should you ever stand in need of my help throw these two hairs into the fire, and in a moment I shall be at your side ready to obey you.'

Iwanich put the fox's hairs with the scale and the feather, and as it was getting dark he hastened home with his horses.

In the meantime his service was drawing near to an end, and in three more days the year was up, and he would be able to get his reward and leave the witch.

On the first evening of these last three days, when he came home and was eating his supper, he noticed the old woman stealing into the stables.

The Prince followed her secretly to see what she was going to do.  He crouched down in the doorway and heard the wicked witch telling the horses to wait next morning till Iwanich was asleep, and then to go and hide themselves in the river, and to stay there till she told them to return; and if they didn't do as she told them the old woman threatened to beat them till they bled.

When Iwanich heard all this he went back to his room, determined that nothing should induce him to fall asleep next day.  On the following morning he led the mare and foal to the fields as usual, but bound a cord round them both which he kept in his hand.

But after a few hours, by the magic arts of the old witch, he was overpowered by sleep, and the mare and foal escaped and did as they had been told to do.  The Prince did not awake till late in the evening; and when he did, he found, to his horror, that the horses had disappeared.  Filled with despair, he cursed the moment when he had entered the service of the cruel witch, and already he saw his head sticking up on the sharp spike beside the others.

Then he suddenly remembered the fish's scale, which, with the eagle's feather and the fox's hairs, he always carried about with him.  He drew the scale from his pocket, and hurrying to the river he threw it in.  In a minute the grateful fish swam towards the bank on which Iwanich was standing, and said: 'What do you command, my friend and benefactor?'

The Prince replied: 'I had to look after a mare and foal, and they have run away from me and have hidden themselves in the river; if you wish to save my life drive them back to the land.'

'Wait a moment,' answered the fish, 'and I and my friends

[p. 174]

will soon drive them out of the water.'  With these words the creature disappeared into the depths of the stream.

Almost immediately a rushing hissing sound was heard in the waters, the waves dashed against the banks, the foam was tossed into the air, and the two horses leapt suddenly on to the dry land, trembling and shaking with fear.

Iwanich sprang at once on to the mare's back, seized the foal by its bridle, and hastened home in the highest spirits.

When the witch saw the Prince bringing the horses home she could hardly conceal her wrath, and as soon as she had placed Iwanich's supper before him she stole away again to the stables.  The Prince followed her, and heard her scolding the beasts harshly for not having hidden themselves better.  She bade them wait next morning till Iwanich was asleep and then to hide themselves in the clouds, and to remain there till she called.  If they did not do as she told them she would beat them till they bled.

The next morning, after Iwanich had led his horses to the fields, he fell once more into a magic sleep.  The horses at once ran away and hid themselves in the clouds, which hung down from the mountains in soft billowy masses.

When the Prince awoke and found that both the mare and the foal had disappeared, he bethought him at once of the eagle, and taking the feather out of his pocket he blew it into the air.

In a moment the bird swooped down beside him and asked: 'What do you wish me to do?'

'My mare and foal,' replied the Prince, 'have run away from me, and have hidden themselves in the clouds; if you wish to save my life, restore both animals to me.'

'Wait a minute,' answered the eagle; 'with the help of my friends I will soon drive them back to you.'

With these words the bird flew up into the air and disappeared among the clouds.

Almost directly Iwanich saw his two horses being driven towards him by a host of eagles of all sizes.  He caught the mare and foal, and having thanked the eagle he drove them cheerfully home again.

The old witch was more disgusted than ever when she saw him appearing, and having set his supper before him she stole into the stables, and Iwanich heard her abusing the horses for not having hidden themselves better in the clouds.  Then she bade them hide themselves next morning, as soon as Iwanich was asleep, in the

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] King's hen-house, which stood on a lonely part of the heath, and to remain there till she called.  If they failed to do as she told them she would certainly beat them this time till they bled.

On the following morning the Prince drove his horses as usual to the fields.  After he had been overpowered by sleep, as on the former days, the mare and foal ran away and hid themselves in the royal hen house.

When the Prince awoke and found the horses gone he determined to appeal to the fox; so, lighting a fire, he threw the two hairs into it, and in a few moments the fox stood beside him and asked: 'In what way can I serve you?'

'I wish to know,' replied Iwanich, 'where the King's hen-house is.'

'Hardly an hour's walk from here,' answered the fox, and offered to show the Prince the way to it.

While they were walking along the fox asked him what he wanted to do at the royal hen-house.  The Prince told him of the misfortune that had befallen him, and of the necessity of recovering the mare and foal.

'That is no easy matter,' replied the fox.  'But wait a moment.  I have an idea.  Stand at the door of the hen-house, and wait there for your horses.  In the meantime I will slip in among the hens through a hole in the wall and give them a good chase, so that the noise they make will arouse the royal henwives, and they will come to see what is the matter.  When they see the horses they will at once imagine them to be the cause of the disturbance, and will drive them out.  Then you must lay hands on the mare and foal and catch them.

All turned out exactly as the sly fox had foreseen.  The Prince swung himself on the mare, seized the foal by its bridle, and hurried home.

While he was riding over the heath in the highest of spirits the mare suddenly said to her rider: 'You are the first person who has ever succeeded in outwitting the old witch Corva, and now you may ask what reward you like for your service.  If you promise never to betray me I will give you a piece of advice which you will do well to follow.'

The Prince promised never to betray her confidence, and the mare continued: 'Ask nothing else as a reward than my foal, for it has not its like in the world, and is not to be bought for love or money; for it can go from one end of the earth to another in a few minutes.  Of course the cunning Corva will do her best to dissuade

[p. 176]

you from taking the foal, and will tell you that it is both idle and sickly; but do not believe her, and stick to your point.'

Iwanich longed to possess such an animal, and promised the mare to follow her advice.

[p. 177]

This time Corva received him in the most friendly manner, and set a sumptuous repast before him.  As soon as he had finished she asked him what reward he demanded for his year's service.

'Nothing more nor less,' replied the Prince, 'than the foal of your mare.'

The witch pretended to be much astonished at his request, and said that he deserved something much better than the foal, for the beast was lazy and nervous, blind in one eye, and, in short, was quite worthless.

But the Prince knew what he wanted, and when the old witch saw that he had made up his mind to have the foal, she said, 'I am obliged to keep my promise and to hand you over the foal; and as I know who you are and what you want, I will tell you in what way the animal will be useful to you.  The man in the cauldron of boiling pitch, whom you set free, is a mighty magician; through your curiosity and thoughtlessness Militza came into his power, and he has transported her and her castle and belongings into a distant country.

'You are the only person who can kill him; and in consequence he fears you to such an extent that he has set spies to watch you, and they report your movements to him daily.

'When you have reached him, beware of speaking a single word to him, or you will fall into the power of his friends.  Seize him at once by the beard and dash him to the ground.'

Iwanich thanked the old witch, mounted his foal, put spurs to its sides, and they flew like lightning through the air.

Already it was growing dark, when Iwanich perceived some figures in the distance; they soon came up to them, and then the Prince saw that it was the magician and his friends who were driving through the air in a carriage drawn by owls.

When the magician found himself face to face with Iwanich, without hope of escape, he turned to him with false friendliness and said: 'Thrice my kind benefactor!'

But the Prince, without saying a word, seized him at once by his beard and dashed him to the ground.  At the same moment the foal sprang on the top of the magician and kicked and stamped on him with his hoofs till he died.

Then Iwanich found himself once more in the palace of his bride, and Militza herself flew into his arms.

From this time forward they lived in undisturbed peace and happiness till the end of their lives.

Footnotes

^161:1 From the Russian. Kletke.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

[p. 178]

THE MAGIC RING

Once upon a time there lived an old couple who had one son called Martin.  Now when the old man's time had come, he stretched himself out on his bed and died.  Though all his life long he had toiled and moiled, he only left his widow and son two hundred florins.  The old woman determined to put by the money for a rainy day; but alas!  the rainy day was close at hand, for their meal was all consumed, and who is prepared to face starvation with two hundred florins at their disposal?  So the old woman counted out a hundred of her florins, and giving them to Martin, told him to go into the town and lay in a store of meal for a year.

So Martin started off for the town.  When he reached the meat-market he found the whole place in turmoil, and a great noise of angry voices and barking of dogs.  Mixing in the crowd, he noticed a stag-hound which the butchers had caught and tied to a post, and which was being flogged in a merciless manner.  Overcome with pity, Martin spoke to the butchers, saying:

'Friends, why are you beating the poor dog so cruelly?'

'We have every right to beat him,' they replied; 'he has just devoured a newly-killed pig.'

'Leave off beating him,' said Martin, 'and sell him to me instead.'

'If you choose to buy him,' answered the butchers derisively; 'but for such a treasure we won't take a penny less than a hundred florins.'

'A hundred!' exclaimed Martin.  'Well, so be it, if you will not take less;' and, taking the money out of his pocket, he handed it over in exchange for the dog, whose name was Schurka.

When Martin got home, his mother met him with the question:

'Well, what have you bought?'

'Schurka, the dog,' replied Martin, pointing to his new possession.

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] Whereupon his mother became very angry, and abused him roundly.  He ought to be ashamed of himself, when there was scarcely a handful of meal in the house, to have spent the money on a useless brute like that.  On the following day she sent him back to the town, saying, 'Here, take our last hundred florins, and buy provisions with them.  I have just emptied the last grains of meal out of the chest, and baked a bannock; but it won't last over to-morrow.'

Just as Martin was entering the town he met a rough-looking peasant who was dragging a cat after him by a string which was fastened round the poor beast's neck.

'Stop,' cried Martin; 'where are you dragging that poor cat?'

'I mean to drown him,' was the answer.

'What harm has the poor beast done?' said Martin.

'It has just killed a goose,' replied the peasant.

'Don't drown him, sell him to me instead,' begged Martin.

'Not for a hundred florins,' was the answer.

'Surely for a hundred florins you'll sell it?' said Martin.  'See!  here is the money;' and, so saying, he handed him the hundred florins, which the peasant pocketed, and Martin took possession of the cat, which was called Waska.

When he reached his home his mother greeted him with the question:

'Well, what have you brought back?'

'I have brought this cat, Waska,' answered Martin.

'And what besides?'

'I had no money over to buy anything else with,' replied Martin.

'You useless ne'er-do-weel!' exclaimed his mother in a great passion.  'Leave the house at once, and go and beg your bread among strangers;' and as Martin did not dare to contradict her, he called Schurka and Waska and started off with them to the nearest village in search of work.  On the way he met a rich peasant, who asked him where he was going.

'I want to get work as a day labourer,' he answered.

'Come along with me, then.  But I must tell you I engage my labourers without wages.  If you serve me faithfully for a year, I promise you it shall be for your advantage.'

So Martin consented, and for a year he worked diligently, and served his master faithfully, not sparing himself in any way.  When the day of reckoning had come the peasant led him into a

[p. 180]

barn, and pointing to two full sacks, said: 'Take whichever of these you choose.'

Martin examined the contents of the sacks, and seeing that one was full of silver and the other of sand, he said to himself:

'There must be some trick about this; I had better take the sand.'  And throwing the sack over his shoulders he started out into the world, in search of fresh work.  On and on he walked, and at last he reached a great gloomy wood.  In the middle of the wood he came upon a meadow, where a fire was burning, and in the midst of the fire, surrounded by flames, was a lovely damsel, more beautiful than anything that Martin had ever seen, and when she saw him she called to him:

'Martin, if you would win happiness, save my life.  Extinguish the flames with the sand that you earned in payment of your faithful service.'

'Truly,' thought Martin to himself, 'it would be more sensible to save a fellow-being's life with this sand than to drag it about on one's back, seeing what a weight it is.'  And forthwith he lowered the sack from his shoulders and emptied its contents on the flames, and instantly the fire was extinguished; but at the same moment lo!  and behold the lovely damsel turned into a Serpent, and, darting upon him, coiled itself round his neck, and whispered lovingly in his ear:

'Do not be afraid of me, Martin; I love you, and will go with you through the world.  But first you must follow me boldly into my Father's Kingdom, underneath the earth; and when we get there, remember this--he will offer you gold and silver, and dazzling gems, but do not touch them.  Ask him, instead, for the ring which he wears on his little finger, for in that ring lies a magic power; you have only to throw it from one hand to the other, and at once twelve young men will appear, who will do your bidding, no matter how difficult, in a single night.'

So they started on their way, and after much wandering they reached a spot where a great rock rose straight up in the middle of the road.  Instantly the Serpent uncoiled itself from his neck, and, as it touched the damp earth, it resumed the shape of the lovely damsel.  Pointing to the rock, she showed him an opening just big enough for a man to wriggle through.  Passing into it, they entered a long underground passage, which led out on to a wide field, above which spread a blue sky.  In the middle of the field stood a magnificent castle, built out of porphyry, with a roof

[p. 181]

of gold and with glittering battlements.  And his beautiful guide told him that this was the palace in which her father lived and reigned over his kingdom in the Under-world.

[p. 182]

Together they entered the palace, and were received by the King with great kindness.  Turning to his daughter, he said:

'My child, I had almost given up the hope of ever seeing you again.  Where have you been all these years?'

'My father,' she replied, 'I owe my life to this youth, who saved me from a terrible death.'

Upon which the King turned to Martin with a gracious smile, saying: 'I will reward your courage by granting you whatever your heart desires.  Take as much gold, silver, and precious stones as you choose.'

'I thank you, mighty King, for your gracious offer,' answered Martin,' 'but I do not covet either gold, silver, or precious stones; yet if you will grant me a favour, give me, I beg, the ring from off the little finger of your royal hand.  Every time my eye falls on it I shall think of your gracious Majesty, and when I marry I shall present it to my bride.'

So the King took the ring from his finger and gave it to Martin, saying: 'Take it, good youth; but with it I make one condition-- you are never to confide to anyone that this is a magic ring.  If you do, you will straightway bring misfortune on yourself.'

Martin took the ring, and, having thanked the King, he set out on the same road by which he had come down into the Under-world.  When he had regained the upper air he started for his old home, and having found his mother still living in the old house where he had left her, they settled down together very happily.  So uneventful was their life that it almost seemed as if it would go on in this way always, without let or hindrance.  But one day it suddenly came into his mind that he would like to get married, and, moreover, that he would choose a very grand wife--a King's daughter, in short.  But as he did not trust himself as a wooer, he determined to send his old mother on the mission.

'You must go to the King,' he said to her, 'and demand the hand of his lovely daughter in marriage for me.'

'What are you thinking of, my son?' answered the old woman, aghast at the idea.  'Why cannot you marry someone in your own rank?  That would be far more fitting than to send a poor old woman like me a-wooing to the King's Court for the hand of a Princess.  Why, it is as much as our heads are worth.  Neither my life nor yours would be worth anything if I went on such a fool's errand.'

'Never fear, little mother,' answered Martin.  'Trust me; all

[p. 183]

will be well.  But see that you do not come back without an answer of some kind.'

And so, obedient to her son's behest, the old woman hobbled off to the palace, and, without being hindered, reached the courtyard, and began to mount the flight of steps leading to the royal presence chamber.  At the head of the landing rows of courtiers were collected in magnificent attire, who stared at the queer old figure, and called to her, and explained to her, with every kind of sign, that it was strictly forbidden to mount those steps.  But their stern words and forbidding gestures made no impression whatever on the old woman, and she resolutely continued to climb the stairs, bent on carrying out her son's orders.  Upon this some of the courtiers seized her by the arms, and held her back by sheer force, at which she set up such a yell that the King himself heard it, and stepped out on to the balcony to see what was the matter.  When he beheld the old woman flinging her arms wildly about, and heard her scream that she would not leave the place till she had laid her case before the King, he ordered that she should be brought into his presence.  And forthwith she was conducted into the golden presence chamber, where, leaning back amongst cushions of royal purple, the King sat, surrounded by his counsellors and courtiers.  Courtesying low, the old woman stood silent before him.  'Well, my good old dame, what can I do for you?' asked the King.

'I have come,' replied Martin's mother--'and your Majesty must not be angry with me--I have come a-wooing.'

'Is the woman out of her mind?' said the King, with an angry frown.

But Martin's mother answered boldly: 'If the King will only listen patiently to me, and give me a straightforward answer, he will see that I am not out of my mind.  You, O King, have a lovely daughter to give in marriage.  I have a son--a wooer--as clever a youth and as good a son-in-law as you will find in your whole kingdom.  There is nothing that he cannot do.  Now tell me, O King, plump and plain, will you give your daughter to my son as wife?'  The King listened to the end of the old woman's strange request, but every moment his face grew blacker, and his features sterner; till all at once he thought to himself, 'Is it worth while that I, the King, should be angry with this poor old fool?' And all the courtiers and counsellors were amazed when they saw the hard lines round his mouth and the frown on his brow grow

[p. 184]

smooth, and heard the mild but mocking tones in which he answered the old woman, saying:

'If your son is as wonderfully clever as you say, and if there is nothing in the world that he cannot do, let him build a magnificent castle, just opposite my palace windows, in four and twenty hours.  The palace must be joined together by a bridge of pure crystal.  On each side of the bridge there must be growing trees, having golden and silver apples, and with birds of Paradise among the branches.  At the right of the bridge there must be a church, with five golden cupolas; in this church your son shall be wedded to my daughter, and we will keep the wedding festivities in the new castle.  But if he fails to execute this my royal command, then, as a just but mild monarch, I shall give orders that you and he are taken, and first dipped in tar and then in feathers, and you shall be executed in the market-place for the entertainment of my courtiers.'

And a smile played round the King's lips as he finished speaking, and his courtiers and counsellors shook with laughter when they thought of the old woman's folly, and praised the King's wise device, and said to each other, 'What a joke it will be when we see the pair of them tarred and feathered!  The son is just as able to grow a beard on the palm of his hand as to execute such a task in twenty-four hours.'

Now the poor old woman was mortally afraid and, in a trembling voice she asked:

'Is that really your royal will, O King?  Must I take this order to my poor son?'

'Yes, old dame; such is my command.  If your son carries out my order, he shall be rewarded with my daughter; but if he fails, away to the tar-barrel and the stake with you both!'

On her way home the poor old woman shed bitter tears, and when she saw Martin she told him what the King had said, and sobbed out:

'Didn't I tell you, my son, that you should marry someone of your own rank?  It would have been better for us this day if you had.  As I told you, my going to Court has been as much as our lives are worth, and now we will both be tarred and feathered, and burnt in the public market-place.  It is terrible!' and she moaned and cried.

'Never fear, little mother,' answered Martin; 'trust me, and you will see all will be well.  You may go to sleep with a quiet mind.'

And, stepping to the front of the hut, Martin threw his ring

[p. 185]

from the palm of one hand into the other, upon which twelve youths instantly appeared, and demanded what he wanted them to do.  Then he told them the King's commands, and they answered that by next morning all should be accomplished exactly as the King had ordered.

Next morning when the King awoke, and looked out of his window, to his amazement he beheld a magnificent castle, just opposite his own palace, and joined to it a bridge of pure crystal.

At each side of the bridge trees were growing, from whose branches hung golden and silver apples, among which birds of Paradise perched.  At the right, gleaming in the sun, were the five golden cupolas of a splendid church, whose bells rang out, as if they would summon people from all corners of the earth to come and behold the wonder.  Now, though the King would much rather have seen his future son-in-law tarred, feathered, and burnt at the stake, he remembered his royal oath, and had to make the best of a bad business.  So he took heart of grace, and made Martin a Duke, and gave his daughter a rich dowry, and prepared the grandest wedding-feast that had ever been seen, so that to this day the old people in the country still talk of it.

After the wedding Martin and his royal bride went to dwell in the magnificent new palace, and here Martin lived in the greatest comfort and luxury, such luxury as he had never imagined.  But though he was as happy as the day was long, and as merry as a grig, the King's daughter fretted all day, thinking of the indignity that had been done her in making her marry Martin, the poor widow's son, instead of a rich young Prince from a foreign country.  So unhappy was she that she spent all her time wondering how she should get rid of her undesirable husband.  And first she determined to learn the secret of his power, and, with flattering, caressing words, she tried to coax him to tell her how he was so clever that there was nothing in the world that he could not do.  At first he would tell her nothing; but once, when he was in a yielding mood, she approached him with a winning smile on her lovely face, and, speaking flattering words to him, she gave him a potion to drink, with a sweet, strong taste.  And when he had drunk it Martin's lips were unsealed, and he told her that all his power lay in the magic ring that he wore on his finger, and he described to her how to use it, and, still speaking, he fell into a deep sleep.  And when she saw that the potion had worked, and that he was sound asleep, the Princess took the magic ring from his finger, and, going into

[p. 186]

the courtyard, she threw it from the palm of one hand into the other.

On the instant the twelve youths appeared, and asked her what she commanded them to do.  Then she told them that by the next morning they were to do away with the castle, and the bridge, and the church, and put in their stead the humble hut in which Martin used to live with his mother, and that while he slept her husband was to be carried to his old lowly room; and that they were to bear her away to the utmost ends of the earth, where an old King lived who would make her welcome in his palace, and surround her with the state that befitted a royal Princess.

'You shall be obeyed,' answered the twelve youths at the same moment.  And lo and behold!  the following morning, when the King awoke and looked out of his window he beheld to his amazement that the palace, bridge, church, and trees had all vanished, and there was nothing in their place but a bare, miserable-looking hut.

Immediately the King sent for his son-in-law, and commanded him to explain what had happened.  But Martin looked at his royal father-in-law, and answered never a word.  Then the King was very angry, and, calling a council together, he charged Martin with having been guilty of witchcraft, and of having deceived the King, and having made away with the Princess; and he was condemned to imprisonment in a high stone tower, with neither meat nor drink, till he should die of starvation.

Then, in the hour of his dire necessity, his old friends Schurka (the dog) and Waska (the cat) remembered how Martin had once

[p. 187]

saved them from a cruel death; and they took counsel together as to how they should help him.  And Schurka growled, and was of opinion that he would like to tear everyone in pieces; but Waska purred meditatively, and scratched the back of her ear with a velvet paw, and remained lost in thought.  At the end of a few minutes she had made up her mind, and, turning to Schurka, said: 'Let us go together into the town, and the moment we meet a baker you must make a rush between his legs and upset the tray from off his head; I will lay hold of the rolls, and will carry them off to our master.'  No sooner said than done.  Together the two faithful creatures trotted off into the town, and very soon they met a baker bearing a tray on his head, and looking round on all sides, while he cried:

'Fresh rolls, sweet cake,
    Fancy bread of every kind.
  Come and buy, come and take,
    Sure you'll find it to your mind,'

[p. 188]

At that moment Schurka made a rush between his legs--the baker stumbled, the tray was upset, the rolls fell to the ground, and, while the man angrily pursued Schurka, Waska managed to drag the rolls out of sight behind a bush.  And when a moment later Schurka joined her, they set off at full tilt to the stone tower where Martin was a prisoner, taking the rolls with them.  Waska, being very agile, climbed up by the outside to the grated window, and called in an anxious voice:

'Are you alive, master?'

'Scarcely alive--almost starved to death,' answered Martin in a weak voice.  'I little thought it would come to this, that I should die of hunger.'

'Never fear, dear master.  Schurka and I will look after you,' said Waska.  And in another moment she had climbed down and brought him back a roll, and then another, and another, till she had brought him the whole tray-load.  Upon which she said: 'Dear master, Schurka and I are going off to a distant kingdom at the utmost ends of the earth to fetch you back your magic ring.  You must be careful that the rolls last till our return.'

And Waska took leave of her beloved master, and set off with Schurka on their journey.  On and on they travelled, looking always to right and left for traces of the Princess, following up every track, making inquiries of every cat and dog they met, listening to the talk of every wayfarer they passed; and at last they heard that the kingdom at the utmost ends of the earth where the twelve youths had borne the Princess was not very far off.  And at last one day they reached that distant kingdom, and, going at once to the palace, they began to make friends with all the dogs and cats in the place, and to question them about the Princess and the magic ring; but no one could tell them much about either.  Now one day it chanced that Waska had gone down to the palace cellar to hunt for mice and rats, and seeing an especially fat, well-fed mouse, she pounced upon it, buried her claws in its soft fur, and was just going to gobble it up, when she was stopped by the pleading tones of the little creature, saying, 'If you will only spare my life I may be of great service to you.  I will do everything in my power for you; for I am the King of the Mice, and if I perish the whole race will die out.'

'So be it,' said Waska.  'I will spare your life; but in return you must do something for me.  In this castle there lives a Princess, the wicked wife of my dear master.  She has stolen

[p. 189]

away his magic ring.  You must get it away from her at whatever cost; do you hear?  Till you have done this I won't take my claws out of your fur.'

'Good!' replied the mouse; 'I will do what you ask.'  And, so saying, he summoned all the mice in his kingdom together.  A countless number of mice, small and big, brown and grey, assembled, and formed a circle round their king, who was a prisoner under Waska's claws.  Turning to them he said: 'Dear and faithful subjects, who ever among you will steal the magic ring from the strange Princess will release me from a cruel death; and I shall honour him above all the other mice in the kingdom.'

Instantly a tiny mouse stepped forward and said: 'I often creep about the Princess's bedroom at night, and I have noticed that she has a ring which she treasures as the apple of her eye.  All day

[p. 190]

she wears it on her finger, and at night she keeps it in her mouth.  I will undertake, sire, to steal away the ring for you.'

And the tiny mouse tripped away into the bedroom of the Princess, and waited for nightfall; then, when the Princess had fallen asleep, it crept up on to her bed, and gnawed a hole in the pillow, through which it dragged one by one little down feathers, and threw them under the Princess's nose.  And the fluff flew into the Princess's nose, and into her mouth, and starting up she sneezed and coughed, and the ring fell out of her mouth on to the coverlet.  In a flash the tiny mouse had seized it, and brought it to Waska as a ransom for the King of the Mice.  Thereupon Waska and Schurka started off, and travelled night and day till they reached the stone tower where Martin was imprisoned; and the cat climbed up the window, and called out to him:

'Martin, dear master, are you still alive?'

'Ah!  Waska, my faithful little cat, is that you?' replied a weak voice.  'I am dying of hunger.  For three days I have not tasted food.'

'Be of good heart, dear master,' replied Waska; 'from this day forth you will know nothing but happiness and prosperity.  If this were a moment to trouble you with riddles, I would make you guess what Schurka and I have brought you back.  Only think, we have got you your ring!'

At these words Martin's joy knew no bounds, and he stroked her fondly, and she rubbed up against him and purred happily, while below Schurka bounded in the air, and barked joyfully.  Then Martin took the ring, and threw it from one hand into the other, and instantly the twelve youths appeared and asked what they were to do.  'Fetch me first something to eat and drink, as quickly as possible; and after that bring musicians hither, and let us have music all day long.'

Now when the people in the town and palace heard music coming from the tower they were filled with amazement, and came to the King with the news that witchcraft must be going on in Martin's Tower, for, instead of dying of starvation, he was seemingly making merry to the sound of music, and to the clatter of plates, and glass, and knives and forks; and the music was so enchantingly sweet that all the passers-by stood still to listen to it.  On this the King sent at once a messenger to the Starvation Tower, and he was so astonished with what he saw that he remained

[p. 191]

rooted to the spot.  Then the King sent his chief counsellors, and they too were transfixed with wonder.  At last the King came himself, and he likewise was spellbound by the beauty of the music.

Then Martin summoned the twelve youths, spoke to them, saying, 'Build up my castle again, and join it to the King's Palace with a crystal bridge; do not forget the trees with the golden and silver apples, and with the birds of Paradise in the branches; and put back the church with the five cupolas, and let the bells ring out, summoning the people from the four corners of the kingdom.  And one thing more: bring back my faithless wife, and lead her into the women's chamber.'

And it was all done as he commanded, and, leaving the Starvation Tower, he took the King, his father-in-law, by the arm, and led him into the new palace, where the Princess sat in fear and trembling, awaiting her death.  And Martin spoke to the King, saying, 'King and royal father, I have suffered much at the hands of your daughter.  What punishment shall be dealt to her?'

Then the mild King answered: 'Beloved Prince and son-in-law, if you love me, let your anger be turned to grace--forgive my daughter, and restore her to your heart and favour.'

And Martin's heart was softened and he forgave his wife, and they lived happily together ever after.  And his old mother came and lived with him, and he never parted with Schurka and Waska; and I need hardly tell you that he never again let the ring out of his possession.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

[p. 192]

THE FLOWER QUEEN'S DAUGHTER [*1]

A young Prince was riding one day through a meadow that stretched for miles in front of him, when he came to a deep open ditch.  He was turning aside to avoid it, when he heard the sound of someone crying in the ditch.  He dismounted from his horse, and stepped along in the direction the sound came from.  To his astonishment he found an old woman, who begged him to help her out of the ditch.  The Prince bent down and lifted her out of her living grave, asking her at the same time how she had managed to get there.

'My son,' answered the old woman, 'I am a very poor woman, and soon after midnight I set out for the neighbouring town in order to sell my eggs in the market on the following morning; but I lost my way in the dark, and fell into this deep ditch, where I might have remained for ever but for your kindness.'

Then the Prince said to her, 'You can hardly walk; I will put you on my horse and lead you home.  Where do you live?'

'Over there, at the edge of the forest in the little hut you see in the distance,' replied the old woman.

The Prince lifted her on to his horse, and soon they reached the hut, where the old woman got down, and turning to the Prince said, 'Just wait a moment, and I will give you something.'  And she disappeared into her hut, but returned very soon and said, 'You are a mighty Prince, but at the same time you have a kind heart, which deserves to be rewarded.  Would you like to have the most beautiful woman in the world for your wife?'

'Most certainly I would,' replied the Prince.

So the old woman continued, 'The most beautiful woman in the whole world is the daughter of the Queen of the Flowers, who has been captured by a dragon.  If you wish to marry her, you must first set her free, and this I will help you to do.  I will give you

[p. 193]

this little bell: if you ring it once, the King of the Eagles will appear; if you ring it twice, the King of the Foxes will come to you; and if you ring it three times, you will see the King of the Fishes by your side.  These will help you if you are in any difficulty.  Now farewell, and heaven prosper your undertaking.'  She handed him the little bell, and there disappeared hut and all, as though the earth had swallowed her up.

Then it dawned on the Prince that he had been speaking to a good fairy, and putting the little bell carefully in his pocket, he rode home and told his father that he meant to set the daughter of the Flower Queen free, and intended setting out on the following day into the wide world in search of the maid.

So the next morning the Prince mounted his fine horse and left his home.  He had roamed round the world for a whole year, and his horse had died of exhaustion, while he himself had suffered much from want and misery, but still he had come on no trace of her he was in search of.  At last one day he came to a hut, in front of which sat a very old man.  The Prince asked him, 'Do you not know where the Dragon lives who keeps the daughter of the Flower Queen prisoner?'

'No, I do not,' answered the old man.  'But if you go straight along this road for a year, you will reach a hut where my father lives, and possibly he may be able to tell you.'

The Prince thanked him for his information, and continued his journey for a whole year along the same road, and at the end of it came to the little hut, where he found a very old man.  He asked him the same question, and the old man answered, 'No, I do not know where the Dragon lives.  But go straight along this road for another year, and you will come to a hut in which my father lives.  I know he can tell you.'

And so the Prince wandered on for another year, always on the same road, and at last reached the hut where he found the third old man.  He put the same question to him as he had put to his son and grandson; but this time the old man answered, 'The Dragon lives up there on the mountain, and he has just begun his year of sleep.  For one whole year he is always awake, and the next he sleeps.  But if you wish to see the Flower Queen's daughter go up the second mountain: the Dragon's old mother lives there, and she has a ball every night, to which the Flower Queen's daughter goes regularly.'

So the Prince went up the second mountain, where he found a

[p. 194]

castle all made of gold with diamond windows.  He opened the big gate leading into the courtyard, and was just going to walk in, when seven dragons rushed on him and asked him what he wanted?

The Prince replied, 'I have heard so much of the beauty and kindness of the Dragon's Mother, and would like to enter her service.'

This flattering speech pleased the dragons, and the eldest of them said, 'Well, you may come with me, and I will take you to the Mother Dragon.'  They entered the castle and walked through twelve splendid halls, all made of gold and diamonds.  In the twelfth room they found the Mother Dragon seated on a diamond throne.  She was the ugliest woman under the sun, and, added to it all, she had three heads.  Her appearance was a great shock to the Prince, and so was her voice, which was like the croaking of many ravens.  She asked him, 'Why have you come here?'

The Prince answered at once, 'I have heard so much of your beauty and kindness, that I would very much like to enter your service.'

'Very well,' said the Mother Dragon; 'but if you wish to enter my service, you must first lead my mare out to the meadow and look after her for three days; but if you don't bring her home safely every evening, we will eat you up.'

The Prince undertook the task and led the mare out to the meadow.

But no sooner had they reached the grass than she vanished.  The Prince sought for her in vain, and at last in despair sat down on a big stone and contemplated his sad fate.  As he sat thus lost in thought, he noticed an eagle flying over his head.  Then he suddenly bethought him of his little bell, and taking it out of his pocket he rang it once.  In a moment he heard a rustling sound in the air beside him, and the King of the Eagles sank at his feet.

'I know what you want of me,' the bird said.  'You are looking for the Mother Dragon's mare who is galloping about among the clouds.  I will summon all the eagles of the air together, and order them to catch the mare and bring her to you.'  And with these words the King of the Eagles flew away.  Towards evening the Prince heard a mighty rushing sound in the air, and when he looked up he saw thousands of eagles driving the mare before them.  They sank at his feet on to the ground and gave the mare over to him.  Then the Prince rode home to the old Mother Dragon, who was full of wonder when she saw him, and said, 'You have succeeded

[p. 195]

to-day in looking after my mare, and as a reward you shall come to my ball to-night.'  She gave him at the same time a cloak made of copper, and led him to a big room where several young he-dragons and she-dragons were dancing together.  Here, too, was the Flower Queen's beautiful daughter.  Her dress was woven out of the most lovely flowers in the world, and her complexion was like lilies and roses.  As the Prince was dancing with her he managed to whisper in her ear, 'I have come to set you free!'

Then the beautiful girl said to him, 'If you succeed in bringing the mare back safely the third day, ask the Mother Dragon to give you a foal of the mare as a reward.'

The ball came to an end at midnight, and early next morning

[p. 196]

the Prince again led the Mother Dragon's mare out into the meadow.  But again she vanished before his eyes.  Then he took out his little bell and rang it twice.

In a moment the King of the Foxes stood before him and said: 'I know already what you want, and will summon all the foxes of the world together to find the mare who has hidden herself in a hill.'

With these words the King of the Foxes disappeared, and in the evening many thousand foxes brought the mare to the Prince.

Then he rode home to the Mother-Dragon, from whom he received this time a cloak made of silver, and again she led him to the ball-room.

The Flower Queen's daughter was delighted to see him safe and sound, and when they were dancing together she whispered in his ear: 'If you succeed again to-morrow, wait for me with the foal in the meadow.  After the ball we will fly away together.'

On the third day the Prince led the mare to the meadow again; but once more she vanished before his eyes.  Then the Prince took out his little bell and rang it three times.

In a moment the King of the Fishes appeared, and said to him: 'I know quite well what you want me to do, and I will summon all the fishes of the sea together, and tell them to bring you back the mare, who is hiding herself in a river.'

Towards evening the mare was returned to him, and when he led her home to the Mother Dragon she said to him:

'You are a brave youth, and I will make you my body-servant.  But what shall I give you as a reward to begin with?'

The Prince begged for a foal of the mare, which the Mother Dragon at once gave him, and over and above, a cloak made of gold, for she had fallen in love with him because he had praised her beauty.

So in the evening he appeared at the ball in his golden cloak; but before the entertainment was over he slipped away, and went straight to the stables, where he mounted his foal and rode out into the meadow to wait for the Flower Queen's daughter.  Towards midnight the beautiful girl appeared, and placing her in front of him on his horse, the Prince and she flew like the wind till they reached the Flower Queen's dwelling.  But the dragons had noticed their flight, and woke their brother out of his year's sleep.  He flew into a terrible rage when he heard what had happened, and determined to lay siege to the Flower Queen's palace; but the

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] Queen caused a forest of flowers as high as the sky to grow up round her dwelling, through which no one could force a way.

When the Flower Queen heard that her daughter wanted to marry the Prince, she said to him: 'I will give my consent to your marriage gladly, but my daughter can only stay with you in summer.  In winter, when everything is dead and the ground covered with snow, she must come and live with me in my palace underground.'  The Prince consented to this, and led his beautiful bride home, where the wedding was held with great pomp and magnificence.  The young couple lived happily together till winter came, when the Flower Queen's daughter departed and went home to her mother.  In summer she returned to her husband, and their life of joy and happiness began again, and lasted till the approach of winter, when the Flower Queen's daughter went back again to her mother.  This coming and going continued all her life long, and in spite of it they always lived happily together.

Footnotes

^192:1 From the Bukowinaer. Von Wliolocki.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

[p. 198]

THE FLYING SHIP [*1]

Once upon a time there lived an old couple who had three sons; the two elder were clever, but the third was a regular dunce.  The clever sons were very fond of their mother, gave her good clothes, and always spoke pleasantly to her; but the youngest was always getting in her way, and she had no patience with him.  Now, one day it was announced in the village that the King had issued a decree, offering his daughter, the Princess, in marriage to whoever should build a ship that could fly.  Immediately the two elder brothers determined to try their luck, and asked their parents' blessing.  So the old mother smartened up their clothes, and gave them a store of provisions for their journey, not forgetting to add a bottle of brandy.  When they had gone the poor Simpleton began to tease his mother to smarten him up and let him start off.

'What would become of a dolt like you?' she answered.  'Why, you would be eaten up by wolves.'

But the foolish youth kept repeating, 'I will go, I will go, I will go!'

Seeing that she could do nothing with him, the mother gave him a crust of bread and a bottle of water, and took no further heed of him.

So the Simpleton set off on his way.  When he had gone a short distance he met a little old manikin.  They greeted one another, and the manikin asked him where he was going.

'I am off to the King's Court,' he answered.  'He has promised to give his daughter to whoever can make a flying ship.'

'And can you make such a ship?'

'Not I.'

'Then why in the world are you going?'

'Can't tell,' replied the Simpleton.

'Well, if that is the case,' said the manikin, 'sit down beside

[p. 199]

me; we can rest for a little and have something to eat.  Give me what you have got in your satchel.'

Now, the poor Simpleton was ashamed to show what was in it.  However, he thought it best not to make a fuss, so he opened the satchel, and could scarcely believe his own eyes, for, instead of the hard crust, he saw two beautiful fresh rolls and some cold meat.  He shared them with the manikin, who licked his lips and said:

'Now, go into that wood, and stop in front of the first tree, bow three times, and then strike the tree with your axe, fall on your knees on the ground, with your face on the earth, and remain there till you are raised up.  You will then find a ship at your side, step into it and fly to the King's Palace.  If you meet anyone on the way, take him with you.'

The Simpleton thanked the manikin very kindly, bade him farewell, and went into the road.  When he got to the first tree he stopped in front of it, did everything just as he had been told, and, kneeling on the ground with his face to the earth, fell asleep.  After a little time he was aroused; he awoke and, rubbing his eyes, saw a ready-made ship at his side, and at once got into it.

And the ship rose and rose, and in another minute was flying through the air, when the Simpleton, who was on the look out, cast his eyes

[p. 200]

down to the earth and saw a man beneath him on the road, who was kneeling with his ear upon the damp ground.

'Hallo!' he called out, 'what are you doing down there?'

'I am listening to what is going on in the world,' replied the man.

'Come with me in my ship,' said the Simpleton.

So the man was only too glad, and got in beside him; and the ship flew, and flew, and flew through the air, till again from his outlook the Simpleton saw a man on the road below, who was hopping on one leg, while his other leg was tied up behind his ear.  So he hailed him, calling out:

'Hallo!  what are you doing, hopping on one leg?'

'I can't help it,' replied the man.  'I walk so fast that unless I tied up one leg I should be at the end of the earth in a bound.'

'Come with us on my ship,' he answered; and the man made no objections, but joined them; and the ship flew on, and on, and on, till suddenly the Simpleton, looking down on the road below, beheld a man aiming with a gun into the distance.

'Hallo!' he shouted to him, 'what are you aiming at?  As far as eye can see, there is no bird in sight.'

'What would be the good of my taking a near shot?' replied the man; 'I can hit beast or bird at a hundred miles' distance.  That is the kind of shot I enjoy.'

'Come into the ship with us,' answered the Simpleton; and the man was only too glad to join them, and he got in; and the ship flew on, farther and farther, till again the Simpleton from his outlook saw a man on the road below, carrying on his back a basket full of bread.  And he waved to him, calling out:

'Hallo!  where are you going?'

'To fetch bread for my breakfast.'

'Bread?  Why, you have got a whole basket-load of it on your back.'

'That's nothing,' answered the man; 'I should finish that in one mouthful.'

'Come along with us in my ship, then.'

And so the glutton joined the party, and the ship mounted again into the air, and flew up and onward, till the Simpleton from his outlook saw a man walking by the shore of a great lake, and evidently looking for something.

'Hallo!' he cried to him,' what are you seeking?

'I want water to drink, I'm so thirsty,' replied the man.

[p. 201]

'Well, there's a whole lake in front of you; why don't you drink some of that?'

'Do you call that enough?' answered the other.  'Why, I should drink it up in one gulp.'

'Well, come with us in the ship.'

And so the mighty drinker was added to the company; and the ship flew farther, and even farther, till again the Simpleton looked out, and this time he saw a man dragging a bundle of wood, walking through the forest beneath them.

'Hallo!' he shouted to him, 'why are you carrying wood through a forest?'

'This is not common wood,' answered the other.

'What sort of wood is it, then?' said the Simpleton.

'If you throw it upon the ground,' said the man, 'it will be changed into an army of soldiers.'

'Come into the ship with us, then.'

[p. 202]

And so he too joined them; and away the ship flew on, and on, and on, and once more the Simpleton looked out, and this time he saw a man carrying straw upon his back.

'Hallo!  Where are you carrying that straw to?'

'To the village,' said the man.

'Do you mean to say there is no straw in the village?'

'Ah!  but this is quite a peculiar straw.  If you strew it about even in the hottest summer the air at once becomes cold, and snow falls, and the people freeze.'

Then the Simpleton asked him also to join them.

At last the ship, with its strange crew, arrived at the King's Court.  The King was having his dinner, but he at once despatched one of his courtiers to find out what the huge, strange new bird could be that had come flying through the air.  The courtier peeped into the ship, and, seeing what it was, instantly went back to the King and told him that it was a flying ship, and that it was manned by a few peasants.

Then the King remembered his royal oath; but he made up his mind that he would never consent to let the Princess marry a poor peasant.  So he thought and thought, and then said to himself:

'I will give him some impossible tasks to perform; that will be the best way of getting rid of him.'  And he there and then decided to despatch one of his courtiers to the Simpleton, with the command that he was to fetch the King the healing water from the world's end before he had finished his dinner.

But while the King was still instructing the courtier exactly what he was to say, the first man of the ship's company, the one with the miraculous power of hearing, had overheard the King's words, and hastily reported them to the poor Simpleton.

'Alas, alas!' he cried; 'what am I to do now?  It would take me quite a year, possibly my whole life, to find the water.'

'Never fear,' said his fleet-footed comrade, 'I will fetch what the King wants.'

Just then the courtier arrived, bearing the King's command.

'Tell his Majesty,' said the Simpleton, 'that his orders shall be obeyed; 'and forthwith the swift runner unbound the foot that was strung up behind his ear and started off, and in less than no time had reached the world's end and drawn the healing water from the well.

'Dear me,' he thought to himself, 'that's rather tiring!  I'll just rest for a few minutes; it will be some little time yet before the

[p. 203]

[paragraph continues] King has got to dessert.'  So he threw himself down on the grass, and, as the sun was very dazzling, he closed his eyes, and in a few seconds had fallen sound asleep.

In the meantime all the ship's crew were anxiously awaiting him; the King's dinner would soon be finished, and their comrade had not yet returned.  So the man with the marvellous quick hearing lay down and, putting his ear to the ground, listened.

'That's a nice sort of fellow!' he suddenly exclaimed.  'He's lying on the ground, snoring hard!'

At this the marksman seized his gun, took aim, and fired in the direction of the world's end, in order to awaken the sluggard.  And a moment later the swift runner reappeared, and, stepping on board the ship, handed the healing water to the Simpleton.  So while the King was still sitting at table finishing his dinner news was brought to him that his orders had been obeyed to the letter.

What was to be done now?  The King determined to think of a still more impossible task.  So he told another courtier to go to the Simpleton with the command that he and his comrades were instantly to eat up twelve oxen and twelve tons of bread.  Once more the sharp-eared comrade overheard the King's words while he was still talking to the courtier, and reported them to the Simpleton.

'Alas, alas!' he sighed; 'what in the world shall I do?  Why, it would take us a year, possibly our whole lives, to eat up twelve oxen and twelve tons of bread.'

'Never fear,' said the glutton.  'It will scarcely be enough for me, I'm so hungry.'

So when the courtier arrived with the royal message he was told to take back word to the King that his orders should be obeyed.  Then twelve roasted oxen and twelve tons of bread were brought alongside of the ship, and at one sitting the glutton had devoured it all.

'I call that a small meal,' he said.  'I wish they'd brought me some more.'

Next, the King ordered that forty casks of wine, containing forty gallons each, were to be drunk up on the spot by the Simpleton and his party.  When these words were overheard by the sharp-eared comrade and repeated to the Simpleton, he was in despair.

'Alas, alas!' he exclaimed; 'what is to be done?  It would take us a year, possibly our whole lives, to drink so much.'

[p. 204]

'Never fear,' said his thirsty comrade.  'I'll drink it all up at a gulp, see if I don't.'  And sure enough, when the forty casks of wine containing forty gallons each were brought alongside of the ship, they disappeared down the thirsty comrade's throat in no time; and when they were empty he remarked:

'Why, I'm still thirsty.  I should have been glad of two more casks.'

Then the King took counsel with himself and sent an order to the Simpleton that he was to have a bath, in a bath-room at the royal palace, and after that the betrothal should take place.  Now the bath-room was built of iron, and the King gave orders that it was to be heated to such a pitch that it would suffocate the Simpleton.  And so when the poor silly youth entered the room, he discovered that the iron walls were red hot.  But, fortunately, his comrade with the straw on his back had entered behind him, and when the door was shut upon them he scattered the straw about, and suddenly the red-hot walls cooled down, and it became so very cold that the Simpleton could scarcely bear to take a bath, and all the water in the room froze.  So the Simpleton climbed up upon the stove, and, wrapping himself up in the bath blankets, lay there the whole night.  And in the morning when they opened the door there he lay sound and safe, singing cheerfully to himself.

Now when this strange tale was told to the King he became quite sad, not knowing what he should do to get rid of so undesirable a son-in-law, when suddenly a brilliant idea occurred to him.

'Tell the rascal to raise me an army, now at this instant!' he exclaimed to one of his courtiers.  'Inform him at once of this, my royal will.'  And to himself he added, 'I think I shall do for him this time.'

As on former occasions, the quick-eared comrade had overheard the King's command and repeated it to the Simpleton.

'Alas, alas!' he groaned; 'now I am quite done for.'

'Not at all,' replied one of his comrades (the one who had dragged the bundle of wood through the forest).  'Have you quite forgotten me?'

In the meantime the courtier, who had run all the way from the palace, reached the ship panting and breathless, and delivered the King's message.

'Good!' remarked the Simpleton.  'I will raise an army for the King,' and he drew himself up.  'But if, after that, the King refuses

[p. 205]

to accept me as his son-in-law, I will wage war against him, and carry the Princess off by force.'

During the night the Simpleton and his comrade went, together into a big field, not forgetting to take the bundle of wood with them, which the man spread out in all directions--and in a moment a mighty army stood upon the spot, regiment on regiment of foot and horse soldiers; the bugles sounded and the drums beat, the chargers neighed, and their riders put their lances in rest, and the soldiers presented arms.

In the morning when the King awoke he was startled by these warlike sounds, the bugles and the drums, and the clatter of the horses, and the shouts of the soldiers.  And, stepping to the window, he saw the lances gleam in the sunlight and the armour and weapons glitter.  And the proud monarch said to himself, 'I am powerless in comparison with this man.'  So he sent him royal robes and costly jewels, and commanded him to come to the palace to be married to the Princess.  And his son-in-law put on the royal robes, and he looked so grand and stately that it was impossible to recognise the poor Simpleton, so changed was he; and the Princess fell in love with him as soon as ever she saw him.

Never before had so grand a wedding been seen, and there was so much food and wine that even the glutton and the thirsty comrade had enough to eat and drink.

Footnotes

^198:1 From the Russian.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

[p. 206]

THE SNOW-DAUGHTER AND THE FIRE-SON [*1]

There was once upon a time a man and his wife, and they had no children, which was a great grief to them.  One winter's day, when the sun was shining brightly, the couple were standing outside their cottage, and the woman was looking at all the little icicles which hung from the roof.  She sighed, and turning to her husband said, 'I wish I had as many children as there are icicles hanging there.'  'Nothing would please me more either,' replied her husband.  Then a tiny icicle detached itself from the roof, and dropped into the woman's mouth, who swallowed it with a smile, and said, 'Perhaps I shall give birth to a snow child now!' Her husband laughed at his wife's strange idea, and they went back into the house.

But after a short time the woman gave birth to a little girl, who was as white as snow and as cold as ice.  If they brought the child anywhere near the fire, it screamed loudly till they put it back into some cool place.  The little maid throve wonderfully, and in a few months she could run about and speak.  But she was not altogether easy to bring up, and gave her parents much trouble and anxiety, for all summer she insisted on spending in the cellar, and in the winter she would sleep outside in the snow, and the colder it was the happier she seemed to be.  Her father and mother called her simply 'Our Snow-daughter,' and this name stuck to her all her life.

One day her parents sat by the fire, talking over the extraordinary behaviour of their daughter, who was disporting herself in the snowstorm that raged outside.  The woman sighed deeply and said, 'I wish I had given birth to a Fire-son!' As she said these words, a spark from the big wood fire flew into the woman's lap, and she said with a laugh, 'Now perhaps I shall give birth to a Fire-son!'

[p. 207]

[paragraph continues] The man laughed at his wife's words, and thought it was a good joke.  But he ceased to think it a joke when his wife shortly afterwards gave birth to a boy, who screamed lustily till he was put quite close to the fire, and who nearly yelled himself into a fit if the Snow-daughter came anywhere near him.  The Snow-daughter herself avoided him as much as she could, and always crept into a corner as far away from him as possible.  The parents called the boy simply 'Our Fire-son,' a name which stuck to him all his life.  They had a great deal of trouble and worry with him too; but he throve and grew very quickly, and before he was a year old he could run about and talk.  He was as red as fire, and as hot to touch, and he always sat on the hearth quite close to the fire, and complained of the cold; if his sister were in the room he almost crept into the flames, while the girl on her part always complained of the great heat if her brother were anywhere near.  In summer the boy always lay out in the sun, while the girl hid herself in the cellar: so it happened that the brother and sister came very little into contact with each other--in fact, they carefully avoided it.

Just as the girl grew up into a beautiful woman, her father and mother both died one after the other.  Then the Fire-son, who had grown up in the meantime into a fine, strong young man, said to his sister, 'I am going out into the world, for what is the use of remaining on here?'

'I shall go with you,' she answered, 'for, except you, I have no one in the world, and I have a feeling that if we set out together we shall be lucky.'

The Fire-son said, 'I love you with all my heart, but at the same time I always freeze if you are near me, and you nearly die of heat if I approach you!  How shall we travel about together without being odious the one to the other?'

'Don't worry about that,' replied the girl, 'for I've thought it all over, and have settled on a plan which will make us each able to bear with the other!  See, I have had a fur cloak made for each of us, and if we put them on I shall not feel the heat so much nor you the cold.'  So they put on the fur cloaks, and set out cheerfully on their way, and for the first time in their lives quite happy in each other's company.

For a long time the Fire-son and the Snow-daughter wandered through the world, and when at the beginning of winter they came to a big wood they determined to stay there till spring.  The Fire-son built himself a hut where he always kept up a huge fire, while

[p. 208]

his sister with very few clothes on stayed outside night and day.  Now it happened one day that the King of the land held a hunt in this wood, and saw the Snow-daughter wandering about in the open air.  He wondered very much who the beautiful girl clad in such garments could be, and he stopped and spoke to her.  He soon learnt that she could not stand heat, and that her brother could not endure cold.  The King was so charmed by the Snow-daughter, that he asked her to be his wife.  The girl consented, and the wedding was held with much state.  The King had a huge house of ice made for his wife underground, so that even in summer it did not melt.  But for his brother-in-law he had a house built with huge ovens all round it, that were kept heated all day and night.  The Fire-son was delighted, but the perpetual heat in which he lived made his body so hot, that it was dangerous to go too close to him.

One day the King gave a great feast, and asked his brother-in-law among the other guests.  The Fire-son did not appear till everyone had assembled, and when he did, everyone fled outside to the open air, so intense was the heat he gave forth.  Then the King was very angry and said, 'If I had known what a lot of trouble you would have been, I would never have taken you into my house.'  Then the Fire-son replied with a laugh, 'Don't be angry, dear brother!  I love heat and my sister loves cold--come here and let me embrace you, and then I'll go home at once.'  And before the King had time to reply, the Fire-son seized him in a tight embrace.  The King screamed aloud in agony, and when his wife, the Snow-daughter, who had taken refuge from her brother in the next room, hurried to him, the King lay dead on the ground burnt to a cinder.  When the Snow-daughter saw this she turned on her brother and flew at him.  Then a fight began, the like of which had never been seen on earth.  When the people, attracted by the noise, hurried to the spot, they saw the Snow-daughter melting into water and the Fire-son burn to a cinder.  And so ended the unhappy brother and sister.

Footnotes

^206:1 From the Bukowinaer Tales and Legends. Von Wliolocki.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f32]

[p. 209]

THE STORY OF KING FROST [*1]

There was once upon a time a peasant-woman who had a daughter and a step-daughter.  The daughter had her own way in everything, and whatever she did was right in her mother's eyes; but the poor step-daughter had a hard time.  Let her do what she would, she was always blamed, and got small thanks for all the trouble she took; nothing was right, everything wrong; and yet, if the truth were known, the girl was worth her weight in gold--she was so unselfish and good-hearted.  But her step-mother did not like her, and the poor girl's days were spent in weeping; for it was impossible to live peacefully with the woman.  The wicked shrew was determined to get rid of the girl by fair means or foul, and kept saying to her father: 'Send her away, old man; send her away--anywhere so that my eyes sha'n't be plagued any longer by the sight of her, or my ears tormented by the sound of her voice.  Send her out into the fields, and let the cutting frost do for her.'

In vain did the poor old father weep and implore her pity; she was firm, and he dared not gainsay her.  So he placed his daughter in a sledge, not even daring to give her a horse-cloth to keep herself warm with, and drove her out on to the bare, open fields, where he kissed her and left her, driving home as fast as he could, that he might not witness her miserable death.

Deserted by her father, the poor girl sat down under a fir-tree at the edge of the forest and began to weep silently.  Suddenly she heard a faint sound: it was King Frost springing from tree to tree, and cracking his fingers as he went.  At length he reached the fir-tree beneath which she was sitting, and with a crisp crackling sound he alighted beside her, and looked at her lovely face.

'Well, maiden,' he snapped out, 'do you know who I am?  I am King Frost, king of the red-noses.'

[p. 210]

'All hail to you, great King!' answered the girl, in a gentle, trembling voice.  'Have you come to take me?'

'Are you warm, maiden?' he replied.

'Quite warm, King Frost,' she answered, though she shivered as she spoke.

Then King Frost stooped down, and bent over the girl, and the crackling sound grew louder, and the air seemed to be full of knives and darts; and again he asked:

'Maiden, are you warm?  Are you warm, you beautiful girl?'

And though her breath was almost frozen on her lips, she whispered gently, 'Quite warm, King Frost.'

Then King Frost gnashed his teeth, and cracked his fingers, and his eyes sparkled, and the crackling, crisp sound was louder than ever, and for the last time he asked her:

'Maiden, are you still warm?  Are you still warm, little love?'

And the poor girl was so stiff and numb that she could just gasp, 'Still warm, O King!'

Now her gentle, courteous words and her uncomplaining ways touched King Frost, and he had pity on her, and he wrapped her up in furs, and covered her with blankets, and he fetched a great box, in which were beautiful jewels and a rich robe embroidered in gold and silver.  And she put it on, and looked more lovely than ever, and King Frost stepped with her into his sledge, with six white horses.

In the meantime the wicked step-mother was waiting at home for news of the girl's death, and preparing pancakes for the funeral feast.  And she said to her husband: 'Old man, you had better go out into the fields and find your daughter's body and bury her.'  Just as the old man was leaving the house the little dog under the table began to bark, saying:

'Your daughter shall live to be your delight;
  Her daughter shall die this very night.'

'Hold your tongue, you foolish beast!' scolded the woman.  'There's a pancake for you, but you must say:

"Her daughter shall have much silver and gold;
  His daughter is frozen quite stiff and cold."'

But the doggie ate up the pancake and barked, saying:

'His daughter shall wear a crown on her head;
  Her daughter shall die unwooed, unwed.'

[p. 211]

Then the old woman tried to coax the doggie with more pancakes and to terrify it with blows, but he barked on, always repeating the same words.  And suddenly the door creaked and flew open, and a great heavy chest was pushed in, and behind it came the step-daughter, radiant and beautiful, in a dress all glittering with silver and gold.  For a moment the step-mother's eyes were dazzled.  Then she called to her husband: 'Old man, yoke the horses at once into the sledge, and take my daughter to the same field and leave her on the same spot exactly; 'and so the old man took the girl and left her beneath the same tree where he had parted from his daughter.  In a few minutes King Frost came past, and, looking at the girl, he said:

'Are you warm, maiden?'

'What a blind old fool you must be to ask such a question!' she

[p. 212]

answered angrily.  'Can't you see that my hands and feet are nearly frozen?'

Then King Frost sprang to and fro in front of her, questioning her, and getting only rude, rough words in reply, till at last he got very angry, and cracked his fingers, and gnashed his teeth, and froze her to death.

But in the hut her mother was waiting for her return, and as she grew impatient she said to her husband: 'Get out the horses, old man, to go and fetch her home; but see that you are careful not to upset the sledge and lose the chest.'

But the doggie beneath the table began to bark, saying:

'Your daughter is frozen quite stiff and cold,
  And shall never have a chest full of gold.'

'Don't tell such wicked lies!' scolded the woman.  'There's a cake for you; now say:

"Her daughter shall marry a mighty King."

At that moment the door flew open, and she rushed out to meet her daughter, and as she took her frozen body in her arms she too was chilled to death.

Footnotes

^209:1 From the Russian.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f33]

[p. 213]

THE DEATH OF THE SUN-HERO [*1]

Many, many thousand years ago there lived a mighty King whom heaven had blessed with a clever and beautiful son.  When he was only ten years old the boy was cleverer than all the King's counsellors put together, and when he was twenty he was the greatest hero in the whole kingdom.  His father could not make enough of his son, and always had him clothed in golden garments which shone and sparkled like the sun; and his mother gave him a white horse, which never slept, and which flew like the wind.  All the people in the land loved him dearly, and called him the Sun-Hero, for they did not think his like existed under the sun.  Now it happened one night that both his parents had the same extraordinary dream.  They dreamt that a girl all dressed in red had come to them and said: 'If you wish that your son should really become the Sun-Hero in deed and not only in name, let him go out into the world and search for the Tree of the Sun, and when he has found it, let him pluck a golden apple from it and bring it home.'

When the King and Queen had each related their dreams to the other, they were much amazed that they should both have dreamt exactly the same about their son, and the King said to his wife, 'This is clearly a sign from heaven that we should send our son out into the world in order that he may come home the great Sun-Hero, as the Red Girl said, not only in name but in deed.'

The Queen consented with many tears, and the King at once bade his son set forth in search of the Tree of the Sun, from which he was to pluck a golden apple.  The Prince was delighted at the prospect, and set out on his travels that very day.

For a long time he wandered all through the world, and it was not till the ninety-ninth day after he started that he found an old man who was able to tell him where the Tree of the Sun grew.  He followed his directions, and rode on his way, and after another

[p. 214]

ninety-nine days he arrived at a golden castle, which stood in the middle of a vast wilderness.  He knocked at the door, which was opened noiselessly and by invisible hands.  Finding no one about, the Prince rode on, and came to a great meadow, where the Sun-Tree grew.  When he reached the tree he put out his hand to pick a golden apple; but all of a sudden the tree grew higher, so that he could not reach its fruit.  Then he heard some one behind him laughing.  Turning round, he saw the girl in red walking towards him, who addressed him in these words:

'Do you really imagine, brave son of the earth, that you can pluck an apple so easily from the Tree of the Sun?  Before you can do that, you have a difficult task before you.  You must guard the tree for nine days and nine nights from the ravages of two wild black wolves, who will try to harm it.  Do you think you can undertake this?'

'Yes,' answered the Sun-Hero, 'I will guard the Tree of the Sun nine days and nine nights.'

Then the girl continued: 'Remember, though, if you do not succeed the Sun will kill you.  Now begin your watch.'

With these words the Red Girl went back into the golden castle.  She had hardly left him when the two black wolves appeared: but

[p. 215]

the Sun-Hero beat them off with his sword, and they retired, only, however, to reappear in a very short time.  The Sun-Hero chased them away once more, but he had hardly sat down to rest when the two black wolves were on the scene again.  This went on for seven days and nights, when the white horse, who had never done such a thing before, turned to the Sun-Hero and said in a human voice: 'Listen to what I am going to say.  A Fairy gave me to your mother in order that I might be of service to you; so let me tell you, that if you go to sleep and let the wolves harm the tree, the Sun will surely kill you.  The Fairy, foreseeing this, put everyone in the world under a spell, which prevents their obeying the Sun's command to take your life.  But all the same, she has forgotten one person, who will certainly kill you if you fall asleep and let the wolves damage the tree.  So watch and keep the wolves away.'

Then the Sun-Hero strove with all his might and kept the black wolves at bay, and conquered his desire to sleep; but on the eighth night his strength failed him, and he fell fast asleep.  When he awoke a woman in black stood beside him, who said: 'You have fulfilled your task very badly, for you have let the two black wolves damage the Tree of the Sun.  I am the mother of the Sun, and I command you to ride away from here at once, and I pronounce sentence of death upon you, for you proudly let yourself be called the Sun-Hero without having done anything to deserve the name.'

The youth mounted his horse sadly, and rode home.  The people all thronged round him on his return, anxious to hear his adventures, but he told them nothing, and only to his mother did he confide what had befallen him.  But the old Queen laughed, and said to her son: 'Don't worry, my child; you see, the Fairy has protected you so far, and the Sun has found no one to kill you.  So cheer up and be happy.'

After a time the Prince forgot all about his adventure, and married a beautiful Princess, with whom he lived very happily for some time.  But one day when he was out hunting he felt very thirsty, and coming to a stream he stooped down to drink from it, and this caused his death, for a crab came swimming up, and with its claws tore out his tongue.  He was carried home in a dying condition, and as he lay on his death-bed the black woman appeared and said: 'So the Sun has, after all, found someone, who was not under the Fairy's spell, who has caused your death.  And a similar fate will overtake everyone under the Sun who wrongfully assumes a title to which he has no right.'

Footnotes

^213:1 From the Bukowinaer Tales and Legends. Von Wliolocki.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f34]

[p. 216]

THE WITCH [*1]

Once upon a time there was a peasant whose wife died, leaving him with two children--twins--a boy and a girl.  For some years the poor man lived on alone with the children, caring for them as best he could; but everything in the house seemed to go wrong without a woman to look after it, and at last he made up his mind to marry again, feeling that a wife would bring peace and order to his household and take care of his motherless children.  So he married, and in the following years several children were born to him; but peace and order did not come to the household.  For the step-mother was very cruel to the twins, and beat them, and half-starved them, and constantly drove them out of the house; for her one idea was to get them out of the way.  All day she thought of nothing but how she should get rid of them; and at last an evil idea came into her head, and she determined to send them out into the great gloomy wood where a wicked witch lived.  And so one morning she spoke to them, saying:

'You have been such good children that I am going to send you to visit my granny, who lives in a dear little hut in the wood.  You will have to wait upon her and serve her, but you will be well rewarded, for she will give you the best of everything.'

So the children left the house together; and the little sister, who was very wise for her years, said to the brother:

'We will first go and see our own dear grandmother, and tell her where our step-mother is sending us.'

And when the grandmother heard where they were going, she cried and said:

'You poor motherless children!  How I pity you; and yet I can do nothing to help you!  Your step-mother is not sending you to her granny, but to a wicked witch who lives in that great gloomy wood.  Now listen to me, children.  You must be civil and kind to

[p. 217]

everyone, and never say a cross word to anyone, and never touch a crumb belonging to anyone else.  Who knows if, after all, help may not be sent to you?'

And she gave her grandchildren a bottle of milk and a piece of ham and a loaf of bread, and they set out for the great gloomy wood.  When they reached it they saw in front of them, in the thickest of the trees, a queer little hut, and when they looked into it, there lay the witch, with her head on the threshold of the door, with one foot in one corner and the other in the other corner, and her knees cocked up, almost touching the ceiling.

'Who's there?' she snarled, in an awful voice, when she saw the children.

And they answered civilly, though they were so terrified that they hid behind one another, and said:

'Good-morning, granny; our step-mother has sent us to wait upon you, and serve you.'

'See that you do it well, then,' growled the witch.  'If I am pleased with you, I'll reward you; but if I am not, I'll put you in a pan and fry you in the oven--that's what I'll do with you, my pretty dears!  You have been gently reared, but you'll find my work hard enough.  See if you don't.'

And, so saying, she set the girl down to spin yarn, and she gave the boy a sieve in which to carry water from the well, and she herself

[p. 218]

went out into the wood.  Now, as the girl was sitting at her distaff, weeping bitterly because she could not spin, she heard the sound of hundreds of little feet, and from every hole and corner in the hut mice came pattering along the floor, squeaking and saying:

'Little girl, why are your eyes so red?
  If you want help, then give us some bread.'

And the girl gave them the bread that her grandmother had given her.  Then the mice told her that the witch had a cat, and the cat was very fond of ham; if she would give the cat her ham, it would show her the way out of the wood, and in the meantime they would spin the yarn for her.  So the girl set out to look for the cat, and, as she was hunting about, she met her brother, in great trouble because he could not carry water from the well in a sieve, as it came pouring out as fast as he put it in.  And as she was trying to comfort him they heard a rustling of wings, and a flight of wrens alighted on the ground beside them.  And the wrens said:

'Give us some crumbs, then you need not grieve.
  For you'll find that water will stay in the sieve.'

Then the twins crumbled their bread on the ground, and the wrens pecked it, and chirruped and chirped.  And when they had eaten the last crumb they told the boy to fill up the holes of the sieve with clay, and then to draw water from the well.  So he did what they said, and carried the sieve full of water into the hut without spilling a drop.  When they entered the hut the cat was curled up on the floor.  So they stroked her, and fed her with ham, and said to her:

'Pussy, grey pussy, tell us how we are to get away from the witch?'

Then the cat thanked them for the ham, and gave them a pocket-handkerchief and a comb, and told them that when the witch pursued them, as she certainly would, all they had to do was to throw the handkerchief on the ground and run as fast as they could.  As soon as the handkerchief touched the ground a deep, broad river would spring up, which would hinder the witch's progress.  If she managed to get across it, they must throw the comb behind them and run for their lives, for where the comb fell a dense forest would start up, which would delay the witch so long that they would be able to get safely away.

[p. 219]

The cat had scarcely finished speaking when the witch returned to see if the children had fulfilled their tasks.

'Well, you have done well enough for to-day,' she grumbled; 'but to-morrow you'll have something more difficult to do, and if you don't do it well, you pampered brats, straight into the oven you go.'

Half-dead with fright, and trembling in every limb, the poor children lay down to sleep on a heap of straw in the corner of the hut; but they dared not close their eyes, and scarcely ventured to breathe.  In the morning the witch gave the girl two pieces of linen to weave before night, and the boy a pile of wood to cut into chips.  Then the witch left them to their tasks, and went out into the wood.  As soon as she had gone out of sight the children took the comb and the handkerchief, and, taking one another by the hand, they started and ran, and ran, and ran.  And first they met the watch-dog, who was going to leap on them and tear them to pieces; but they threw the remains of their bread to him, and he ate them and wagged his tail.  Then they were hindered by the birch-trees, whose branches almost put their eyes out.  But the little sister tied the twigs together with a piece of ribbon, and they got past safely, and, after running through the wood, came out on to the open fields.

In the meantime in the hut the cat was busy weaving the linen and tangling the threads as it wove.  And the witch returned to see how the children were getting on; and she crept up to the window, and whispered:

'Are you weaving, my little dear?'

'Yes, granny, I am weaving,' answered the cat.

When the witch saw that the children had escaped her, she was furious, and, hitting the cat with a porringer, she said: 'Why did you let the children leave the hut?  Why did you not scratch their eyes out?'

But the cat curled up its tail and put its back up, and answered: 'I have served you all these years and you never even threw me a bone, but the dear children gave me their own piece of ham.'

Then the witch was furious with the watch-dog and with the birch-trees, because they had let the children pass.  But the dog answered:

'I have served you all these years and you never gave me so much as a hard crust, but the dear children gave me their own loaf of bread.'

And the birch rustled its leaves, and said: 'I have served you

[p. 220]

longer than I can say, and you never tied a bit of twine even round my branches; and the dear children bound them up with their brightest ribbons.'

So the witch saw there was no help to be got from her old servants, and that the best thing she could do was to mount on her broom and set off in pursuit of the children.  And as the children ran they heard the sound of the broom sweeping the ground close behind them, so instantly they threw the handkerchief down over their shoulder, and in a moment a deep, broad river flowed behind them.

When the witch came up to it, it took her a long time before she found a place which she could ford over on her broom-stick; but at last she got across, and continued the chase faster than before.  And as the children ran they heard a sound, and the little sister put her ear to the ground, and heard the broom sweeping the earth close behind them; so, quick as thought, she threw the comb down on the ground, and in an instant, as the cat had said, a dense forest sprung up, in which the roots and branches were so closely intertwined, that it was impossible to force a way through it.  So when the witch came up to it on her broom she found that

[p. 221]

there was nothing for it but to turn round and go back to her hut.

But the twins ran straight on till they reached their own home.  Then they told their father all that they had suffered, and he was so angry with their step-mother that he drove her out of the house, and never let her return; but he and the children lived happily together; and he took care of them himself, and never let a stranger come near them.

Footnotes

^216:1 From the Russian.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f35]

[p. 222]

THE HAZEL-NUT CHILD [*1]

There was once upon a time a couple who had no children, and they prayed Heaven every day to send them a child, though it were no bigger than a hazel-nut.  At last Heaven heard their prayer and sent them a child exactly the size of a hazel-nut, and it never grew an inch.  The parents were very devoted to the little creature, and nursed and tended it carefully.  Their tiny son too was as clever as he could be, and so sharp and sensible that all the neighbours marvelled over the wise things he said and did.

When the Hazel-nut child was fifteen years old, and was sitting one day in an egg-shell on the table beside his mother, she turned to him and said, 'You are now fifteen years old, and nothing can be done with you.  What do you intend to be?'

'A messenger,' answered the Hazel-nut child.

Then his mother burst out laughing and said, 'What an idea!  You a messenger!  Why, your little feet would take an hour to go the distance an ordinary person could do in a minute!'

But the Hazel-nut child replied, 'Nevertheless I mean to be a messenger!  Just send me a message and you'll see that I shall be back in next to no time.'

So his mother said, 'Very well, go to your aunt in the neighbouring village, and fetch me a comb.'  The Hazel-nut child jumped quickly out of the egg-shell and ran out into the street.  Here he found a man on horseback who was just setting out for the neighbouring village.  He crept up the horse's leg, sat down under the saddle, and then began to pinch the horse and to prick it with a pin.  The horse plunged and reared and then set off at a hard gallop, which it continued in spite of its rider's efforts to stop it.  When they reached the village, the Hazel-nut child left off pricking the horse, and the poor tired creature pursued its way at a snail's pace.  The Hazel-nut child took advantage of this, and crept down the horse's leg;

[p. 223]

then he ran to his aunt and asked her for a comb.  On the way home he met another rider, and did the return journey in exactly the same way.  When he handed his mother the comb that his aunt had given him, she was much amazed and asked him, 'But how did you manage to get back so quickly?'

'Ah!  mother,' he replied, 'you see I was quite right when I said I knew a messenger was the profession for me.'

His father too possessed a horse which he often used to take out into the fields to graze.  One day he took the Hazel-nut child with him.  At midday the father turned to his small son and said, 'Stay here and look after the horse.  I must go home and give your mother a message, but I shall be back soon.'

When his father had gone, a robber passed by and saw the horse grazing without any one watching it, for of course he could not see the Hazel-nut child hidden in the grass.  So he mounted the horse and rode away.  But the Hazel-nut child, who was the most active little creature, climbed up the horse's tail and began to bite it on the back, enraging the creature to such an extent that it paid no attention to the direction the robber tried to make it go in, but galloped straight home.  The father was much astonished when he saw a stranger riding his horse, but the Hazel-nut child climbed down quickly and told him all that had happened, and his father had the robber arrested at once and put into prison.

One autumn when the Hazel-nut child was twenty years old he said to his parents: 'Farewell, my dear father and mother.  I am going to set out into the world, and as soon as I have become rich I will return home to you.'

The parents laughed at the little man's words, but did not believe him for a moment.  In the evening the Hazel-nut child crept on to the roof, where some storks had built their nest.  The storks were fast asleep, and he climbed on to the back of the father-stork and bound a silk cord round the joint of one of its wings, then he crept among its soft downy feathers and fell asleep.

The next morning the storks flew towards the south, for winter was approaching.  The Hazel-nut child flew through the air on the stork's back, and when he wanted to rest he bound his silk cord on to the joint of the bird's other wing, so that it could not fly any farther.  In this way he reached the country of the black people, where the storks took up their abode close to the capital.  When the people saw the Hazel-nut child they were much astonished, and took him with the stork to the King of the country.  The King was

[p. 224]

delighted with the little creature and kept him always beside him, and he soon grew so fond of the little man that he gave him a diamond four times as big as himself.  The Hazel-nut child fastened the diamond firmly under the stork's neck with a ribbon, and when he saw that the other storks were getting ready for their northern flight, he untied the silk cord from his stork's wings, and away they went, getting nearer home every minute.  At length the Hazel-nut child came to his native village; then he undid the ribbon from the stork's neck and the diamond fell to the ground; he covered it first with sand and stones, and then ran to get his parents, so that they might carry the treasure home, for he himself was not able to lift the great diamond.

So the Hazel-nut child and his parents lived in happiness and prosperity after this till they died.

Footnotes

^222:1 From the Bukowniaer. Van Wliolocki.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f36]

[p. 225]

THE STORY OF BIG KLAUS AND LITTLE KLAUS

In a certain village there lived two people who had both the same name.  Both were called Klaus, but one owned four horses and the other only one.  In order to distinguish the one from the other, the one who had four horses was called Big Klaus, and the one who had only one horse, Little Klaus.  Now you shall hear what befell them both, for this is a true story.

The whole week through Little Klaus had to plough for Big Klaus, and lend him his one horse; then Big Klaus lent him his four horses, but only once a week, and that was on Sunday.  Hurrah!  how loudly Little Klaus cracked his whip over all the five horses!  for they were indeed as good as his on this one day.  The sun shone brightly, and all the bells in the church-towers were pealing; the people were dressed in their best clothes, and were going to church, with their hymn books under their arms, to hear the minister preach.  They saw Little Klaus ploughing with the five horses; but he was so happy that he kept on cracking his whip, and calling out 'Gee-up, my five horses!'

'You mustn't say that,' said Big Klaus.  'Only one horse is yours.'

But as soon as someone else was going by Little Klaus forgot that he must not say it, and called out 'Gee-up, my five horses!'

'Now you had better stop that,' said Big Klaus, 'for if you say it once more I will give your horse such a crack on the head that it will drop down dead on the spot!'

'I really won't say it again!' said Little Klaus.  But as soon as more people passed by, and nodded him good-morning, he became so happy in thinking how well it looked to have five horses ploughing his field that, cracking his whip, he called out 'Gee-up, my five horses!'

[p. 226]

'I'll see to your horses!' said Big Klaus; and, seizing an iron bar, he struck Little Klaus' one horse such a blow on the head that it fell down and died on the spot.

'Alas!  Now I have no horse!' said Little Klaus, beginning to cry.  Then he flayed the skin off his horse, dried it, and put it in a sack, which he threw over his shoulder, and went into the town to sell it.  He had a long way to go, and had to pass through a great dark forest.  A dreadful storm came on, in which he lost his way, and before he could get on to the right road night came on, and it was impossible to reach the town that evening.

Right in front of him was a large farm-house.  The window-shutters were closed, but the light came through the chinks.  'I should very much like to be allowed to spend the night there,' thought Little Klaus; and he went and knocked at the door.  The farmer's wife opened it, but when she heard what he wanted she told him to go away; her husband was not at home, and she took in no strangers.

'Well, I must lie down outside,' said Little Klaus; and the farmer's wife shut the door in his face.  Close by stood a large haystack, and between it and the house a little out-house, covered with a flat thatched roof.

'I can lie down there,' thought Little Klaus, looking at the roof; 'it will make a splendid bed, if only the stork won't fly down and bite my legs.'  For a live stork was standing on the roof, where it had its nest.  So Little Klaus crept up into the out-house, where he lay down, and made himself comfortable for the night.  The wooden shutters over the windows were not shut at the top, and he could just see into the room.

There stood a large table, spread with wine and roast meat and a beautiful fish.  The farmer's wife and the sexton sat at the table, but there was no one else.  She was filling up his glass, while he stuck his fork into the fish which was his favourite dish.

'If one could only get some of that!' thought Little Klaus, stretching his head towards the window.  Ah, what delicious cakes he saw standing there!  It was a feast!

Then he heard someone riding along the road towards the house.  It was the farmer coming home.  He was a very worthy man; but he had one great peculiarity--namely, that he could not bear to see a sexton.  If he saw one he was made quite mad.  That was why the sexton had gone to say good-day to the farmer's wife when he knew that her husband was not at home, and the good woman therefore

[p. 227]

put in front of him the best food she had.  But when they heard the farmer coming they were frightened, and the farmer's wife begged the sexton to creep into a great empty chest.  He did so, as he knew the poor man could not bear to see a sexton.  The wife hastily hid all the beautiful food and the wine in her oven; for if her husband had seen it, he would have been sure to ask what it all meant.

'Oh, dear!  oh, dear!' groaned Little Klaus up in the shed, when he saw the good food disappearing.

'Is anybody up there?' asked the farmer, catching sight of Little Klaus.  'Why are you lying there?  Come with me into the house.'

Then Little Klaus told him how he had lost his way, and begged to be allowed to spend the night there.

'Yes, certainly,' said the farmer; 'but we must first have something to eat!'

The wife received them both very kindly, spread a long table, and gave them a large plate of porridge.  The farmer was hungry, and ate with a good appetite; but Little Klaus could not help thinking of the delicious dishes of fish and roast meats and cakes which he knew were in the oven.  Under the table at his feet he had laid the sack with the horse-skin in it, for, as we know, he was going to the town to sell it.  The porridge did not taste good to him, so he trod upon his sack, and the dry skin in the sack squeaked loudly.

'Hush!' said Little Klaus to his sack, at the same time treading on it again so that it squeaked even louder than before.

'Hallo!  what have you got in your sack?' asked the farmer.  'Oh, it is a wizard!' said Little Klaus.  'He says we should not eat porridge, for he has conjured the whole oven full of roast meats and fish and cakes.'

'Goodness me!' said the farmer; and opening the oven he saw all the delicious, tempting dishes his wife had hidden there, but which he now believed the wizard in the sack had conjured up for them.  The wife could say nothing, but she put the food at once on the table, and they ate the fish, the roast meat, and the cakes.  Little Klaus now trod again on his sack, so that the skin squeaked.

'What does he say now?' asked the farmer.

'He says,' replied Little Klaus, 'that he has also conjured up for us three bottles of wine; they are standing in the corner by the oven!'

[p. 228]

The wife had to fetch the wine which she had hidden, and the farmer drank and grew very merry.  He would very much like to have had such a wizard as Little Klaus had in the sack.

'Can he conjure up the Devil?' asked the farmer.  'I should like to see him very much, for I feel just now in very good spirits!'

'Yes,' said Little Klaus; 'my wizard can do everything that I ask.  Isn't that true?' he asked, treading on the sack so that it squeaked.  'Do you hear?  He says ''Yes;'' but that the Devil looks so ugly that we should not like to see him.'

'Oh!  I'm not at all afraid.  What does he look like?'

'He will show himself in the shape of a sexton!'

'I say!' said the farmer, 'he must be ugly!  You must know that I can't bear to look at a sexton!  But it doesn't matter.  I know that it is the Devil, and I sha'n't mind!  I feel up to it now.  But he must not come too near me!'

'I must ask my wizard,' said Little Klaus, treading on the sack and putting his ear to it.

'What does he say?'

'He says you can open the chest in the corner there, and you will see the Devil squatting inside it; but you must hold the lid so that he shall not escape.'

'Will you help me to hold him?' begged the farmer, going towards the chest where his wife had hidden the real sexton, who was sitting inside in a terrible fright.  The farmer opened the lid a little way, and saw him inside.

'Ugh!' he shrieked, springing back.  'Yes, now I have seen him; he looked just like our sexton.  Oh, it was horrid!'

So he had to drink again, and they drank till far on into the night.

'You must sell me the wizard,' said the farmer.  'Ask anything you like!  I will pay you down a bushelful of money on the spot.'

'No, I really can't,' said Little Klaus.  'Just think how many things I can get from this wizard!'

'Ah!  I should like to have him so much!' said the farmer, begging very hard.

'Well!' said Little Klaus at last, 'as you have been so good as to give me shelter to-night, I will sell him.  You shall have the wizard for a bushel of money, but I must have full measure.'

'That you shall,' said the farmer.  'But you must take the

[p. 229]

chest with you.  I won't keep it another hour in the house.  Who knows that he isn't in there still?'

Little Klaus gave the farmer his sack with the dry skin, and got instead a good bushelful of money.  The farmer also gave him a wheelbarrow to carry away his money and the chest.  'Farewell,' said Little Klaus; and away he went with his money and the big chest, wherein sat the sexton.

On the other side of the wood was a large deep river.  The water flowed so rapidly that you could scarcely swim against the stream. A great new bridge had been built over it, on the middle of which Little Klaus stopped, and said aloud so that the sexton might hear:

'Now, what am I to do with this stupid chest?  It is as heavy as if it were filled with stones!  I shall only be tired, dragging it along; I will throw it into the river.  If it swims home to me, well and good; and if it doesn't, it's no matter.'

Then he took the chest with one hand and lifted it up a little, as if he were going to throw it into the water.

[p. 230]

'No, don't do that!' called out the sexton in the chest.  'Let me get out first!'

'Oh, oh!' said Little Klaus, pretending that he was afraid.  'He is still in there!  I must throw him quickly into the water to drown him!'

'Oh!  no, no!' cried the sexton.  'I will give you a whole bushelful of money if you will let me go!'

'Ah, that's quite another thing!' said Little Klaus, opening the chest.  The sexton crept out very quickly, pushed the empty chest into the water and went to his house, where he gave Little Klaus a bushel of money.  One he had had already from the farmer, and now he had his wheelbarrow full of money.

'Well, I have got a good price for the horse!' said he to himself when he shook all his money out in a heap in his room.  'This will put Big Klaus in a rage when he hears how rich I have become through my one horse; but I won't tell him just yet!'

So he sent a boy to Big Klaus to borrow a bushel measure from him.

'Now what can he want with it?' thought Big Klaus; and he smeared some tar at the bottom, so that of whatever was measured a little should remain in it.  And this is just what happened; for when he got his measure back, three new silver five-shilling pieces were sticking to it.

What does this mean?' said Big Klaus, and he ran off at once to Little Klaus.

'Where did you get so much money from?'

'Oh, that was from my horse-skin.  I sold it yesterday evening.'

'That's certainly a good price!' said Big Klaus; and running home in great haste, he took an axe, knocked all his four horses on the head, skinned them, and went into the town.

'Skins!  skins!  Who will buy skins?' he cried through the streets.

All the shoemakers and tanners came running to ask him what he wanted for them.  'A bushel of money for each,' said Big Klaus.

'Are you mad?' they all exclaimed.  'Do you think we have money by the bushel?'

'Skins!  skins!  Who will buy skins?' he cried again, and to all who asked him what they cost, he answered, 'A bushel of money.'

'He is making game of us,' they said; and the shoemakers

[p. 231]

seized their yard measures and the tanners their leathern aprons and they gave Big Klaus a good beating.  'Skins!  skins!' they cried mockingly; yes, we will tan your skin for you!  Out of the town with him!' they shouted; and Big Klaus had to hurry off as quickly as he could, if he wanted to save his life.

'Aha!' said he when he came home, 'Little Klaus shall pay dearly for this.  I will kill him!'

Little Klaus' grandmother had just died.  Though she had been very unkind to him, he was very much distressed, and he took the dead woman and laid her in his warm bed to try if he could not bring her back to life.  There she lay the whole night, while he sat in the corner and slept on a chair, which he had often done before.  And in the night as he sat there the door opened, and Big Klaus came in with his axe.  He knew quite well where Little Klaus's bed stood, and going up to it he struck the grandmother on the head just where he thought Little Klaus would be.  'There!'

[p. 232]

said he.  'Now you won't get the best of me again!'  And he went home.

'What a very wicked man!' thought Little Klaus.  'He was going to kill me!  It was a good thing for my grandmother that she was dead already, or else he would have killed her!'

Then he dressed his grandmother in her Sunday clothes, borrowed a horse from his neighbour, harnessed the cart to it, sat his grandmother on the back seat so that she could not fall out when he drove, and away they went.  When the sun rose they were in front of a large inn.  Little Klaus got down, and went in to get something to drink.  The host was very rich.  He was a very worthy but hot-tempered man.

'Good morning!' said he to Little Klaus.  'You are early on the road.'

'Yes,' said Little Klaus.  'I am going to the town with my grandmother.  She is sitting outside in the cart; I cannot bring her in.  Will you not give her a glass of mead?  But you will have to speak loud, for she is very hard of hearing.'

'Oh yes, certainly I will!' said the host; and, pouring out a large glass of mead, he took it out to the dead grandmother, who was sitting upright in the cart.

'Here is a glass of mead from your son,' said the host.  But the dead woman did not answer a word, and sat still.  'Don't you hear?' cried the host as loud as he could.  'Here is a glass of mead from your son!'

Then he shouted the same thing again, and yet again, but she never moved in her place; and at last he grew angry, threw the glass in her face, so that she fell back into the cart, for she was not tied in her place.

'Hullo!' cried Little Klaus, running out of the door, and seizing the host by the throat.  'You have killed my grandmother!  Look!  there is a great hole in her forehead!'

'Oh, what a misfortune!' cried the host, wringing his hands.  'It all comes from my hot temper!  Dear Little Klaus!  I will give you a bushel of money, and will bury your grandmother as if she were my own; only don't tell about it, or I shall have my head cut off, and that would be very uncomfortable.'

So Little Klaus got a bushel of money, and the host buried his grandmother as if she had been his own.

Now when Little Klaus again reached home with so much money he sent his boy to Big Klaus to borrow his bushel measure.

[p. 233]

'What's this?' said Big Klaus.  'Didn't I kill him?  I must see to this myself!'

So he went himself to Little Klaus with the measure.

'Well, now, where did you get all this money?' asked he, opening his eyes at the heap.

'You killed my grandmother--not me,' said Little Klaus.  'I sold her, and got a bushel of money for her.'

'That is indeed a good price!' said Big Klaus; and, hurrying home, he took an axe and killed his grandmother, laid her in the cart, and drove off to the apothecary's, and asked whether he wanted to buy a dead body.

'Who is it, and how did you get it?' asked the apothecary.

'It is my grandmother,' said Big Klaus.  'I killed her in order to get a bushel of money.'

'You are mad!' said the apothecary.  'Don't mention such things, or you will lose your head!'  And he began to tell him what a dreadful thing he had done, and what a wicked man he was, and that he ought to be punished; till Big Klaus was so frightened that he jumped into the cart and drove home as hard as he could.  The apothecary and all the people thought he must be mad, so they let him go.

'You shall pay for this!' said Big Klaus as he drove home.  'You shall pay for this dearly, Little Klaus!'

So as soon as he got home he took the largest sack he could find, and went to Little Klaus and said: 'You have fooled me again!  First I killed my horses, then my grandmother!  It is all your fault; but you sha'n't do it again!'  And he seized Little Klaus, pushed him in the sack, threw it over his shoulder, crying out 'Now I am going to drown you!'

He had to go a long way before he came to the river, and Little Klaus was not very light.  The road passed by the church; the organ was sounding, and the people were singing most beautifully.

Big Klaus put down the sack with Little Klaus in it by the church-door, and thought that he might as well go in and hear a psalm before going on farther.  Little Klaus could not get out, and everybody was in church; so he went in.

'Oh, dear!  oh, dear!' groaned Little Klaus in the sack, twisting and turning himself.  But he could not undo the string.

There came by an old, old shepherd, with snow-white hair and a long staff in his hand.  He was driving a herd of cows and oxen.  These pushed against the sack so that it was overturned.

[p. 234]

'Alas!' moaned Little Klaus, 'I am so young and yet I must die!'

'And I, poor man,' said the cattle-driver, 'I am so old and yet I cannot die!'

'Open the sack,' called out Little Klaus; 'creep in here instead of me, and you will die in a moment!'

'I will gladly do that,' said the cattle-driver; and he opened the sack, and Little Klaus struggled out at once.

'You will take care of the cattle, won't you?' asked the old man, creeping into the sack, which Little Klaus fastened up and then went on with the cows and oxen.  Soon after Big Klaus came out of the church, and taking up the sack on his shoulders it seemed to him as if it had become lighter; for the old cattle-driver was not half as heavy as Little Klaus.

[p. 235]

'How easy he is to carry now!  That must be because I heard part of the service.'

So he went to the river, which was deep and broad, threw in the sack with the old driver, and called after it, for he thought Little Klaus was inside:

'Down you go!  You won't mock me any more now!'

Then he went home; but when he came to the cross-roads, there he met Little Klaus, who was driving his cattle.

'What's this?' said Big Klaus.  'Haven't I drowned you?'

'Yes,' replied Little Klaus; 'you threw me into the river a good half-hour ago!'

'But how did you get those splendid cattle?' asked Big Klaus.

'They are sea-cattle!' said Little Klaus.  'I will tell you the whole story, and I thank you for having drowned me, because now I am on dry land and really rich!  How frightened I was when I was in the sack!  How the wind whistled in my ears as you threw me from the bridge into the cold water!  I sank at once to the bottom; but I did not hurt myself for underneath was growing the most beautiful soft grass.  I fell on this, and immediately the sack opened; the loveliest maiden in snow-white garments, with a green garland round her wet hair, took me by the hand, and said!  ''Are you Little Klaus?  Here are some cattle for you to begin with, and a mile farther down the road there is another herd, which I will give you as a present!'' Now I saw that the river was a great high-road for the sea-people.  Along it they travel underneath from the sea to the land till the river ends.  It was so beautiful, full of flowers and fresh grass; the fishes which were swimming in the water shot past my ears as the birds do here in the air.  What lovely people there were, and what fine cattle were grazing in the ditches and dykes!'

'But why did you come up to us again?' asked Big Klaus.  'I should not have done so, if it is so beautiful down below!'

'Oh!' said Little Klaus, 'that was just so politic of me.  You heard what I told you, that the sea-maiden said to me a mile farther along the road--and by the road she meant the river, for she can go by no other way--there was another herd of cattle waiting for me.  But I know what windings the river makes, now here, now there, so that it is a long way round.  Therefore it makes it much shorter if one comes on the land and drives across the field to the river.  Thus I have spared myself quite half a mile, and have come much quicker to my sea-cattle!'

[p. 236]

'Oh, you're a lucky fellow!' said Big Klaus.  'Do you think I should also get some cattle if I went to the bottom of the river?'

'Oh, yes!  I think so,' said Little Klaus.  'But I can't carry you in a sack to the river; you are too heavy for me!  If you like to go there yourself and then creep into the sack, I will throw you in with the greatest of pleasure.'

'Thank you,' said Big Klaus; 'but if I don't get any sea-cattle when I come there, you will have a good hiding, mind!'

'Oh, no!  Don't be so hard on me!'  Then they went to the river.  When the cattle, which were thirsty, caught sight of the water, they ran as quickly as they could to drink.

'Look how they are running!' said Little Klaus.  'They want to go to the bottom again!'

'Yes; but help me first,' said Big Klaus, 'or else you shall have a beating!'

And so he crept into the large sack, which was lying on the back of one of the oxen.  'Put a stone in, for I am afraid I may not reach the bottom,' said Big Klaus.

'It goes all right!' said Little Klaus; but still he laid a big stone in the sack, fastened it up tight, and then pushed it in.  Plump!  there was Big Klaus in the water, and he sank like lead to the bottom.

'I doubt if he will find any cattle!' said Little Klaus as he drove his own home.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f37]

[p. 237]

PRINCE RING [*1]

Once upon a time there was a King and his Queen in their kingdom.

They had one daughter, who was called Ingiborg, and one son, whose name was Ring.  He was less fond of adventures than men of rank usually were in those days, and was not famous for strength or feats of arms.  When he was twelve years old, one fine winter day he rode into the forest along with his men to enjoy himself.  They went on a long way, until they caught sight of a hind with a gold ring on its horns.  The Prince was eager to catch it, if possible, so they gave chase and rode on without stopping until all the horses began to founder beneath them.  At last the Prince's horse gave way too, and then there came over them a darkness so black that they could no longer see the hind.  By this time they were far away from any house, and thought it was high time to be making their way home again, but they found they had got lost now.  At first they all kept together, but soon each began to think that he knew the right way best; so they separated, and all went in different directions.

The Prince, too, had got lost like the rest, and wandered on for a time until he came to a little clearing in the forest not far from the sea, where he saw a woman sitting on a chair and a big barrel standing beside her.  The Prince went up to her and saluted her politely, and she received him very graciously.  He looked down into the barrel then, and saw lying at the bottom an unusually beautiful gold ring, which pleased him so much that he could not take his eyes off it.  The woman saw this, and said that he might have it if he would take the trouble to get it; for which the Prince thanked her, and said it was at least worth trying.  So he leaned over into the barrel, which did not seem very deep, and thought he would easily reach the ring; but the more he stretched down after it the deeper grew the barrel.  As he was thus bending down into

[p. 238]

it the woman suddenly rose up and pushed him in head first, saying that now he could take up his quarters there.  Then she fixed the top on the barrel and threw it out into the sea.

The Prince thought himself in a bad plight now, as he felt the barrel floating out from the land and tossing about on the waves.

How many days he spent thus he could not tell, but at last he felt that the barrel was knocking against rocks, at which he was a little cheered, thinking it was probably land and not merely a reef in the sea.  Being something of a swimmer, he at last made up his mind to kick the bottom out of the barrel, and having done so he was able to get on shore, for the rocks by the sea were smooth and level; but overhead there were high cliffs.  It seemed difficult to

[p. 239]

get up these, but he went along the foot of them for a little, till at last he tried to climb up, which at last he did.

Having got to the top, he looked round about him and saw that he was on an island, which was covered with forest, with apples growing, and altogether pleasant as far as the land was concerned.  After he had been there several days, he one day heard a great noise in the forest, which made him terribly afraid, so that he ran to hide himself among the trees.  Then he saw a Giant approaching, dragging a sledge loaded with wood, and making straight for him, so that he could see nothing for it but to lie down just where he was.  When the Giant came across him, he stood still and looked at the Prince for a little; then he took him up in his arms and carried him home to his house, and was exceedingly kind to him.  He gave him to his wife, saying he had found this child in the wood, and she could have it to help her in the house.  The old woman was greatly pleased, and began to fondle the Prince with the utmost delight.  He stayed there with them, and was very willing and obedient to them in everything, while they grew kinder to him every day.

One day the Giant took him round and showed him all his rooms except the parlour; this made the Prince curious to have a look into it, thinking there must be some very rare treasure there.  So one day, when the Giant had gone into the forest, he tried to get into the parlour, and managed to get the door open half-way.  Then he saw that some living creature moved inside and ran along the floor towards him and said something, which made him so frightened that he sprang back from the door and shut it again.  As soon as the fright began to pass off he tried it again, for he thought it would be interesting to hear what it said; but things went just as before with him.  He then got angry with himself, and, summoning up all his courage, tried it a third time, and opened the door of the room and stood firm.  Then he saw that it was a big Dog, which spoke to him and said:

'Choose me, Prince Ring.'

The Prince went away rather afraid, thinking with himself that it was no great treasure after all; but all the same what it had said to him stuck in his mind.

It is not said how long the Prince stayed with the Giant, but one day the latter came to him and said he would now take him over to the mainland out of the island, for he himself had no long time to live.  He also thanked him for his good service, and told

[p. 240]

him to choose some-one of his possessions, for he would get whatever he wanted.  Ring thanked him heartily, and said there was no need to pay him for his services, they were so little worth; but if he did wish to give him anything he would choose what was in the parlour.  The Giant was taken by surprise, and said:

'There, you chose my old woman's right hand; but I must not break my word.'

Upon this he went to get the Dog, which came running with signs of great delight; but the Prince was so much afraid of it that it was all he could do to keep from showing his alarm.

After this the Giant accompanied him down to the sea, where he saw a stone boat which was just big enough to hold the two of them and the Dog.  On reaching the mainland the Giant took a friendly farewell of Ring, and told him he might take possession of all that was in the island after he and his wife died, which would happen within two weeks from that time.  The Prince thanked him for this and for all his other kindnesses, and the Giant returned home, while Ring went up some distance from the sea; but he did not know what land he had come to, and was afraid to speak to the Dog.  After he had walked on in silence for a time the Dog spoke to him and said:

'You don't seem to have much curiosity, seeing you never ask my name.'

The Prince then forced himself to ask, 'What is your name?'

'You had best call me Snati-Snati,' said the Dog.  'Now we are coming to a King's seat, and you must ask the King to keep us all winter, and to give you a little room for both of us.'

The Prince now began to be less afraid of the Dog.  They came to the King and asked him to keep them all the winter, to which he agreed.  When the King's men saw the Dog they began to laugh at it, and make as if they would tease it; but when the Prince saw this he advised them not to do it, or they might have the worst of it.  They replied that they didn't care a bit what he thought.

After Ring had been with the King for some days the latter began to think there was a great deal in him, and esteemed him more than the others.  The King, however, had a counsellor called Red, who became very jealous when he saw how much the King esteemed Ring; and one day he talked to him, and said he could not understand why he had so good an opinion of this stranger, who had not yet shown himself superior to other men in anything.  The King

[p. 241]

replied that it was only a short time since he had come there.  Red then asked him to send them both to cut down wood next morning, and see which of them could do most work.  Snati-Snati heard this and told it to Ring, advising him to ask the King for two axes, so that he might have one in reserve if the first one got broken.  Next morning the King asked Ring and Red to go and cut down trees for him, and both agreed.  Ring got the two axes, and each went his own way; but when the Prince had got out into the wood Snati took one of the axes and began to hew along with him.  In the evening the King came to look over their day's work, as Red had proposed, and found that Ring's wood-heap was more than twice as big.

'I suspected,' said the King, 'that Ring was not quite useless; never have I seen such a day's work.'

Ring was now in far greater esteem with the King than before, and Red was all the more discontented.  One day he came to the King and said, 'If Ring is such a mighty man, I think you might ask him to kill the wild oxen in the wood here, and flay them the same day, and bring you the horns and the hides in the evening.'

'Don't you think that a desperate errand?' said the King, 'seeing they are so dangerous, and no one has ever yet ventured to go against them?'

Red answered that he had only one life to lose, and it would be interesting to see how brave he was; besides, the King would have good reason to ennoble him if he overcame them.  The King at last allowed himself, though rather unwillingly, to be won over by Red's persistency, and one day asked Ring to go and kill the oxen that were in the wood for him, and bring their horns and hides to him in the evening.  Not knowing how dangerous the oxen were, Ring was quite ready, and went off at once, to the great delight of Red, who was now sure of his death.

As soon as Ring came in sight of the oxen they came bellowing to meet him; one of them was tremendously big, the other rather less.  Ring grew terribly afraid.

'How do you like them?' asked Snati.

'Not well at all,' said the Prince.

'We can do nothing else,' said Snati, 'than attack them, if it is to go well; you will go against the little one, and I shall take the other.'

With this Snati leapt at the big one, and was not long in bringing him down.  Meanwhile the Prince went against the other with

[p. 242]

fear and trembling, and by the time Snati came to help him the ox had nearly got him under, but Snati was not slow in helping his master to kill it.

Each of them then began to flay their own ox, but Ring was only half through by the time Snati had finished his.  In the evening, after they had finished this task, the Prince thought himself unfit to carry all the horns and both the hides, so Snati told him to lay them all on his back until they got to the Palace gate.

The Prince agreed, and laid everything on the Dog except the skin of the smaller ox, which he staggered along with himself.  At the Palace gate he left everything lying, went before the King, and asked him to come that length with him, and there handed over to him the hides and horns of the oxen.  The King was greatly surprised at his valour, and said he knew no one like him, and thanked him heartily for what he had done.

After this the King set Ring next to himself, and all esteemed

[p. 243]

him highly, and held him to be a great hero; nor could Red any longer say anything against him, though he grew still more determined to destroy him.  One day a good idea came into his head.  He came to the King and said he had something to say to him.

'What is that?' said the King.

Red said that he had just remembered the gold cloak, gold chess-board, and bright gold piece that the King had lost about a year before.

'Don't remind me of them!' said the King.

Red, however, went on to say that, since Ring was such a mighty man that he could do everything, it had occurred to him to advise the King to ask him to search for these treasures, and come back with them before Christmas; in return the King should promise him his daughter.

The King replied that he thought it altogether unbecoming to propose such a thing to Ring, seeing that he could not tell him where the things were; but Red pretended not to hear the King's excuses, and went on talking about it until the King gave in to him.  One day, a month or so before Christmas, the King spoke to Ring, saying that he wished to ask a great favour of him.

'What is that?' said Ring.

'It is this,' said the King: 'that you find for me my gold cloak, my gold chess-board, and my bright gold piece, that were stolen from me about a year ago.  If you can bring them to me before Christmas I will give you my daughter in marriage.'

'Where am I to look for them, then?' said Ring.

'That you must find out for yourself,' said the King: 'I don't know.'

Ring now left the King, and was very silent, for he saw he was in a great difficulty: but, on the other hand, he thought it was excellent to have such a chance of winning the King's daughter.  Snati noticed that his master was at a loss, and said to him that he should not disregard what the King had asked him to do; but he would have to act upon his advice, otherwise he would get into great difficulties.  The Prince assented to this, and began to prepare for the journey.

After he had taken leave of the King, and was setting out on the search, Snati said to him, 'Now you must first of all go about the neighbourhood, and gather as much salt as ever you can.'  The Prince did so, and gathered so much salt that he could hardly carry

[p. 244]

it; but Snati said, 'Throw it on my back,' which he accordingly did, and the Dog then ran on before the Prince, until they came to the foot of a steep cliff.

'We must go up here,' said Snati.

'I don't think that will be child's play,' said the Prince.

'Hold fast by my tail,' said Snati; and in this way he pulled Ring up on the lowest shelf of the rock.  The Prince began to get giddy, but up went Snati on to the second shelf.  Ring was nearly swooning by this time, but Snati made a third effort and reached the top of the cliff, where the Prince fell down in a faint.  After a little, however, he recovered again, and they went a short distance along a level plain, until they came to a cave.  This was on Christmas Eve.  They went up above the cave, and found a window in it, through which they looked, and saw four trolls lying asleep beside the fire, over which a large porridge-pot was hanging.

'Now you must empty all the salt into the porridge-pot,' said Snati.

[p. 245]

Ring did so, and soon the trolls wakened up.  The old hag, who was the most frightful of them all, went first to taste the porridge.

'How comes this?' she said; 'the porridge is salt!  I got the milk by witchcraft yesterday out of four kingdoms, and now it is salt!'

All the others then came to taste the porridge, and thought it nice, but after they had finished it the old hag grew so thirsty that she could stand it no longer, and asked her daughter to go out and bring her some water from the river that ran near by.

'I won't go,' said she, 'unless you lend me your bright gold piece.'

'Though I should die you shan't have that,' said the hag.

'Die, then,' said the girl.

'Well, then, take it, you brat,' said the old hag, 'and be off with you, and make haste with the water.'

The girl took the gold and ran out with it, and it was so bright that it shone all over the plain.  As soon as she came to the river she lay down to take a drink of the water, but meanwhile the two of them had got down off the roof and thrust her, head first, into the river.

The old hag began now to long for the water, and said that the girl would be running about with the gold piece all over the plain, so she asked her son to go and get her a drop of water.

'I won't go,' said he, 'unless I get the gold cloak.'

'Though I should die you shan't have that,' said the hag.

'Die, then,' said the son.

'Well, then, take it,' said the old hag, 'and be off with you, but you must make haste with the water.'

He put on the cloak, and when he came outside it shone so bright that he could see to go with it.  On reaching the river he went to take a drink like his sister, but at that moment Ring and Snati sprang upon him, took the cloak from him, and threw him into the river.

The old hag could stand the thirst no longer, and asked her husband to go for a drink for her; the brats, she said, were of course running about and playing themselves, just as she had expected they would, little wretches that they were.

'I won't go,' said the old troll, 'unless you lend me the gold chess-board.'

'Though I should die you shan't have that,' said the hag.

[p. 246]

'I think you may just as well do that,' said he, 'since you won't grant me such a little favour.'

'Take it, then, you utter disgrace!' said the old hag, 'since you are just like these two brats.'

The old troll now went out with the gold chess-board, and down to the river, and was about to take a drink, when Ring and Snati came upon him, took the chess-board from him, and threw him into the river.  Before they had got back again, however, and up on top of the cave, they saw the poor old fellow's ghost come marching up from the river.  Snati immediately sprang upon him, and Ring assisted in the attack, and after a hard struggle they mastered him

[p. 247]

a second time.  When they got back again to the window they saw that the old hag was moving towards the door.

'Now we must go in at once,' said Snati, 'and try to master her there, for if she once gets out we shall have no chance with her.  She is the worst witch that ever lived, and no iron can cut her.  One of us must pour boiling porridge out of the pot on her, and the other punch her with red-hot iron.'

In they went then, and no sooner did the hag see them than she said, 'So you have come, Prince Ring; you must have seen to my husband and children.'

Snati saw that she was about to attack them, and sprang at her with a red-hot iron from the fire, while Ring kept pouring boiling porridge on her without stopping, and in this way they at last got her killed.  Then they burned the old troll and her to ashes, and explored the cave, where they found plenty of gold and treasures.  The most valuable of these they carried with them as far as the cliff, and left them there.  Then they hastened home to the King with his three treasures, where they arrived late on Christmas night, and Ring handed them over to him.

The King was beside himself with joy, and was astonished at how clever a man Ring was in all kinds of feats, so that he esteemed him still more highly than before, and betrothed his daughter to him; and the feast for this was to last all through Christmastide.  Ring thanked the King courteously for this and all his other kindnesses, and as soon as he had finished eating and drinking in the hall went off to sleep in his own room.  Snati, however, asked permission to sleep in the Prince's bed for that night, while the Prince should sleep where the Dog usually lay.  Ring said he was welcome to do so, and that he deserved more from him than that came to.  So Snati went up into the Prince's bed, but after a time he came back, and told Ring he could go there himself now, but to take care not to meddle with anything that was in the bed.

Now the story comes back to Red, who came into the hall and showed the King his right arm wanting the hand, and said that now he could see what kind of a man his intended son-in-law was, for he had done this to him without any cause whatever.  The King became very angry, and said he would soon find out the truth about it, and if Ring had cut off his hand without good cause he should be hanged; but if it was otherwise, then Red should die.  So the King sent for Ring and asked him for what reason he had done this.  Snati, however, had just told Ring what had happened during

[p. 248]

the night, and in reply he asked the King to go with him and he would show him something.  The King went with him to his sleeping-room, and saw lying on the bed a man's hand holding a sword.

'This hand,' said Ring, 'came over the partition during the night, and was about to run me through in my bed, if I had not defended myself.'

The King answered that in that case he could not blame him for protecting his own life, and that Red was well worthy of death.  So Red was hanged, and Ring married the King's daughter.

The first night that they went to bed together Snati asked Ring to allow him to lie at their feet, and this Ring allowed him to do.  During the night he heard a howling and outcry beside them, struck a light in a hurry and saw an ugly dog's skin lying near him, and a beautiful Prince in the bed.  Ring instantly took the skin and burned it, and then shook the Prince, who was lying unconscious, until he woke up.  The bridegroom then asked his name; he replied that he was called Ring, and was a King's son.  In his youth he had lost his mother, and in her place his father had married a witch, who had laid a spell on him that he should turn into a dog, and never be released from the spell unless a Prince of the same name as himself allowed him to sleep at his feet the first night after his marriage.  He added further, 'As soon as she knew that you were my namesake she tried to get you destroyed, so that you might not free me from the spell.  She was the hind that you and your companions chased; she was the woman that you found in the clearing with the barrel, and the old hag that we just now killed in the cave.'

After the feasting was over the two namesakes, along with other men, went to the cliff and brought all the treasure home to the Palace.  Then they went to the island and removed all that was valuable from it.  Ring gave to his namesake, whom he had freed from the spell, his sister Ingiborg and his father's kingdom to look after, but he himself stayed with his father-in-law the King, and had half the kingdom while he lived and the whole of it after his death.

Footnotes

^237:1 From the Icelandic.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f38]

[p. 249]

THE SWINEHERD

There was once a poor Prince.  He possessed a kingdom which, though small, was yet large enough for him to marry on, and married he wished to be.

Now it was certainly a little audacious of him to venture to say to the Emperor's daughter, 'Will you marry me?'  But he did venture to say so, for his name was known far and wide.  There were hundreds of princesses who would gladly have said 'Yes,' but would she say the same?

Well, we shall see.

On the grave of the Prince's father grew a rose-tree, a very beautiful rose-tree.  It only bloomed every five years, and then bore but a single rose, but oh, such a rose!  Its scent was so sweet that when you smelt it you forgot all your cares and troubles.  And he had also a nightingale which could sing as if all the beautiful melodies in the world were shut up in its little throat.  This rose and this nightingale the Princess was to have, and so they were both put into silver caskets and sent to her.

The Emperor had them brought to him in the great hall, where the Princess was playing 'Here comes a duke a-riding' with her ladies-in-waiting.  And when she caught sight of the big caskets which contained the presents, she clapped her hands for joy.

'If only it were a little pussy cat!' she said.  But the rose-tree with the beautiful rose came out.

'But how prettily it is made!' said all the ladies-in-waiting.

'It is more than pretty,' said the Emperor, 'it is charming!'

But the Princess felt it, and then she almost began to cry.

'Ugh!  Papa,' she said, 'it is not artificial, it is real!'

'Ugh!' said all the ladies-in-waiting, 'it is real!'

'Let us see first what is in the other casket before we begin to be angry,' thought the Emperor, and there came out the nightingale.

[p. 250]

[paragraph continues] It sang so beautifully that one could scarcely utter a cross word against it.

'Superbe! charmant!' said the ladies-in-waiting, for they all chattered French, each one worse than the other.

'How much the bird reminds me of the musical snuff-box of the late Empress!' said an old courtier.  'Ah, yes, it is the same tone, the same execution!'

'Yes,' said the Emperor; and then he wept like a little child.

'I hope that this, at least, is not real?' asked the Princess.

'Yes, it is a real bird,' said those who had brought it.

'Then let the bird fly away,' said the Princess; and she would not on any account allow the Prince to come.

'But he was nothing daunted.  He painted his face brown and black, drew his cap well over his face, and knocked at the door.  'Good-day, Emperor,' he said.  'Can I get a place here as servant in the castle?'

'Yes,' said the Emperor, 'but there are so many who ask for a place that I don't know whether there will be one for you; but, still, I will think of you.  Stay, it has just occurred to me that I want someone to look after the swine, for I have so very many of them.'

And the Prince got the situation of Imperial Swineherd.  He had a wretched little room close to the pigsties; here he had to stay, but the whole day he sat working, and when evening was come he had made a pretty little pot.  All round it were little bells, and when the pot boiled they jingled most beautifully and played the old tune--

'Where is Augustus dear?
  Alas!  he's not here, here, here!'

But the most wonderful thing was, that when one held one's finger in the steam of the pot, then at once one could smell what dinner was ready in any fire-place in the town.  That was indeed something quite different from the rose.

Now the Princess came walking past with all her ladies-in-waiting, and when she heard the tune she stood still and her face beamed with joy, for she also could play 'Where is Augustus dear?'

It was the only tune she knew, but that she could play with one finger.

'Why, that is what I play!' she said.  'He must be a most

[p. 251]

accomplished Swineherd!  Listen!  Go down and ask him what the instrument costs.'

And one of the ladies-in-waiting had to go down; but she put on wooden clogs.  'What will you take for the pot?' asked the lady-in-waiting.

'I will have ten kisses from the Princess,' answered the Swineherd.

'Heaven forbid!' said the lady-in-waiting.

'Yes, I will sell it for nothing less,' replied the Swineherd.

'Well, what does he say?' asked the Princess.

'I really hardly like to tell you,' answered the lady-in-waiting.

'Oh, then you can whisper it to me.'

'He is disobliging!' said the Princess, and went away.  But she had only gone a few steps when the bells rang out so prettily--

'Where is Augustus dear?
  Alas!  he's not here, here, here.'m

'Listen!' said the Princess.  'Ask him whether he will take ten kisses from my ladies-in-waiting.'

'No, thank you,' said the Swineherd.  'Ten kisses from the Princess, or else I keep my pot.'

'That is very tiresome!' said the Princess.  'But you must put yourselves in front of me, so that no one can see.'

And the ladies-in-waiting placed themselves in front and then spread out their dresses; so the Swineherd got his ten kisses, and she got the pot.

What happiness that was!  The whole night and the whole day the pot was made to boil; there was not a fire-place in the whole town where they did not know what was being cooked, whether it was at the chancellor's or at the shoemaker's.

The ladies-in-waiting danced and clapped their hands.

'We know who is going to have soup and pancakes; we know who is going to have porridge and sausages--isn't it interesting?'

'Yes, very interesting!' said the first lady-in-waiting.

'But don't say anything about it, for I am the Emperor's daughter.'

'Oh, no, of course we won't!' said everyone.

The Swineherd--that is to say, the Prince (though they did not know he was anything but a true Swineherd)--let no day pass without making something, and one day he made a rattle which, when

[p. 252]

it was turned round, played all the waltzes, galops, and polkas which had ever been known since the world began.

'But that is superbe!' said the Princess as she passed by.  'I have never heard a more beautiful composition.  Listen!  Go down and ask him what this instrument costs; but I won't kiss him again.'

'He wants a hundred kisses from the Princess,' said the lady-in-waiting who had gone down to ask him.

'I believe he is mad!' said the Princess, and then she went on; but she had only gone a few steps when she stopped.

'One ought to encourage art,' she said.  'I am the Emperor's daughter!  Tell him he shall have, as before, ten kisses; the rest he can take from my ladies-in-waiting.'

'But we don't at all like being kissed by him,' said the ladies-in-waiting.

'That's nonsense,' said the Princess; 'and if I can kiss him, you can too.  Besides, remember that I give you board and lodging.'  So the ladies-in-waiting had to go down to him again.

'A hundred kisses from the Princess,' said he, 'or each keeps his own.'

'Put yourselves in front of us,' she said then; and so all the ladies-in-waiting put themselves in front, and he began to kiss the Princess.

'What can that commotion be by the pigsties?' asked the Emperor, who was standing on the balcony.  He rubbed his eyes and put on his spectacles.  'Why those are the ladies-in-waiting playing their games; I must go down to them.'

So he took off his shoes, which were shoes though he had trodden them down into slippers.  What a hurry he was in, to be sure!

As soon as he came into the yard he walked very softly, and the ladies-in-waiting were so busy counting the kisses and seeing fair play that they never noticed the Emperor.  He stood on tiptoe.

'What is that?' he said, when he saw the kissing; and then he threw one of his slippers at their heads just as the Swineherd was taking his eighty-sixth kiss.

'Be off with you!' said the Emperor, for he was very angry.  And the Princess and the Swineherd were driven out of the empire.

Then she stood still and wept; the Swineherd was scolding, and the rain was streaming down.

'Alas, what an unhappy creature I am!' sobbed the Princess.

[p. 253]

[paragraph continues] 'If only I had taken the beautiful Prince!  Alas, how unfortunate I am!'

And the Swineherd went behind a tree, washed the black and brown off his face, threw away his old clothes, and then stepped forward in his splendid dress, looking so beautiful that the Princess was obliged to courtesy.

'I now come to this.  I despise you!' he said.  'You would have nothing to do with a noble Prince; you did not understand the rose or the nightingale, but you could kiss the Swineherd for the sake of a toy.  This is what you get for it!'  And he went into his kingdom and shut the door in her face, and she had to stay outside singing--

'Where's my Augustus dear?
  Alas!  he's not here, here, here!

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f39]

[p. 254]

HOW TO TELL A TRUE PRINCESS

There was once upon a time a Prince who wanted to marry a Princess, but she must be a true Princess.  So he travelled through the whole world to find one, but there was always something against each.  There were plenty of Princesses, but he could not find out if they were true Princesses.  In every case there was some little defect, which showed the genuine article was not yet found.  So he came home again in very low spirits, for he had wanted very much to have a true Princess.  One night there was a dreadful storm; it thundered and lightened and the rain streamed down in torrents.  It was fearful!  There was a knocking heard at the Palace gate, and the old King went to open it.

There stood a Princess outside the gate; but oh, in what a sad plight she was from the rain and the storm!  The water was running down from her hair and her dress into the points of her shoes and out at the heels again.  And yet she said she was a true Princess!

'Well, we shall soon find that!' thought the old Queen.  But she said nothing, and went into the sleeping-room, took off all the bed-clothes, and laid a pea on the bottom of the bed.  Then she put twenty mattresses on top of the pea, and twenty eider-down quilts on the top of the mattresses.  And this was the bed in which the Princess was to sleep.

The next morning she was asked how she had slept.

'Oh, very badly!' said the Princess.  'I scarcely closed my eyes all night!  I am sure I don't know what was in the bed.  I laid on something so hard that my whole body is black and blue.  It is dreadful!'

Now they perceived that she was a true Princess, because she had felt the pea through the twenty mattresses and the twenty eider-down quilts.

No one but a true Princess could be so sensitive.

[p. 255]

So the Prince married her, for now he knew that at last he had got hold of a true Princess.  And the pea was put into the Royal Museum, where it is still to be seen if no one has stolen it.  Now this is a true story.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f40]

[p. 256]

THE BLUE MOUNTAINS

There were once a Scotsman and an Englishman and an Irishman serving in the army together, who took it into their heads to run away on the first opportunity they could get.  The chance came and they took it.  They went on travelling for two days through a great forest, without food or drink, and without coming across a single house, and every night they had to climb up into the trees through fear of the wild beasts that were in the wood.  On the second morning the Scotsman saw from the top of his tree a great castle far away.  He said to himself that he would certainly die if he stayed in the forest without anything to eat but the roots of grass, which would not keep him alive very long.  As soon, then, as he got down out of the tree he set off towards the castle, without so much as telling his companions that he had seen it at all; perhaps the hunger and want they had suffered had changed their nature so much that the one did not care what became of the other if he could save himself.  He travelled on most of the day, so that it was quite late when he reached the castle, and to his great disappointment found nothing but closed doors and no smoke rising from the chimneys.  He thought there was nothing for it but to die after all, and had lain down beside the wall, when he heard a window being opened high above him.  At this he looked up, and saw the most beautiful woman he had ever set eyes on.

'Oh, it is Fortune that has sent you to me,' he said.

'It is indeed,' said she.  'What are you in need of, or what has sent you here?'

'Necessity,' said he.  'I am dying for want of food and drink.'

'Come inside, then,' she said; 'there is plenty of both here.'

Accordingly he went in to where she was, and she opened a large room for him, where he saw a number of men lying asleep.  She then set food before him, and after that showed him to the room

[p. 257]

where the others were.  He lay down on one of the beds and fell sound asleep.  And now we must go back to the two that he left behind him in the wood.

When nightfall and the time of the wild beasts came upon these, the Englishman happened to climb up into the very same tree on which the Scotsman was when he got a sight of the castle; and as soon as the day began to dawn and the Englishman looked to the four quarters of heaven, what did he see but the castle too!  Off he went without saying a word to the Irishman, and everything happened to him just as it had done to the Scotsman.

The poor Irishman was now left all alone, and did not know where the others had gone to, so he just stayed where he was, very sad and miserable.  When night came he climbed up into the same tree as the Englishman had been on the night before.  As soon as day came he also saw the castle, and set out towards it; but when he reached it he could see no signs of fire or living being about it.  Before long, however, he heard the window opened above his head, looked up, and beheld the most beautiful woman he had ever seen.  He asked if she would give him food and drink, and she answered kindly and heartily that she would, if he would only come inside.  This he did very willingly, and she set before him food and drink that he had never seen the like of before.  In the room there was a bed, with diamond rings hanging at every loop of the curtains, and everything that was in the room besides astonished him so much that he actually forgot that he was hungry.  When she saw that he was not eating at all, she asked him what he wanted yet, to which he replied that he would neither eat nor drink until he knew who she was, or where she came from, or who had put her there.

'I shall tell you that,' said she.  'I am an enchanted Princess, and my father has promised that the man who releases me from the spell shall have the third of his kingdom while he is alive, and the whole of it after he is dead, and marry me as well.  If ever I saw a man who looked likely to do this, you are the one.  I have been here for sixteen years now, and no one who ever came to the castle has asked me who I was, except yourself.  Every other man that has come, so long as I have been here, lies asleep in the big room down there.'

'Tell me, then,' said the Irishman, 'what is the spell that has been laid on you, and how you can be freed from it.'

'There is a little room there,' said the Princess, 'and if I could

[p. 258]

get a man to stay in it from ten o'clock till midnight for three nights on end I should be freed from the spell.'

'I am the man for you, then,' said he; 'I will take on hand to do it.'

Thereupon she brought him a pipe and tobacco, and he went into the room; but before long he heard a hammering and knocking on the outside of the door, and was told to open it

'I won't,' he said.

The next moment the door came flying in, and those outside along with it.  They knocked him down, and kicked him, and knelt on his body till it came to midnight; but as soon as the cock crew they all disappeared.  The Irishman was little more than alive

[p. 259]

by this time.  As soon as daylight appeared the Princess came, and found him lying full length on the floor, unable to speak a word.  She took a bottle, rubbed him from head to foot with something from it, and thereupon he was as sound as ever; but after what he had got that night he was very unwilling to try it a second time.  The Princess, however, entreated him to stay, saying that the next night would not be so bad, and in the end he gave in and stayed.

When it was getting near midnight he heard them ordering him to open the door, and there were three of them for every one that there had been the previous evening.  He did not make the slightest movement to go out to them or to open the door, but before long they broke it up, and were in on top of him.  They laid hold of him, and kept throwing him between them up to the ceiling, or jumping above him, until the cock crew, when they all disappeared.  When day came the Princess went to the room to see if he was still alive, and taking the bottle put it to his nostrils, which soon brought him to himself.  The first thing he said then was that he was a fool to go on getting himself killed for anyone he ever saw, and was determined to be off and stay there no longer, When the Princess learned his intention she entreated him to stay, reminding him that another night would free her from the spell.  'Besides,' she said, 'if there is a single spark of life in you when the day comes, the stuff that is in this bottle will make you as sound as ever you were.'

With all this the Irishman decided to stay; but that night there were three at him for every one that was there the two nights before, and it looked very unlikely that he would be alive in the morning after all that he got.  When morning dawned, and the Princess came to see if he was still alive, she found him lying on the floor as if dead.  She tried to see if there was breath in him, but could not quite make it out.  Then she put her hand on his pulse, and found a faint movement in it.  Accordingly she poured what was in the bottle on him, and before long he rose up on his feet, and was as well as ever he was.  So that business was finished, and the Princess was freed from the spell.

The Princess then told the Irishman that she must go away for the present, but would return for him in a few days in a carriage drawn by four grey horses.  He told her to 'be aisy,' and not speak like that to him.  'I have paid dear for you for the last three nights,' he said, 'if I have to part with you now;' but in the

[p. 260]

twinkling of an eye she had disappeared.  He did not know what to do with himself when he saw that she was gone, but before she went she had given him a little rod, with which he could, when he pleased, waken the men who had been sleeping there, some of them for sixteen years.

After being thus left alone, he went in and stretched himself on three chairs that were in the room, when what does he see coming in at the door but a little fair-haired lad.

'Where did you come from, my lad?' said the Irishman.

'I came to make ready your food for you,' said he.

'Who told you to do that?' said the Irishman.

'My mistress,' answered the lad--'the Princess that was under the spell and is now free.'

By this the Irishman knew that she had sent the lad to wait on him.  The lad also told him that his mistress wished him to be ready next morning at nine o'clock, when she would come for him with the carriage, as she had promised.  He was greatly pleased at this, and next morning, when the time was drawing near, went out into the garden; but the little fair-haired lad took a big pin out of his pocket, and stuck it into the back of the Irishman's coat without his noticing it, whereupon he fell sound asleep.

Before long the Princess came with the carriage and four horses, and asked the lad whether his master was awake.  He said that he wasn't.  'It is bad for him,' said she, 'when the night is not long enough for him to sleep.  Tell him that if he doesn't meet me at this time to-morrow it is not likely that he will ever see me again all his life.'

As soon as she was gone the lad took the pin out of  his master's coat, who instantly awoke.  The first word he said to the lad was, 'Have you seen her?'

'Yes,' said he, 'and she bade me tell you that if you don't meet her at nine o'clock to-morrow you will never see her again.'

He was very sorry when he heard this, and could not understand why the sleep should have fallen upon him just when she was coming.  He decided, however, to go early to bed that night, in order to rise in time nest morning, and so he did.  When it was getting near nine o'clock he went out to the garden to wait till she came, and the fair-haired lad along with him; but as soon as the lad got the chance he stuck the pin into his master's coat again and he fell asleep as before.  Precisely at nine o'clock came the Princess in the carriage with four horses, and asked the lad

[p. 261]

if his master had got up yet; but he said 'No, he was asleep, just as he was the day before.'  'Dear!  dear!' said the Princess, 'I am sorry for him.  Was the sleep he had last night not enough for him?  Tell him that he will never see me here again; and here is a sword that you will give him in my name, and my blessing along with it.'

With this she went off, and as soon as she had gone the lad took the pin out of his master's coat.  He awoke instantly, and the first word he said was, 'Have you seen her?' The lad said that he had, and there was the sword she had left for him.  The Irishman was ready to kill the lad out of sheer vexation, but when he gave a glance over his shoulder not a trace of the fair-haired lad was left.

Being thus left all alone, he thought of going into the room where all the men were lying asleep, and there among the rest he found his two comrades who had deserted along with him.  Then he remembered what the Princess had told him--that he had only to touch them with the rod she had given him and they would all awake; and the first he touched were his own comrades.  They started to their feet at once, and he gave them as much silver and gold as they could carry when they went away.  There was plenty to do before he got all the others wakened, for the two doors of the castle were crowded with them all the day long.

The loss of the Princess, however, kept rankling in his mind day and night, till finally he thought he would go about the world to see if he could find anyone to give him news of her.  So he took the best horse in the stable and set out.  Three years he spent travelling through forests and wildernesses, but could find no one able to tell him anything of the Princess.  At last he fell into so great despair that he thought he would put an end to his own life, and for this purpose laid hold of the sword that she had given him by the hands of the fair-haired lad; but on drawing it from its sheath he noticed that there was some writing on one side of the blade.  He looked at this, and read there, 'You will find me in the Blue Mountains.'  This made him take heart again, and he gave up the idea of killing himself, thinking that he would go on in hope of meeting some one who could tell him where the Blue Mountains were.  After he had gone a long way without thinking where he was going, he saw at last a light far away, and made straight for it.  On reaching it he found it came from a little house, and as soon as the man inside heard the noise of the horse's feet he came out to see who was there.  Seeing

[p. 262]

a stranger on horseback, he asked what brought him there and where he was going.

'I have lived here,' said he, 'for three hundred years, and all that time I have not seen a single human being but yourself.'

'I have been going about for the last three years,' said the Irishman, 'to see if I could find anyone who can tell me where the Blue Mountains are.'

'Come in,' said the old man, 'and stay with me all night.  I have a book which contains the history of the world, which I shall go through to-night, and if there is such a place as the Blue Mountains in it we shall find it out.'

The Irishman stayed there all night, and as soon as morning came rose to go.  The old man said he had not gone to sleep all night for going through the book, but there was not a word about the Blue Mountains in it.  'But I'll tell you what,' he said, 'if there is such a place on earth at all, I have a brother who lives nine hundred miles from here, and he is sure to know where they are, if anyone in this world does.'  The Irishman answered that he could never go these nine hundred miles, for his horse was giving in already.  'That doesn't matter,' said the old man; 'I can do better than that.  I have only to blow my whistle and you will be at my brother's house before nightfall.'

So he blew the whistle, and the Irishman did not know where on earth he was until he found himself at the other old man's door, who also told him that it was three hundred years since he had seen anyone, and asked him where he was going.

'I am going to see if I can find anyone that can tell me where the Blue Mountains are,' he said.

'If you will stay with me to-night,' said the old man, 'I have a book of the history of the world, and I shall know where they are before daylight, if there is such a place in it at all.'

He stayed there all night, but there was not a word in the book about the Blue Mountains.  Seeing that he was rather cast down, the old man told him that he had a brother nine hundred miles away, and that if information could be got about them from anyone it would be from him; 'and I will enable you,' he said, 'to reach the place where he lives before night.'  So he blew his whistle, and the Irishman landed at the brother's house before nightfall.  When the old man saw him he said he had not seen a single man for three hundred years, and was very much surprised to see anyone come to him now.

[p. 263]

'Where are you going to?' he said.

'I am going about asking for the Blue Mountains,' said the Irishman.

'The Blue Mountains?' said the old man.

'Yes,' said the Irishman.

'I never heard the name before; but if they do exist I shall find them out.  I am master of all the birds in the world, and have only to blow my whistle and every one will come to me.  I shall then ask each of them to tell where it came from, and if there is any way of finding out the Blue Mountains that is it.'

So he blew his whistle, and when he blew it then all the birds of the world began to gather.  The old man questioned each of them as to where they had come from, but there was not one of them that had come from the Blue Mountains.  After he had run over them all, however, he missed a big Eagle that was wanting, and wondered that it had not come.  Soon afterwards he saw something big coming towards him, darkening the sky.  It kept coming nearer and growing bigger, and what was this after all but the Eagle?  When she arrived the old man scolded her, and asked what had kept her so long behind.

'I couldn't help it,' she said; 'I had more than twenty times further to come than any bird that has come here to-day.'

'Where have you come from, then?' said the old man.

'From the Blue Mountains,' said she.

'Indeed!' said the old man; and what are they doing there?'

'They are making ready this very day,' said the Eagle, 'for the marriage of the daughter of the King of the Blue Mountains.  For three years now she has refused to marry anyone whatsoever, until she should give up all hope of the coming of the man who released her from the spell.  Now she can wait no longer, for three years is the time that she agreed with her father to remain without marrying.'

The Irishman knew that it was for himself she had been waiting so long, but he was unable to make any better of it, for he had no hope of reaching the Blue Mountains all his life.  The old man noticed how sad he grew, and asked the Eagle what she would take for carrying this man on her back to the Blue Mountains.

'I must have threescore cattle killed,' said she, 'and cut up into quarters, and every time I look over my shoulder he must throw one of them into my mouth.'

As soon as the Irishman and the old man heard her demand

[p. 264]

they went out hunting, and before evening they had killed three-score cattle.  They made quarters of them, as the Eagle told them, and then the old man asked her to lie down, till they would get it all heaped up on her back.  First of all, though, they had to get a ladder of fourteen steps, to enable them to get on to the Eagle's back, and there they piled up the meat as well as they could.  Then the old man told the Irishman to mount, and to remember to throw a quarter of beef to her every time she looked round.  He went up, and the old man gave the Eagle the word to be off, which she instantly obeyed; and every time she turned her head the Irishman threw a quarter of beef into her mouth.

As they came near the borders of the kingdom of the Blue Mountains, however, the beef was done, and, when the Eagle looked over her shoulder, what was the Irishman at but throwing the stone between her tail and her neck!  At this she turned a complete somersault, and threw the Irishman off into the sea, where he fell into the bay that was right in front of the King's Palace.  Fortunately the points of his toes just touched the bottom, and he managed to get ashore.

When he went up into the town all the streets were gleaming with light, and the wedding of the Princess was just about to begin.  He went into the first house he came to, and this happened to be the house of the King's hen-wife.  He asked the old woman what was causing all the noise and light in the town.

'The Princess,' said she, 'is going to be married to-night against her will, for she has been expecting every day that the man who freed her from the spell would come.'

'There is a guinea for you,' said he; 'go and bring her here.'

The old woman went, and soon returned along with the Princess.  She and the Irishman recognised each other, and were married, and had a great wedding that lasted for a year and a day.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f41]

[p. 265]

THE TINDER-BOX

A soldier came marching along the high road--left, right!  A left, right!  He had his knapsack on his back and a sword by his side, for he had been to the wars and was now returning home.

An old Witch met him on the road.  She was very ugly to look at: her under-lip hung down to her breast.

'Good evening, Soldier!' she said.  'What a fine sword and knapsack you have!  You are something like a soldier!  You ought to have as much money as you would like to carry!'

'Thank you, old Witch,' said the Soldier.

'Do you see that great tree there?' said the Witch, pointing to a tree beside them.  'It is hollow within.  You must climb up to the top, and then you will see a hole through which you can let yourself down into the tree.  I will tie a rope round your waist, so that I may be able to pull you up again when you call.'

'What shall I do down there?' asked the Soldier.

'Get money!' answered the Witch.  'Listen!  When you reach the bottom of the tree you will find yourself in a large hall; it is light there, for there are more than three hundred lamps burning.  Then you will see three doors, which you can open--the keys are in the locks.  If you go into the first room, you will see a great chest in the middle of the floor with a dog sitting upon it; he has eyes as large as saucers, but you needn't trouble about him.  I will give you my blue-check apron, which you must spread out on the floor, and then go back quickly and fetch the dog and set him upon it; open the chest and take as much money as you like.  It is copper there.  If you would rather have silver, you must go into the next room, where there is a dog with eyes as large as mill-wheels.  But don't take any notice of him; just set him upon my apron, and help yourself to the money.  If you prefer gold, you can get that too, if you go into the third room, and as much as you like to carry.  But the dog that guards the chest there has eyes as large

[p. 266]

as the Round Tower at Copenhagen!  He is a savage dog, I can tell you; but you needn't be afraid of him either.  Only, put him on my apron and he won't touch you, and you can take out of the chest as much gold as you like!'

'Come, this is not bad!' said the Soldier.  'But what am I to give you, old Witch; for surely you are not going to do this for nothing?'

'Yes, I am!' replied the Witch.  'Not a single farthing will I take!  For me you shall bring nothing but an old tinder-box which my grandmother forgot last time she was down there.'

'Well, tie the rope round my waist!  'said the Soldier.

'Here it is,' said the Witch, 'and here is my blue-check apron.'

Then the Soldier climbed up the tree, let himself down through the hole, and found himself standing, as the Witch had said, underground in the large hall, where the three hundred lamps were burning.

Well, he opened the first door.  Ugh!  there sat the dog with eyes as big as saucers glaring at him.

'You are a fine fellow!' said the Soldier, and put him on the Witch's apron, took as much copper as his pockets could hold; then he shut the chest, put the dog on it again, and went into the second room.  Sure enough there sat the dog with eyes as large as mill-wheels.

'You had better not look at me so hard!' said the Soldier.  'Your eyes will come out of their sockets!'

And then he set the dog on the apron.  When he saw all the silver in the chest, he threw away the copper he had taken, and filled his pockets and knapsack with nothing but silver.

Then he went into the third room.  Horrors!  the dog there had two eyes, each as large as the Round Tower at Copenhagen, spinning round in his head like wheels.

'Good evening!' said the Soldier and saluted, for he had never seen a dog like this before.  But when he had examined him more closely, he thought to himself: 'Now then, I've had enough of this!' and put him down on the floor, and opened the chest.  Heavens!  what a heap of gold there was!  With all that he could buy up the whole town, and all the sugar pigs, all the tin soldiers, whips and rocking-horses in the whole world.  Now he threw away all the silver with which he had filled his pockets and knapsack, and filled them with gold instead--yes, all his pockets, his knapsack, cap and boots even, so that he could hardly walk.  Now he

[p. 267]

was rich indeed.  He put the dog back upon the chest, shut the door, and then called up through the tree:

'Now pull me up again, old Witch!'

'Have you got the tinder-box also?' asked the Witch.

'Botheration!' said the Soldier, 'I had clean forgotten it!' And then he went back and fetched it.

The Witch pulled him up, and there he stood again on the high road, with pockets, knapsack, cap and boots filled with gold.

'What do you want to do with the tinder-box?' asked the Soldier.

'That doesn't matter to you,' replied the Witch.  'You have got your money, give me my tinder-box.'

'We'll see!' said the Soldier.  'Tell me at once what you want to do with it, or I will draw my sword, and cut off your head!'

'No!' screamed the Witch.

The Soldier immediately cut off her head.  That was the end of her!  But he tied up all his gold in her apron, slung it like a

[p. 268]

bundle over his shoulder, put the tinder-box in his pocket, and set out towards the town.

It was a splendid town!  He turned into the finest inn, ordered the best chamber and his favourite dinner; for now that he had so much money he was really rich.

It certainly occurred to the servant who had to clean his boots that they were astonishingly old boots for such a rich lord.  But that was because he had not yet bought new ones; next day he appeared in respectable boots and fine clothes.  Now, instead of a common soldier he had become a noble lord, and the people told him about all the grand doings of the town and the King, and what a beautiful Princess his daughter was.

'How can one get to see her?' asked the Soldier.

'She is never to be seen at all!' they told him; 'she lives in a great copper castle, surrounded by many walls and towers!  No one except the King may go in or out, for it is prophesied that she will marry a common soldier, and the King cannot submit to that.'

'I should very much like to see her,' thought the Soldier; but he could not get permission.

Now he lived very gaily, went to the theatre, drove in the King's garden, and gave the poor a great deal of money, which was very nice of him; he had experienced in former times how hard it is not to have a farthing in the world.  Now he was rich, wore fine clothes, and made many friends, who all said that he was an excellent man, a real nobleman.  And the Soldier liked that.  But as he was always spending money, and never made any more, at last the day came when he had nothing left but two shillings, and he had to leave the beautiful rooms in which he had been living, and go into a little attic under the roof, and clean his own boots, and mend them with a darning-needle.  None of his friends came to visit him there, for there were too many stairs to climb.

It was a dark evening, and he could not even buy a light.  But all at once it flashed across him that there was a little end of tinder in the tinder-box, which he had taken from the hollow tree into which the Witch had helped him down.  He found the box with the tinder in it; but just as he was kindling a light, and had struck a spark out of the tinder-box, the door burst open, and the dog with eyes as large as saucers, which he had seen down in the tree, stood before him and said:

'What does my lord command?'

'What's the meaning of this?' exclaimed the Soldier.  'This is

[p. 269]

a pretty kind of tinder-box, if I can get whatever I want like this.  Get me money!' he cried to the dog, and hey, presto!  he was off and back again, holding a great purse full of money in his mouth.

Now the Soldier knew what a capital tinder-box this was.  If he rubbed once, the dog that sat on the chest of copper appeared; if he rubbed twice, there came the dog that watched over the silver chest; and if he rubbed three times, the one that guarded the gold appeared.  Now, the Soldier went down again to his beautiful rooms, and appeared once more in splendid clothes.  All his friends immediately recognised him again, and paid him great court.

One day he thought to himself: 'It is very strange that no one can get to see the Princess.  They all say she is very pretty, but what's the use of that if she has to sit for ever in the great copper castle with all the towers?  Can I not manage to see her somehow?  Where is my tinder-box?' and so he struck a spark, and, presto!  there came the dog with eyes as large as saucers.

'It is the middle of the night, I know,' said the Soldier; 'but I should very much like to see the Princess for a moment.'

The dog was already outside the door, and before the Soldier could look round, in he came with the Princess.  She was lying asleep on the dog's back, and was so beautiful that anyone could see she was a real Princess.  The Soldier really could not refrain

[p. 270]

from kissing her--he was such a thorough Soldier.  Then the dog ran back with the Princess.  But when it was morning, and the King and Queen were drinking tea, the Princess said that the night before she had had such a strange dream about a dog and a Soldier: she had ridden on the dog's back, and the Soldier had kissed her.

'That is certainly a fine story,' said the Queen.  But the next night one of the ladies-in-waiting was to watch at the Princess's bed, to see if it was only a dream, or if it had actually happened.

The Soldier had an overpowering longing to see the Princess again, and so the dog came in the middle of the night and fetched her, running as fast as he could.  But the lady-in-waiting slipped on indiarubber shoes and followed them.  When she saw them disappear into a large house, she thought to herself: 'Now I know where it is; 'and made a great cross on the door with a piece of chalk.  Then she went home and lay down, and the dog came back also, with the Princess.  But when he saw that a cross had been made on the door of the house where the Soldier lived, he took a piece of chalk also, and made crosses on all the doors in the town; and that was very clever, for now the lady-in-waiting could not find the right house, as there were crosses on all the doors.

Early next morning the King, Queen, ladies-in-waiting, and officers came out to see where the Princess had been.

'There it is!' said the King, when he saw the first door with a cross on it.

'No, there it is, my dear!' said the Queen, when she likewise saw a door with a cross.

'But here is one, and there is another!' they all exclaimed; wherever they looked there was a cross on the door.  Then they realised that the sign would not help them at all.

But the Queen was an extremely clever woman, who could do a great deal more than just drive in a coach.  She took her great golden scissors, cut up a piece of silk, and made a pretty little bag of it.  This she filled with the finest buckwheat grains, and tied it round the Princess' neck; this done, she cut a little hole in the bag, so that the grains would strew the whole road wherever the Princess went.

In the night the dog came again, took the Princess on his back and ran away with her to the Soldier, who was very much in love with her, and would have liked to have been a Prince, so that he might have had her for his wife.

The dog did not notice how the grains were strewn right from

[p. 271]

the castle to the Soldier's window, where he ran up the wall with the Princess.

In the morning the King and the Queen saw plainly where their daughter had been, and they took the Soldier and put him into prison.

There he sat.  Oh, how dark and dull it was there!  And they told him: 'To-morrow you are to be hanged.'  Hearing that did

[p. 272]

not exactly cheer him, and he had left his tinder-box in the inn.

Next morning he could see through the iron grating in front of his little window how the people were hurrying out of the town to see him hanged.  He heard the drums and saw the soldiers marching; all the people were running to and fro.  Just below his window was a shoemaker's apprentice, with leather apron and shoes; he was skipping along so merrily that one of his shoes flew off and fell against the wall, just where the Soldier was sitting peeping through the iron grating.

'Oh, shoemaker's boy, you needn't be in such a hurry!' said the Soldier to him.  'There's nothing going on till I arrive.  But if you will run back to the house where I lived, and fetch me my tinder-box, I will give you four shillings.  But you must put your best foot foremost.'

The shoemaker's boy was very willing to earn four shillings, and fetched the tinder-box, gave it to the Soldier, and--yes--now you shall hear.

Outside the town a great scaffold had been erected, and all round were standing the soldiers, and hundreds of thousands of people.  The King and Queen were sitting on a magnificent throne opposite the judges and the whole council.

The Soldier was already standing on the top of the ladder; but when they wanted to put the rope round his neck, he said that the fulfilment of one innocent request was always granted to a poor criminal before he underwent his punishment.  He would so much like to smoke a small pipe of tobacco; it would be his last pipe in this world.

The King could not refuse him this, and so he took out his tinder-box, and rubbed it once, twice, three times.  And lo, and behold I there stood all three dogs--the one with eyes as large as saucers, the second with eyes as large as mill-wheels, and the third with eyes each as large as the Round Tower of Copenhagen.

'Help me now, so that I may not be hanged!' cried the Soldier.  And thereupon the dogs fell upon the judges and the whole council, seized some by the legs, others by the nose, and threw them so high into the air that they fell and were smashed into pieces.

'I won't stand this!' said the King; but the largest dog seized him too, and the Queen as well, and threw them up after the others.  This frightened the soldiers, and all the people cried: 'Good Soldier, you shall be our King, and marry the beautiful Princess!'

[p. 273]

Then they put the Soldier into the King's coach, and the three dogs danced in front, crying 'Hurrah!' And the boys whistled and the soldiers presented arms.

The Princess came out of the copper castle, and became Queen; and that pleased her very much.

The wedding festivities lasted for eight days, and the dogs sat at table and made eyes at everyone.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f42]

[p. 274]

THE WITCH IN THE STONE BOAT [*1]

There were once a King and a Queen, and they had a son called Sigurd, who was very strong and active, and good-looking.  When the King came to be bowed down with the weight of years he spoke to his son, and said that now it was time for him to look out for a fitting match for himself, for he did not know how long he might last now, and he would like to see him married before he died.

Sigurd was not averse to this, and asked his father where he thought it best to look for a wife.  The King answered that in a certain country there was a King who had a beautiful daughter, and he thought it would be most desirable if Sigurd could get her.  So the two parted, and Sigurd prepared for the journey, and went to where his father had directed him.

He came to the King and asked his daughter's hand, which he readily granted him, but only on the condition that he should remain there as long as he could, for the King himself was not strong and not very able to govern his kingdom.  Sigurd accepted this condition, but added that he would have to get leave to go home again to his own country when he heard news of his father's death.  After that Sigurd married the Princess, and helped his father-in-law to govern the kingdom.  He and the Princess loved each other dearly, and after a year a son came to them, who was two years old when word came to Sigurd that his father was dead.  Sigurd now prepared to return home with his wife and child, and went on board ship to go by sea.

They had sailed for several days, when the breeze suddenly fell, and there came a dead calm, at a time when they needed only one day's voyage to reach home.  Sigurd and his Queen were one day on deck, when most of the others on the ship had fallen asleep.  There they sat and talked for a while, and had their little son along

[p. 275]

with them.  After a time Sigurd became so heavy with sleep that he could no longer keep awake, so he went below and lay down, leaving the Queen alone on the deck, playing with her son.

A good while after Sigurd had gone below the Queen saw something black on the sea, which seemed to be coming nearer.  As it approached she could make out that it was a boat, and could see the figure of some one sitting in it and rowing it.  At last the boat came alongside the ship, and now the Queen saw that it was a stone boat, out of which there came up on board the ship a fearfully ugly Witch.  The Queen was more frightened than words can describe, and could neither speak a word nor move from the place so as to awaken the King or the sailors.  The Witch came right up to the Queen, took the child from her and laid it on the deck; then she took the Queen, and stripped her of all her fine clothes, which she proceeded to put on herself, and looked then like a human being.  Last of all she took the Queen, put her into the boat, and said--

'This spell I lay upon you, that you slacken not your course until you come to my brother in the Underworld.'

The Queen sat stunned and motionless, but the boat at once shot away from the ship with her, and before long she was out of sight.

When the boat could no longer be seen the child began to cry, and though the Witch tried to quiet it she could not manage it; so she went below to where the King was sleeping with the child on her arm, and awakened him, scolding him for leaving them alone on deck, while he and all the crew were asleep.  It was great carelessness of him, she said, to leave no one to watch the ship with her.

Sigurd was greatly surprised to hear his Queen scold him so much, for she had never said an angry word to him before; but he thought it was quite excusable in this case, and tried to quiet the child along with her, but it was no use.  Then he went and wakened the sailors, and bade them hoist the sails, for a breeze had sprung up and was blowing straight towards the harbour.

They soon reached the land which Sigurd was to rule over, and found all the people sorrowful for the old King's death, but they became glad when they got Sigurd back to the Court, and made him King over them.

The King's son, however, hardly ever stopped crying from the time he had been taken from his mother on the deck of the ship, although he had always been such a good child before, so that at last the King had to get a nurse for him--one of the maids of the

[p. 276]

[paragraph continues] Court.  As soon as the child got into her charge he stopped crying, and behaved well as before.

After the sea-voyage it seemed to the King that the Queen had altered very much in many ways, and not for the better.  He thought her much more haughty and stubborn and difficult to deal with than she used to be.  Before long others began to notice this as well as the King.  In the Court there were two young fellows, one of eighteen years old, the other of nineteen, who were very fond of playing chess, and often sat long inside playing at it.  Their room was next the Queen's, and often during the day they heard the Queen talking.

One day they paid more attention than usual when they heard her talk, and put their ears close to a crack in the wall between the rooms, and heard the Queen say quite plainly, 'When I yawn a little, then I am a nice little maiden; when I yawn half-way, then I am half a troll; and when I yawn fully, then I am a troll altogether.'

As she said this she yawned tremendously, and in a moment had put on the appearance of a fearfully ugly troll.  Then there came up through the floor of the room a three-headed Giant with a trough full of meat, who saluted her as his sister and set down the trough before her.  She began to eat out of it, and never stopped till she had finished it.  The young fellows saw all this going on, but did not hear the two of them say anything to each other.  They were astonished though at how greedily the Queen devoured the meat, and how much she ate of it, and were no longer surprised that she took so little when she sat at table with the King.  As soon as she had finished it the Giant disappeared with the trough by the same way as he had come, and the Queen returned to her human shape.

Now we must go back to the King's son after he had been put in charge of the nurse.  One evening, after she had lit a candle and was holding the child, several planks sprang up in the floor of the room, and out at the opening came a beautiful woman dressed in white, with an iron belt round her waist, to which was fastened an iron chain that went down into the ground.  The woman came up to the nurse, took the child from her, and pressed it to her breast; then she gave it back to the nurse and returned by the same way as she had come, and the floor closed over her again.  Although the woman had not spoken a single word to her, the nurse was very much frightened, but told no one about it.

[p. 277]

Next evening the same thing happened again, just as before, but as the woman was going away she said in a sad tone, 'Two are gone, and one only is left,' and then disappeared as before.  The nurse was still more frightened when she heard the woman say this, and thought that perhaps some danger was hanging over the child, though she had no ill-opinion of the unknown woman, who, indeed, had behaved towards the child as if it were her own.  The most mysterious thing was the woman saying 'and only one is left;' but the nurse guessed that this must mean that only one day was left, since she had come for two days already.

At last the nurse made up her mind to go to the King, and told him the whole story, and asked him to be present in person next day about the time when the woman usually came.  The King promised to do so, and came to the nurse's room a little before the time, and sat down on a chair with his drawn sword in his hand.  Soon after the planks in the floor sprang up as before, and the woman came up, dressed in white, with the iron belt and chain.  The King saw at once that it was his own Queen, and immediately hewed asunder the iron chain that was fastened to the belt.  This was followed by such noises and crashings down in the earth that all the King's Palace shook, so that no one expected anything else than to see every bit of it shaken to pieces.  At last, however, the noises and shaking stopped, and they began to come to themselves again.

The King and Queen embraced each other, and she told him the whole story--how the Witch came to the ship when they were all asleep and sent her off in the boat.  After she had gone so far that she could not see the ship, she sailed on through darkness until she landed beside a three-headed Giant.  The Giant wished her to marry him, but she refused; whereupon he shut her up by herself, and told her she would never get free until she consented.  After a time she began to plan how to get her freedom, and at last told him that she would consent if he would allow her to visit her son on earth three days on end.  This he agreed to, but put on her this iron belt and chain, the other end of which he fastened round his own waist, and the great noises that were heard when the King cut the chain must have been caused by the Giant's falling down the underground passage when the chain gave way so suddenly.  The Giant's dwelling, indeed, was right under the Palace, and the terrible shakings must have been caused by him in his death-throes.

[p. 278]

The King now understood how the Queen he had had for some time past had been so ill-tempered.  He at once had a sack drawn over her head and made her be stoned to death, and after that torn in pieces by untamed horses.  The two young fellows also told now what they had heard and seen in the Queen's room, for before this they had been afraid to say anything about it, on account of the Queen's power.

The real Queen was now restored to all her dignity, and was beloved by all.  The nurse was married to a nobleman, and the King and Queen gave her splendid presents.

Footnotes

^274:1 From the Icelandic.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f43]

[p. 279]

THUMBELINA

There was once a woman who wanted to have quite a tiny, little child, but she did not know where to get one from.  So one day she went to an old Witch and said to her: 'I should so much like to have a tiny, little child; can you tell me where I can get one?'

'Oh, we have just got one ready!' said the Witch.  'Here is a barley-corn for you, but it's not the kind the farmer sows in his field, or feeds the cocks and hens with, I can tell you.  Put it in a flower-pot, and then you will see something happen.'

'Oh, thank you!' said the woman, and gave the Witch a shilling, for that was what it cost.  Then she went home and planted the barley-corn; immediately there grew out of it a large and beautiful flower, which looked like a tulip, but the petals were tightly closed as if it were still only a bud.

'What a beautiful flower!' exclaimed the woman, and she kissed the red and yellow petals; but as she kissed them the flower burst open.  It was a real tulip, such as one can see any day; but in the middle of the blossom, on the green velvety petals, sat a little girl, quite tiny, trim, and pretty.  She was scarcely half a thumb in height; so they called her Thumbelina.  An elegant polished walnut-shell served Thumbelina as a cradle, the blue petals of a violet were her mattress, and a rose-leaf her coverlid.  There she lay at night, but in the day-time she used to play about on the table; here the woman had put a bowl, surrounded by a ring of flowers, with their stalks in water, in the middle of which floated a great tulip pedal, and on this Thumbelina sat, and sailed from one side of the bowl to the other, rowing herself with two white horse-hairs for oars.  It was such a pretty sight!  She could sing, too, with a voice more soft and sweet than had ever been heard before.

One night, when she was lying in her pretty little bed, an old

[p. 280]

toad crept in through a broken pane in the window.  She was very ugly, clumsy, and clammy; she hopped on to the table where Thumbelina lay asleep under the red rose-leaf.

'This would make a beautiful wife for my son,' said the toad, taking up the walnut-shell, with Thumbelina inside, and hopping with it through the window into the garden.

There flowed a great wide stream, with slippery and marshy banks; here the toad lived with her son.  Ugh!  how ugly and clammy he was, just like his mother!  'Croak, croak, croak!' was all he could say when he saw the pretty little girl in the walnut-shell.

'Don't talk so load, or you'll wake her,' said the old toad.  'She might escape us even now; she is as light as a feather.  We will put her at once on a broad water-lily leaf in the stream.  That will be quite an island for her; she is so small and light.  She can't run away from us there, whilst we are preparing the guest-chamber under the marsh where she shall live.'

Outside in the brook grew many water-lilies, with broad green leaves, which looked as if they were swimming about on the water.

The leaf farthest away was the largest, and to this the old toad swam with Thumbelina in her walnut-shell.

The tiny Thumbelina woke up very early in the morning, and

[p. 281]

when she saw where she was she began to cry bitterly; for on every side of the great green leaf was water, and she could not get to the land.

The old toad was down under the marsh, decorating her room with rushes and yellow marigold leaves, to make it very grand for her new daughter-in-law; then she swam out with her ugly son to the leaf where Thumbelina lay.  She wanted to fetch the pretty cradle to put it into her room before Thumbelina herself came there.  The old toad bowed low in the water before her, and said: 'Here is my son; you shall marry him, and live in great magnificence down under the marsh.'

'Croak, croak, croak!' was all that the son could say.  Then they took the neat little cradle and swam away with it; but Thumbelina sat alone on the great green leaf and wept, for she did not want to live with the clammy toad, or marry her ugly son.  The little fishes swimming about under the water had seen the toad quite plainly, and heard what she had said; so they put up their heads to see the little girl.  When they saw her, they thought her so pretty that they were very sorry she should go down with the ugly toad to live.  No; that must not happen.  They assembled in the water round the green stalk which supported the leaf on which she was sitting, and nibbled the stem in two.  Away floated the leaf

[p. 282]

down the stream, bearing Thumbelina far beyond the reach of the toad.

On she sailed past several towns, and the little birds sitting in the bushes saw her, and sang, 'What a pretty little girl!' The leaf floated farther and farther away; thus Thumbelina left her native land.

A beautiful little white butterfly fluttered above her, and at last settled on the leaf.  Thumbelina pleased him, and she, too, was delighted, for now the toads could not reach her, and it was so beautiful where she was travelling; the sun shone on the water and made it sparkle like the brightest silver.  She took off her sash, and tied one end round the butterfly; the other end she fastened to the leaf, so that now it glided along with her faster than ever.

A great cockchafer came flying past; he caught sight of Thumbelina, and in a moment had put his arms round her slender waist, and had flown off with her to a tree.  The green leaf floated away down the stream, and the butterfly with it, for he was fastened to the leaf and could not get loose from it.  Oh, dear!  how terrified poor little Thumbelina was when the cockchafer flew off with her to the tree!  But she was especially distressed on the beautiful white butterfly's account, as she had tied him fast, so that if he could not get away he must starve to death.  But the cockchafer did not trouble himself about that; he sat down with her on a large green leaf, gave her the honey out of the flowers to eat, and told her that she was very pretty, although she wasn't in the least like a cockchafer.  Later on, all the other cockchafers who lived in the same tree came to pay calls; they examined Thumbelina closely, and remarked, 'Why, she has only two legs!  How very miserable!'

'She has no feelers!' cried another.

'How ugly she is!' said all the lady chafers--and yet Thumbelina was really very pretty.

The cockchafer who had stolen her knew this very well; but when he heard all the ladies saying she was ugly, he began to think so too, and would not keep her; she might go wherever she liked.  So he flew down from the tree with her and put her on a daisy.  There she sat and wept, because she was so ugly that the cockchafer would have nothing to do with her; and yet she was the most beautiful creature imaginable, so soft and delicate, like the loveliest rose-leaf.

The whole summer poor little Thumbelina lived alone in the great wood.  She plaited a bed for herself of blades of grass, and

[p. 283]

hung it up under a clover-leaf, so that she was protected from the rain; she gathered honey from the flowers for food, and drank the dew on the leaves every morning.  Thus the summer and autumn passed, but then came winter--the long, cold winter.  All the birds who had sung so sweetly about her had flown away; the trees shed their leaves, the flowers died; the great clover-leaf under which she had lived curled up, and nothing remained of it but the withered stalk.  She was terribly cold, for her clothes were ragged, and she herself was so small and thin.  Poor little Thumbelina!  she would surely be frozen to death.  It began to snow, and every snow-flake that fell on her was to her as a whole shovelful thrown on one of us, for we are so big, and she was only an inch high.  She wrapt herself round in a dead leaf, but it was torn in the middle and gave her no warmth; she was trembling with cold.

Just outside the wood where she was now living lay a great corn-field.  But the corn had been gone a long time; only the dry, bare stubble was left standing in the frozen ground.  This made a forest for her to wander about in.  All at once she came across the door of a field-mouse, who had a little hole under a corn-stalk.  There the mouse lived warm and snug, with a store-room full of corn, a splendid kitchen and dining-room.  Poor little Thumbelina went up to the door and begged for a little piece of barley, for she had not had anything to eat for the last two days.

'Poor little creature!' said the field-mouse, for she was a kind-hearted old thing at the bottom.  'Come into my warm room and have some dinner with me.'

As Thumbelina pleased her, she said: 'As far as I am concerned you may spend the winter with me; but you must keep my room clean and tidy, and tell me stories, for I like that very much.'

And Thumbelina did all that the kind old field-mouse asked, and did it remarkably well too.

'Now I am expecting a visitor,' said the field-mouse; 'my neighbour comes to call on me once a week.  He is in better circumstances than I am, has great, big rooms, and wears a fine black-velvet coat.  If you could only marry him, you would be well provided for.  But he is blind.  You must tell him all the prettiest stories you know.'

But Thumbelina did not trouble her head about him, for he was only a mole.  He came and paid them a visit in his black-velvet coat.

'He is so rich and so accomplished,' the field-mouse told her,

[p. 284]

[paragraph continues] 'His house is twenty times larger than mine; he possesses great knowledge, but he cannot bear the sun and the beautiful flowers, and speaks slightingly of them, for he has never seen them.'

Thumbelina had to sing to him, so she sang 'Lady-bird, lady-bird, fly away home!' and other songs so prettily that the mole fell in love with her; but he did not say anything, he was a very cautious man.  A short time before he had dug a long passage through the ground from his own house to that of his neighbour; in this he gave the field-mouse and Thumbelina permission to walk as often as they liked.  But he begged them not to be afraid of the dead bird that lay in the passage: it was a real bird with beak and feathers, and must have died a little time ago, and now laid buried just where he had made his tunnel.  The mole took a piece of rotten wood in his mouth, for that glows like fire in the dark, and went in front, lighting them through the long dark passage.  When they came to the place where the dead bird lay, the mole put his broad nose against the ceiling and pushed a hole through, so that the daylight could shine down.  In the middle of the path lay a dead swallow, his pretty wings pressed close to his sides, his claws and head drawn under his feathers; the poor bird had evidently died of cold.  Thumbelina was very sorry, for she was very fond of all little birds; they had sung and twittered so beautifully to her all through the summer.  But the mole kicked him with his bandy legs and said:

'Now he can't sing any more!  It must be very miserable to be a little bird!  I'm thankful that none of my little children are; birds always starve in winter.'

'Yes, you speak like a sensible man,' said the field-mouse.  'What has a bird, in spite of all his singing, in the winter-time?  He must starve and freeze, and that must be very pleasant for him, I must say!'

Thumbelina did not say anything; but when the other two had passed on she bent down to the bird, brushed aside the feathers from his head, and kissed his closed eyes gently.  'Perhaps it was he that sang to me so prettily in the summer,' she thought.  'How much pleasure he did give me, dear little bird!'

The mole closed up the hole again which let in the light, and then escorted the ladies home.  But Thumbelina could not sleep that night; so she got out of bed, and plaited a great big blanket of straw, and carried it off, and spread it over the dead bird, and piled upon it thistle-down as soft as cotton-wool, which she had found in

[p. 285]

the field-mouse's room, so that the poor little thing should lie warmly buried.

'Farewell, pretty little bird!' she said.  'Farewell, and thank you for your beautiful songs in the summer, when the trees were green, and the sun shone down warmly on us!' Then she laid her head against the bird's heart.  But the bird was not dead: he had been frozen, but now that she had warmed him, he was coming to life again.

In autumn the swallows fly away to foreign lands; but there are some who are late in starting, and then they get so cold that they drop down as if dead, and the snow comes and covers them over.

Thumbelina trembled, she was so frightened; for the bird was very large in comparison with herself--only an inch high.  But she took courage, piled up the down more closely over the poor swallow, fetched her own coverlid and laid it over his head.

Next night she crept out again to him.  There he was alive, but very weak; he could only open his eyes for a moment and look at Thumbelina, who was standing in front of him with a piece of rotten wood in her hand, for she had no other lantern.

'Thank you, pretty little child!' said the swallow to her.  'I am so beautifully warm!  Soon I shall regain my strength, and then I shall be able to fly out again into the warm sunshine.'

'Oh!' she said, 'it is very cold outside; it is snowing and freezing!  stay in your warm bed; I will take care of you!'

Then she brought him water in a petal, which he drank, after

[p. 286]

which he related to her how he had torn one of his wings on a bramble, so that he could not fly as fast as the other swallows, who had flown far away to warmer lands.  So at last he had dropped down exhausted, and then he could remember no more.  The whole winter he remained down there, and Thumbelina looked after him and nursed him tenderly.  Neither the mole nor the field-mouse learnt anything of this, for they could not bear the poor swallow.

When the spring came, and the sun warmed the earth again, the swallow said farewell to Thumbelina, who opened the hole in the roof for him which the mole had made.  The sun shone brightly down upon her, and the swallow asked her if she would go with him; she could sit upon his back.  Thumbelina wanted very much to fly far away into the green wood, but she knew that the old field-mouse would be sad if she ran away.  'No, I mustn't come!' she said.

'Farewell, dear good little girl!' said the swallow, and flew off into the sunshine.  Thumbelina gazed after him with the tears standing in her eyes, for she was very fond of the swallow.

'Tweet, tweet!' sang the bird, and flew into the green wood.  Thumbelina was very unhappy.  She was not allowed to go out into the warm sunshine.  The corn which had been sowed in the field over the field-mouse's home grew up high into the air, and made a thick forest for the poor little girl, who was only an inch high.

'Now you are to be a bride, Thumbelina!' said the field-mouse, 'for our neighbour has proposed for you!  What a piece of fortune for a poor child like you!  Now you must set to work at your linen for your dowry, for nothing must be lacking if you are to become the wife of our neighbour, the mole!'

Thumbelina had to spin all day long, and every evening the mole visited her, and told her that when the summer was over the sun would not shine so hot; now it was burning the earth as hard as a stone.  Yes, when the summer had passed, they would keep the wedding.

But she was not at all pleased about it, for she did not like the stupid mole.  Every morning when the sun was rising, and every evening when it was setting, she would steal out of the house-door, and when the breeze parted the ears of corn so that she could see the blue sky through them, she thought how bright and beautiful it must be outside, and longed to see her dear swallow again.  But

[p. 287]

he never came; no doubt he had flown away far into the great green wood.

By the autumn Thumbelina had finished the dowry.

'In four weeks you will be married!' said the field-mouse; 'don't be obstinate, or I shall bite you with my sharp white teeth!  You will get a fine husband!  The King himself has not such a velvet coat.  His store-room and cellar are full, and you should be thankful for that.'

Well, the wedding-day arrived.  The mole had come to fetch Thumbelina to live with him deep down under the ground, never to come out into the warm sun again, for that was what he didn't like.  The poor little girl was very sad; for now she must say good-bye to the beautiful sun.

'Farewell, bright sun!' she cried, stretching out her arms towards it, and taking another step outside the house; for now the corn had been reaped, and only the dry stubble was left standing.  'Farewell, farewell!' she said, and put her arms round a little red flower that grew there.  'Give my love to the dear swallow when you see him!'

'Tweet, tweet!' sounded in her ear all at once.  She looked up.  There was the swallow flying past!  As soon as he saw Thumbelina, he was very glad.  She told him how unwilling she was to marry

[p. 288]

the ugly mole, as then she had to live underground where the sun never shone, and she could not help bursting into tears.

'The cold winter is coming now,' said the swallow.  'I must fly away to warmer lands: will you come with me?  You can sit on my back, and we will fly far away from the ugly mole and his dark house, over the mountains, to the warm countries where the sun shines more brightly than here, where it is always summer, and there are always beautiful flowers.  Do come with me, dear little Thumbelina, who saved my life when I lay frozen in the dark tunnel!'

'Yes, I will go with you,' said Thumbelina, and got on the swallow's back, with her feet on one of his outstretched wings.  Up he flew into the air, over woods and seas, over the great mountains where the snow is always lying.  And if she was cold she crept under his warm feathers, only keeping her little head out to admire all the beautiful things in the world beneath.  At last they came to warm lands; there the sun was brighter, the sky seemed twice as high, and in the hedges hung the finest green and purple grapes; in the woods grew oranges and lemons: the air was scented with myrtle and mint, and on the roads were pretty little children running about and playing with great gorgeous butterflies.  But the swallow flew on farther, and it became more and more beautiful.  Under the most splendid green trees besides a blue lake stood a glittering white-marble castle.  Vines hung about the high pillars; there were many swallows' nests, and in one of these lived the swallow who was carrying Thumbelina.

'Here is my house!' said he.  'But it won't do for you to live with me; I am not tidy enough to please you.  Find a home for yourself in one of the lovely flowers that grow down there; now I will set you down, and you can do whatever you like.'

'That will be splendid!' said she, clapping her little hands.

There lay a great white marble column which had fallen to the ground and broken into three pieces, but between these grew the most beautiful white flowers.  The swallow flew down with Thumbelina, and set her upon one of the broad leaves.  But there, to her astonishment, she found a tiny little man sitting in the middle of the flower, as white and transparent as if he were made of glass; he had the prettiest golden crown on his head, and the most beautiful wings on his shoulders; he himself was no bigger than Thumbelina.  He was the spirit of the flower.  In each

[p. 289]

blossom there dwelt a tiny man or woman; but this one was the King over the others.

'How handsome he is!' whispered Thumbelina to the swallow.

The little Prince was very much frightened at the swallow, for in comparison with one so tiny as himself he seemed a giant.  But when he saw Thumbelina, he was delighted, for she was the most beautiful girl he had ever seen.  So he took his golden crown from off his head and put it on hers, asking her her name, and if she would be his wife, and then she would be Queen of all the flowers.  Yes!  he was a different kind of husband to the son of the toad and the mole with the black-velvet coat.  So she said 'Yes' to the noble Prince.  And out of each flower came a lady and gentleman, each so tiny and pretty that it was a pleasure to see them.  Each brought Thumbelina a present, but the best of all was a beautiful pair of

[p. 290]

wings which were fastened on to her back, and now she too could fly from flower to flower.  They all wished her joy, and the swallow sat above in his nest and sang the wedding march, and that he did as well as he could; but he was sad, because he was very fond of Thumbelina and did not want to be separated from her.

'You shall not be called Thumbelina!' said the spirit of the flower to her; 'that is an ugly name, and you are much too pretty for that.  We will call you May Blossom.'

'Farewell, farewell!' said the little swallow with a heavy heart, and flew away to farther lands, far, far away, right back to Denmark.  There he had a little nest above a window, where his wife lived, who can tell fairy-stories.  'Tweet, tweet!' he sang to her.  And that is the way we learnt the whole story.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f44]

[p. 291]

THE NIGHTINGALE

In China, as I daresay you know, the Emperor is a Chinaman, and all his courtiers are also Chinamen.  The story I am going to tell you happened many years ago, but it is worth while for you to listen to it, before it is forgotten.

The Emperor's Palace was the most splendid in the world, all made of priceless porcelain, but so brittle and delicate that you had to take great care how you touched it.  In the garden were the most beautiful flowers, and on the loveliest of them were tied silver bells which tinkled, so that if you passed you could not help looking at the flowers.  Everything in the Emperor's garden was admirably arranged with a view to effect; and the garden was so large that even the gardener himself did not know where it ended.  If you ever got beyond it, you came to a stately forest with great trees and deep lakes in it.  The forest sloped down to the sea, which was a clear blue.  Large ships could sail under the boughs of the trees, and in these trees there lived a Nightingale.  She sang so beautifully that even the poor fisherman who had so much to do stood and listened when he came at night to cast his nets.  'How beautiful it is!' he said; but he had to attend to his work, and forgot about the bird.  But when she sang the next night and the fisherman came there again, he said the same thing, 'How beautiful it is!'

From all the countries round came travellers to the Emperor's town, who were astonished at the Palace and the garden.  But when they heard the Nightingale they all said, 'This is the finest thing after all!'

The travellers told all about it when they went home, and learned scholars wrote many books upon the town, the Palace, and the garden.  But they did not forget the Nightingale; she was praised the most, and all the poets composed splendid verses on the Nightingale in the forest by the deep sea.

[p. 292]

The books were circulated throughout the world, and some of them reached the Emperor.  He sat in his golden chair, and read and read.  He nodded his head every moment, for he liked reading the brilliant accounts of the town, the Palace, and the garden.  'But the Nightingale is better than all,' he saw written.

'What is that?' said the Emperor.  'I don't know anything about the Nightingale!  Is there such a bird in my empire, and so near as in my garden?  I have never heard it!  Fancy reading for the first time about it in a book!'

And he called his First Lord to him.  He was so proud that if anyone of lower rank than his own ventured to speak to him or ask him anything, he would say nothing but 'P!' and that does not mean anything.

'Here is a most remarkable bird which is called a Nightingale!' said the Emperor.  'They say it is the most glorious thing in my kingdom.  Why has no one ever said anything to me about it?'

'I have never before heard it mentioned!' said the First Lord.  'I will look for it and find it!'

But where was it to be found?  The First Lord ran up and down stairs, through the halls and corridors; but none of those he met had ever heard of the Nightingale.  And the First Lord ran again to the Emperor, and told him that it must be an invention on the part of those who had written the books.

'Your Irmperial Majesty cannot really believe all that is written!  There are some inventions called the Black Art!'

'But the book in which I read this,' said the Emperor, 'is sent me by His Great Majesty the Emperor of Japan; so it cannot be untrue, and I will hear the Nightingale!  She must be here this evening!  She has my gracious permission to appear, and if she does not, the whole Court shall be trampled under foot after supper!'

'Tsing pe!' said the First Lord; and he ran up and down stairs, through the halls and corridors, and half the Court ran with him, for they did not want to be trampled under foot.  Everyone was asking after the wonderful Nightingale which all the world knew of, except those at Court.

At last they met a poor little girl in the kitchen, who said, 'Oh!  I know the Nightingale well.  How she sings!  I have permission to carry the scraps over from the Court meals to my poor sick mother, and when I am going home at night, tired and weary, and rest for a little in the wood, then I hear the Nightingale singing!

[p. 293]

[paragraph continues] It brings tears to my eyes, and I feel as if my mother were kissing me!'

'Little kitchenmaid!' said the First Lord, 'I will give you a place in the kitchen, and you shall have leave to see the Emperor at dinner, if you can lead us to the Nightingale, for she is invited to come to Court this evening.'

And so they all went into the wood where the Nightingale was wont to sing, and half the Court went too.

[p. 294]

When they were on the way there they heard a cow mooing.

'Oh!' said the Courtiers, 'now we have found her!  What a wonderful power for such a small beast to have!  I am sure we have heard her before!'

'No; that is a cow mooing!' said the little kitchenmaid.  'We are still a long way off!'

Then the frogs began to croak in the marsh.  'Splendid!' said the Chinese chaplain.  'Now we hear her; it sounds like a little church-bell!'

'No, no; those are frogs!' said the little kitchenmaid.  'But I think we shall soon hear her now!'

Then the Nightingale began to sing.

'There she is!' cried the little girl.  'Listen!  She is sitting there!'  And she pointed to a little dark-grey bird up in the branches.

'Is it possible!' said the First Lord.  'I should never have thought it!  How ordinary she looks!  She must surely have lost her feathers because she sees so many distinguished men round her!'

'Little Nightingale,' called out the little kitchenmaid, 'our Gracious Emperor wants you to sing before him!'

'With the greatest of pleasure!' said the Nightingale; and she sang so gloriously that it was a pleasure to listen.

'It sounds like glass bells!' said the First Lord.  'And look how her little throat works!  It is wonderful that we have never heard her before!  She will be a great success at Court.'

'Shall I sing once more for the Emperor?' asked the Nightingale, thinking that the Emperor was there.

'My esteemed little Nightingale,' said the First Lord, 'I have the great pleasure to invite you to Court this evening, where His Gracious Imperial Highness will be enchanted with your charming song!'

'It sounds best in the green wood,' said the Nightingale; but still, she came gladly when she heard that the Emperor wished it.

At the Palace everything was splendidly prepared.  The porcelain walls and floors glittered in the light of many thousand gold lamps; the most gorgeous flowers which tinkled out well were placed in the corridors.  There was such a hurrying and draught that all the bells jingled so much that one could not hear oneself speak.  In the centre of the great hall where the Emperor sat was a golden perch, on which the Nightingale sat.  The whole Court was there,

[p. 295]

and the little kitchenmaid was allowed to stand behind the door, now that she was a Court-cook.  Everyone was dressed in his best, and everyone was looking towards the little grey bird to whom the Emperor nodded.

The Nightingale sang so gloriously that the tears came into the Emperor's eyes and ran down his cheeks.  Then the Nightingale sang even more beautifully; it went straight to all hearts.  The Emperor was so delighted that he said she should wear his gold slipper round her neck.  But the Nightingale thanked him, and said she had had enough reward already.  'I have seen tears in the Emperor's eyes--that is a great reward.  An Emperor's tears have such power!'  Then she sang again with her gloriously sweet voice.

'That is the most charming coquetry I have ever seen!' said

[p. 296]

all the ladies round.  And they all took to holding water in their mouths that they might gurgle whenever anyone spoke to them.  Then they thought themselves nightingales.  Yes, the lackeys and chambermaids announced that they were pleased; which means a great deal, for they are the most difficult people of all to satisfy.  In short, the Nightingale was a real success.

She had to stay at Court now; she had her own cage, and permission to walk out twice in the day and once at night.

She was given twelve servants, who each held a silken string which was fastened round her leg.  There was little pleasure in flying about like this.

The whole town was talking about the wonderful bird, and when two people met each other one would say 'Nightin,' and the other 'Gale,' and then they would both sigh and understand one another.

Yes, and eleven grocer's children were called after her, but not one of them could sing a note.

One day the Emperor received a large parcel on which was written 'The Nightingale.'

'Here is another new book about our famous bird!' said the Emperor.

But it was not a book, but a little mechanical toy, which lay in a box--an artificial nightingale which was like the real one, only that it was set all over with diamonds, rubies, and sapphires.  When it was wound up, it could sing the piece the real bird sang, and moved its tail up and down, and glittered with silver and gold.  Round its neck was a little collar on which was written, 'The Nightingale of the Emperor of Japan is nothing compared to that of the Emperor of China.'

'This is magnificent!' they all said, and the man who had  brought the clockwork bird received on the spot the title of 'Bringer of the Imperial First Nightingale.'

'Now they must sing together; what a duet we shall have!'

And so they sang together, but their voices did not blend, for the real Nightingale sang in her way and the clockwork bird sang waltzes.

'It is not its fault!' said the bandmaster; 'it keeps very good time and is quite after my style!'

Then the artificial bird had to sing alone.  It gave just as much pleasure as the real one, and then it was so much prettier to look at; it sparkled like bracelets and necklaces.  Three-and-thirty times it sang the same piece without being tired.  People would

[p. 297]

like to have heard it again, but the Emperor thought that the living Nightingale should sing now--but where was she?  No one had noticed that she had flown out of the open window away to her green woods.

'What shall we do!' said the Emperor.

And all the Court scolded, and said that the Nightingale was very ungrateful.  'But we have still the best bird!' they said and the artificial bird had to sing again, and that was the thirty-fourth time they had heard the same piece.  But they did not yet know it by heart; it was much too difficult.  And the bandmaster praised the bird tremendously; yes, he assured them it was better than a real nightingale, not only because of its beautiful plumage and diamonds, but inside as well.  'For see, my Lords and Ladies and your Imperial Majesty, with the real Nightingale one can never tell what will come out, but all is known about the artificial bird!  You can explain it, you can open it and show people where the waltzes lie, how they go, and how one follows the other!'

'That's just what we think!' said everyone; and the bandmaster received permission to show the bird to the people the next Sunday.  They should hear it sing, commanded the Emperor.  And they heard it, and they were as pleased as if they had been intoxicated with tea, after the Chinese fashion, and they all said 'Oh!' and held up their forefingers and nodded time.  But the poor fishermen who had heard the real Nightingale said: 'This one sings well enough, the tunes glide out; but there is something wanting-- I don't know what!'

The real Nightingale was banished from the kingdom.

The artificial bird was put on silken cushions by the Emperor's bed, all the presents which it received, gold and precious stones, lay round it, and it was given the title of Imperial Night-singer, First from the left.  For the Emperor counted that side as the more distinguished, being the side on which the heart is; the Emperor's heart is also on the left.

And the bandmaster wrote a work of twenty-five volumes about the artificial bird.  It was so learned, long, and so full of the hardest Chinese words that everyone said they had read it and understood it; for once they had been very stupid about a book, and had been trampled under foot in consequence.  So a whole year passed.  The Emperor, the Court, and all the Chinese knew every note of the artificial bird's song by heart.  Bat they liked it all the better for this; they could even sing with it, and they did.  The street boys

[p. 298]

sang 'Tra-la-la-la-la,' and the Emperor sang too sometimes.  It was indeed delightful.

But one evening, when the artificial bird was singing its best, and the Emperor lay in bed listening to it, something in the bird went crack.  Something snapped!  Whir-r-r!  all the wheels ran down and then the music ceased.  The Emperor sprang up, and had his physician summoned, but what could HE do!  Then the clockmaker came, and, after a great deal of talking and examining, he put the bird somewhat in order, but he said that it must be very seldom used as the works were nearly worn out, and it was impossible to put in new ones.  Here was a calamity!  Only once a year was the artificial bird allowed to sing, and even that was almost too much for it.  But then the bandmaster made a little speech full of hard words, saying that it was just as good as before.  And so, of course, it WAS just as good as before.  So five years passed, and then a great sorrow came to the nation.  The Chinese look upon their Emperor as everything, and now he was ill, and not likely to live it was said.

Already a new Emperor had been chosen, and the people stood outside in the street and asked the First Lord how the old Emperor was.  'P!' said he, and shook his head.

Cold and pale lay the Emperor in his splendid great bed; the whole Court believed him dead, and one after the other left him to pay their respects to the new Emperor.  Everywhere in the halls and corridors cloth was laid down so that no footstep could be heard, and everything was still--very, very still.  And nothing came to break the silence.

The Emperor longed for something to come and relieve the monotony of this deathlike stillness.  If only someone would speak to him!  If only someone would sing to him.  Music would carry his thoughts away, and would break the spell lying on him.  The moon was streaming in at the open window; but that, too, was silent, quite silent.

'Music!  music!' cried the Emperor.  'You little bright golden bird, sing!  do sing!  I gave you gold and jewels; I have hung my gold slipper round your neck with my own hand--sing!  do sing!' But the bird was silent.  There was no one to wind it up, and so it could not sing.  And all was silent, so terribly silent!

All at once there came in at the window the most glorious burst of song.  It was the little living Nightingale, who, sitting outside on a bough, had heard the need of her Emperor and had come to sing

[p. 299]

to him of comfort and hope.  And as she sang the blood flowed quicker and quicker in the Emperor's weak limbs, and life began to return.

'Thank you, thank you!' said the Emperor.  'You divine little bird!  I know you.  I chased you from my kingdom, and you have given me life again!  How can I reward you?'

'You have done that already!' said the Nightingale.  'I brought tears to your eyes the first time I sang.  I shall never forget that.  They are jewels that rejoice a singer's heart.  But now sleep and get strong again; I will sing you a lullaby.'  And the Emperor fell into a deep, calm sleep as she sang.

The sun was shining through the window when he awoke, strong and well.  None of his servants had come back yet, for they thought he was dead.  But the Nightingale sat and sang to him.

'You must always stay with me!' said the Emperor.  'You shall sing whenever you like, and I will break the artificial bird into a thousand pieces.'

'Don't do that!' said the Nightingale.  'He did his work as long as he could.  Keep him as you have done!  I cannot build my nest in the Palace and live here; but let me come whenever I like.  I will sit in the evening on the bough outside the window, and I will sing you something that will make you feel happy and grateful.  I will sing of joy, and of sorrow; I will sing of the evil and the

[p. 300]

good which lies hidden from you.  The little singing-bird flies all around, to the poor fisherman's hut, to the farmer's cottage, to all those who are far away from you and your Court.  I love your heart more than your crown, though that has about it a brightness as of something holy.  Now I will sing to you again; but you must promise me one thing----'

'Anything!' said the Emperor, standing up in his Imperial robes, which he had himself put on, and fastening on his sword richly embossed with gold.

'One thing I beg of you!  Don't tell anyone that you have a little bird who tells you everything.  It will be much better not to!' Then the Nightingale flew away.

The servants came in to look at their dead Emperor.

The Emperor said, 'Good-morning!'

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f45]

[p. 301]

HERMOD AND HADVOR [*1]

Once upon a time there were a King and a Queen who had an only daughter, called Hadvor, who was fair and beautiful, and being an only child, was heir to the kingdom.  The King and Queen had also a foster son, named Hermod, who was just about the same age as Hadvor, and was good-looking, as well as clever at most things.  Hermod and Hadvor often played together while they were children, and liked each other so much that while they were still young they secretly plighted their troth to each other.

As time went on the Queen fell sick, and suspecting that it was her last illness, sent for the King to come to her.  When he came she told him that she had no long time to live, and therefore wished to ask one thing of him, which was, that if he married another wife he should promise to take no other one than the Queen of Hetland the Good.  The King gave the promise, and thereafter the Queen died.

Time went past, and the King, growing tired of living alone, fitted out his ship and sailed out to sea.  As he sailed there came upon him so thick a mist that he altogether lost his bearings, but after long trouble he found land.  There he laid his ship to, and went on shore all alone.  After walking for some time he came to a forest, into which he went a little way and stopped.  Then he heard sweet music from a harp, and went in the direction of the sound until he came to a clearing, and there he saw three women, one of whom sat on a golden chair, and was beautifully and grandly dressed; she held a harp in her hands, and was very sorrowful.  The second was also finely dressed, but younger in appearance, and also sat on a chair, but it was not so grand as the first one's.  The third stood beside them, and was very pretty to look at; she had a green cloak over her other clothes, and it was easy to see that she was maid to the other two.

After the King had looked at them for a little he went forward

[p. 302]

and saluted them.  The one that sat on the golden chair asked him who he was and where he was going; and he told her all the story --how he was a king, and had lost his queen, and was now on his way to Hetland the Good, to ask the Queen of that country in marriage.  She answered that fortune had contrived this wonderfully, for pirates had plundered Hetland and killed the King, and she had fled from the land in terror, and had come hither after great trouble, and she was the very person he was looking for, and the others were her daughter and maid.  The King immediately asked her hand; she gladly received his proposal and accepted him at once.  Thereafter they all set out, and made their way to the ship; and after that nothing is told of their voyage until the King reached his own country.  There he made a great feast, and celebrated his marriage with this woman; and after that things are quiet for a time.

Hermod and Hadvor took but little notice of the Queen and her daughter, but, on the other hand, Hadvor and the Queen's maid, whose name was Olof, were very friendly, and Olof came often to visit Hadvor in her castle.  Before long the King went out to war, and no sooner was he away than the Queen came to talk with Hermod, and said that she wanted him to marry her daughter.  Hermod told her straight and plain that he would not do so, at which the Queen grew terribly angry, and said that in that case neither should he have Hadvor, for she would now lay this spell on him, that he should go to a desert island and there be a lion by day and a man by night.  He should also think always of Hadvor, which would cause him all the more sorrow, and from this spell he should never be freed until Hadvor burned the lion's skin, and that would not happen very soon.

As soon as the Queen had finished her speech Hermod replied that he also laid a spell on her, and that was, that as soon as he was freed from her enchantments she should become a rat and her daughter a mouse, and fight with each other in the hall until he killed them with his sword.

After this Hermod disappeared, and no one knew what had become of him; the Queen caused search to be made for him, but he could nowhere be found.  One time, when Olof was in the castle beside Hadvor, she asked the Princess if she knew where Hermod had gone to.  At this Hadvor became very sad, and said that she did not.

'I shall tell you then,' said Olof, 'for I know all about it.

[p. 303]

[paragraph continues] Hermod has disappeared through the wicked devices of the Queen, for she is a witch, and so is her daughter, though they have put on these beautiful forms.  Because Hermod would not fall in with the Queen's plans, and marry her daughter, she has laid a spell on him, to go on an island and be a lion by day and a man by night, and never be freed from this until you burn the lion's skin.  Besides,' said Olof, 'she has looked out a match for you; she has a brother in the Underworld, a three-headed Giant, whom she means to turn into a beautiful prince and get him married to you.  This is no new thing for the Queen; she took me away from my parents' house and compelled me to serve her; but she has never done me any harm, for the green cloak I wear protects me against all mischief.

Hadvor now became still sadder than before at the thought of the marriage destined for her, and entreated Olof to think of some plan to save her.

'I think,' said Olof, 'that your wooer will come up through the floor of the castle to you, and so you must be prepared when you hear the noise of his coming and the floor begins to open, and have at hand blazing pitch, and pour plenty of it into the opening.  That will prove too much for him.'

About this time the King came home from his expedition, and thought it a great blow that no one knew what had become of Hermod; but the Queen consoled him as best she could, and after a time the King thought less about his disappearance.

Hadvor remained in her castle, and had made preparations to receive her wooer when he came.  One night, not long after, a loud noise and rumbling was heard under the castle.  Hadvor at once guessed what it was, and told her maids to be ready to help her.  The noise and thundering grew louder and louder, until the floor began to open, whereupon Hadvor made them take the caldron of pitch and pour plenty of it into the opening.  With that the noises grew fainter and fainter, till at last they ceased altogether.

Next morning the Queen rose early, and went out to the Palace gate, and there she found her brother the Giant lying dead.  She went up to him and said, 'I pronounce this spell, that you become a beautiful prince, and that Hadvor shall be unable to say anything against the charges that I shall bring against her.'

The body of the dead Giant now became that of a beautiful prince, and the Queen went in again.

'I don't think,' said she to the King, 'that your daughter is as good as she is said to be.  My brother came and asked her hand,

[p. 304]

and she has had him put to death.  I have just found his dead body lying at the Palace gate.'

The King went along with the Queen to see the body, and thought it all very strange; so beautiful a youth, he said, would have been a worthy match for Hadvor, and he would readily have agreed to their marriage.  The Queen asked leave to decide what Hadvor's punishment should be, which the King was very willing to allow, so as to escape from punishing his own daughter.  The Queen's decision was that the King should make a big grave-mound for her brother, and put Hadvor into it beside him.

Olof knew all the plans of the Queen, and went to tell the Princess what had been done, whereupon Hadvor earnestly entreated her to tell her what to do.

'First and foremost,' said Olof, 'you must get a wide cloak to wear over your other clothes, when you are put into the mound.  The Giant's ghost will walk after you are both left together in there, and he will have two dogs along with him.  He will ask you to cut pieces out of his legs to give to the dogs, but that you must not promise to do unless he tells you where Hermod has gone to, and tells you how to find him.  He will then let you stand on his shoulders, so as to get out of the mound; but he means to cheat you all the same, and will catch you by the cloak to pull you back again; but you must take care to have the cloak loose on your shoulders, so that he will only get hold of that.'

The mound was all ready now, and the Giant laid in it, and into it Hadvor also had to go without being allowed to make any defence.  After they were both left there everything happened just as Olof had said.  The prince became a Giant again, and asked Hadvor to cut the pieces out of his legs for the dogs; but she refused until he told her that Hermod was in a desert island, which she could not reach unless she took the skin off the soles of his feet and made shoes out of that; with these shoes she could travel both on land and sea.  This Hadvor now did, and the Giant then let her get up on his shoulders to get out of the mound.  As she sprang out he caught hold of her cloak; but she had taken care to let it lie loose on her shoulders, and so escaped.

She now made her way down to the sea, to where she knew there was the shortest distance over to the island in which Hermod was.  This strait she easily crossed, for the shoes kept her up.  On reaching the island she found a sandy beach all along by the sea, and high cliffs above.  Nor could she see any way to get up these,

[p. 305]

and so, being both sad at heart and tired with the long journey, she lay down and fell asleep.  As she slept she dreamed that a tall woman came to her and said, 'I know that you are Princess Hadvor, and are searching for Hermod.  He is on this island; but it will be hard for you to get to him if you have no one to help you, for you cannot climb the cliffs by your own strength.  I have therefore let down a rope, by which you will be able to climb up; and as the island is so large that you might not find Hermod's dwelling-place so easily, I lay down this clew beside you.  You need only hold the end of the thread, and the clew will run on before and show you the way.  I also lay this belt beside you, to put on when you awaken; it will keep you from growing faint with hunger.'

The woman now disappeared, and Hadvor woke, and saw that all her dream had been true.  The rope hung down from the cliff, and the clew and belt lay beside her.  The belt she put on, the rope enabled her to climb up the cliff, and the clew led her on till she came to the mouth of a cave, which was not very big.  She went into the cave, and saw there a low couch, under which she crept and lay down.

When evening came she heard the noise of footsteps outside, and became aware that the lion had come to the mouth of the cave, and shook itself there, after which she heard a man coming towards the couch.  She was sure this was Hermod, because she heard him speaking to himself about his own condition, and calling to mind Hadvor and other things in the old days.  Hadvor made no sign, but waited till he had fallen asleep, and then crept out and burned the lion's skin, which he had left outside.  Then she went back into the cave and wakened Hermod, and they had a most joyful meeting.

In the morning they talked over their plans, and were most at a loss to know how to get out of the island.  Hadvor told Hermod her dream, and said she suspected there was some one in the island who would be able to help them.  Hermod said he knew of a Witch there, who was very ready to help anyone, and that the only plan was to go to her.  So they went to the Witch's cave, and found her there with her fifteen young sons, and asked her to help them to get to the mainland.

'There are other things easier than that,' said she, 'for the Giant that was buried will be waiting for you, and will attack you on the way, as he has turned himself into a big whale.  I shall lend

[p. 306]

you a boat, however, and if you meet the whale and think your lives are in danger, then you can name me by name.'

They thanked her greatly for her help and advice, and set out from the island, but on the way they saw a huge fish coming towards them, with great splashing and dashing of waves.  They

[p. 307]

were sure of what it was, and thought they had as good reason as ever they would have to call on the Witch, and so they did.  The next minute they saw coming after them another huge whale, followed by fifteen smaller ones.  All of these swam past the boat and went on to meet the whale.  There was a fierce battle then, and the sea became so stormy that it was not very easy to keep the boat from being filled by the waves.  After this fight had gone on for some time, they saw that the sea was dyed with blood; the big whale and the fifteen smaller ones disappeared, and they got to land safe and sound.

Now the story goes back to the King's hall, where strange things had happened in the meantime.  The Queen and her daughter had disappeared, but a rat and a mouse were always fighting with each other there.  Ever so many people had tried to drive them away, but no one could manage it.  Thus some time went on, while the King was almost beside himself with sorrow and care for the loss of his Queen, and because these monsters destroyed all mirth in the hall.

One evening, however, while they all sat dull and down-hearted, in came Hermod with a sword by his side, and saluted the King, who received him with the greatest joy, as if he had come back from the dead.  Before Hermod sat down, however, he went to where the rat and the mouse were fighting, and cut them in two with his sword.  All were astonished then by seeing two witches lying dead on the floor of the hall.

Hermod now told the whole story to the King, who was very glad to be rid of such vile creatures.  Next he asked for the hand of Hadvor, which the King readily gave him, and being now an old man, gave the kingdom to him as well; and so Hermod became King.

Olof married a good-looking nobleman, and that is the end of the story.

Footnotes

^301:1 From the Icelandic.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f46]

[p. 308]

THE STEADFAST TIN-SOLDIER

There were once upon a time five-and twenty tin-soldiers--all brothers, as they were made out of the same old tin spoon.  Their uniform was red and blue, and they shouldered their guns and looked straight in front of them.  The first words that they heard in this world, when the lid of the box in which they lay was taken off, were: 'Hurrah, tin-soldiers!' This was exclaimed by a little boy, clapping his hands; they had been given to him because it was his birthday, and now he began setting them out on the table.  Each soldier was exactly like the other in shape, except just one, who had been made last when the tin had run short; but there he stood as firmly on his one leg as the others did on two, and he is the one that became famous.

There were many other playthings on the table on which they were being set out, but the nicest of all was a pretty little castle made of cardboard, with windows through which you could see into the rooms.  In front of the castle stood some little trees surrounding a tiny mirror which looked like a lake.  Wax swans were floating about and reflecting themselves in it.  That was all very pretty; but the most beautiful thing was a little lady, who stood in the open doorway.  She was cut out of paper, but she had on a dress of the finest muslin, with a scarf of narrow blue ribbon round her shoulders, fastened in the middle with a glittering rose made of gold paper, which was as large as her head.  The little lady was stretching out both her arms, for she was a Dancer, and was lifting up one leg so high in the air that the Tin-soldier couldn't find it anywhere, and thought that she, too, had only one leg.

'That's the wife for me!' he thought; 'but she is so grand, and lives in a castle, whilst I have only a box with four-and-twenty others.  This is no place for her!  But I must make her acquaintance.'  Then he stretched himself out behind a snuff-box that lay on the table; from thence he could watch the dainty little lady, who continued to stand on one leg without losing her balance.

[p. 309]

When the night came all the other tin-soldiers went into their box, and the people of the house went to bed.  Then the toys began to play at visiting, dancing, and fighting.  The tin-soldiers rattled in their box, for they wanted to be out too, but they could not raise the lid.  The nut-crackers played at leap-frog, and the slate-pencil ran about the slate; there was such a noise that the canary woke up and began to talk to them, in poetry too!  The only two who did not stir from their places were the Tin-soldier and the little Dancer.  She remained on tip-toe, with both arms outstretched; he stood steadfastly on his one leg, never moving his eyes from her face.

The clock struck twelve, and crack!  off flew the lid of the snuff-box; but there was no snuff inside, only a little black imp--that was the beauty of it.

'Hullo, Tin-soldier!' said the imp.  'Don't look at things that aren't intended for the likes of you!'

But the Tin-soldier took no notice, and seemed not to hear.

'Very well, wait till to-morrow!' said the imp.

When it was morning, and the children had got up, the Tin-soldier was put in the window; and whether it was the wind or the little black imp, I don't know, but all at once the window flew open

[p. 310]

and out fell the little Tin-soldier, head over heels, from the third-storey window!  That was a terrible fall, I can tell you!  He landed on his head with his leg in the air, his gun being wedged between two paving-stones.

The nursery-maid and the little boy came down at once to look for him, but, though they were so near him that they almost trod on him, they did not notice him.  If the Tin-soldier had only called out 'Here I am!' they must have found him; but he did not think it fitting for him to cry out, because he had on his uniform.

Soon it began to drizzle; then the drops came faster, and there was a regular down-pour.  When it was over, two little street boys came along.

'Just look!' cried one.  'Here is a Tin-soldier!  He shall sail up and down in a boat!'

So they made a little boat out of newspaper, put the Tin-soldier in it, and made him sail up and down the gutter; both the boys ran along beside him, clapping their hands.  What great waves there were in the gutter, and what a swift current!  The paper-boat tossed up and down, and in the middle of the stream it went so quick that the Tin-soldier trembled; but he remained steadfast, showed no emotion, looked straight in front of him, shouldering his gun.  All at once the boat passed under a long tunnel that was as dark as his box had been.

'Where can I be coming now?' he wondered.  'Oh, dear!  This is the black imp's fault!  Ah, if only the little lady were sitting beside me in the boat, it might be twice as dark for all I should care!'

[p. 311]

Suddenly there came along a great water-rat that lived in the tunnel.

'Have you a passport?' asked the rat.  'Out with your passport!'

But the Tin-soldier was silent, and grasped his gun more firmly.

The boat sped on, and the rat behind it.  Ugh!  how he showed his teeth, as he cried to the chips of wood and straw: 'Hold him, hold him!  he has not paid the toll!  He has not shown his passport!'

But the current became swifter and stronger.  The Tin-soldier could already see daylight where the tunnel ended; but in his ears there sounded a roaring enough to frighten any brave man.  Only think!  at the end of the tunnel the gutter discharged itself into a great canal; that would be just as dangerous for him as it would be for us to go down a waterfall.

Now he was so near to it that he could not hold on any longer.  On went the boat, the poor Tin-soldier keeping himself as stiff as he could: no one should say of him afterwards that he had flinched.  The boat whirled three, four times round, and became filled to the brim with water: it began to sink!  The Tin-soldier was standing up to his neck in water, and deeper and deeper sank the boat, and softer and softer grew the paper; now the water was over his head.  He was thinking of the pretty little Dancer, whose face he should never see again, and there sounded in his ears, over and over again:

'Forward, forward, soldier bold!
  Death's before thee, grim and cold!'

The paper came in two, and the soldier fell--but at that moment he was swallowed by a great fish.

Oh! how dark it was inside, even darker than in the tunnel, and it was really very close quarters!  But there the steadfast little Tin-soldier lay full length, shouldering his gun.

Up and down swam the fish, then he made the most dreadful contortions, and became suddenly quite still.  Then it was as if a flash of lightning had passed through him; the daylight streamed in, and a voice exclaimed, 'Why, here is the little Tin-soldier!' The fish had been caught, taken to market, sold, and brought into the kitchen, where the cook had cut it open with a great knife.  She took up the soldier between her finger and thumb, and carried him

[p. 312]

into the room, where everyone wanted to see the hero who had been found inside a fish; but the Tin-soldier was not at all proud.  They put him on the table, and--no, but what strange things do happen in this world!--the Tin-soldier was in the same room in which he had been before!  He saw the same children, and the same toys on the table; and there was the same grand castle with the pretty little Dancer.  She was still standing on one leg with the other high in the air; she too was steadfast.  That touched the Tin-soldier, he was nearly going to shed tin-tears; but that would not have been fitting for a soldier.  He looked at her, but she said nothing.

All at once one of the little boys took up the Tin-soldier, and threw him into the stove, giving no reasons; but doubtless the little black imp in the snuff-box was at the bottom of this too.

There the Tin-soldier lay, and felt a heat that was truly terrible; but whether he was suffering from actual fire, or from the ardour of his passion, he did not know.  All his colour had disappeared; whether this had happened on his travels or whether it was the result of trouble, who can say?  He looked at the little lady, she looked at him, and he felt that he was melting; but he remained steadfast, with his gun at his shoulder.  Suddenly a door opened, the draught caught up the little Dancer, and off she flew like a sylph to the Tin-soldier in the stove, burst into flames--and that was the end of her!  Then the Tin-soldier melted down into a little lump, and when next morning the maid was taking out the ashes, she found him in the shape of a heart.  There was nothing left of the little Dancer but her gilt rose, burnt as black as a cinder.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f47]

[p. 313]

BLOCKHEAD-HANS

Far away in the country lay an old manor-house where lived an old squire who had two sons.  They thought themselves so clever, that if they had known only half of what they did know, it would have been quite enough.  They both wanted to marry the King's daughter, for she had proclaimed that she would have for her husband the man who knew best how to choose his words.

Both prepared for the wooing a whole week, which was the longest time allowed them; but, after all, it was quite long enough, for they both had preparatory knowledge, and everyone knows how useful that is.  One knew the whole Latin dictionary and also three years' issue of the daily paper of the town off by heart, so that he could repeat it all backwards or forwards as you pleased.  The other had worked at the laws of corporation, and knew by heart what every member of the corporation ought to know, so that he thought he could quite well speak on State matters and give his opinion.  He understood, besides this, how to embroider braces with roses and other flowers, and scrolls, for he was very ready with his fingers.

'I shall win the king's daughter!' they both cried.

Their old father gave each of them a fine horse; the one who knew the dictionary and the daily paper by heart had a black horse, while the other who was so clever at corporation law had a milk-white one.  Then they oiled the corners of their mouths so that they might be able to speak more fluently.  All the servants stood in the courtyard and saw them mount their steeds, and here by chance came the third brother; for the squire had three sons, but nobody counted him with his brothers, for he was not so learned as they were, and he was generally called 'Blockhead-Hans.'

'Oh, oh!' said Blockhead-Hans.  'Where are you off to?  You are in your Sunday-best clothes!'

'We are going to Court, to woo the Princess!  Don't you know

[p. 314]

what is known throughout all the country side?' And they told him all about it.

'Hurrah!  I'll go to!' cried Blockhead-Hans; and the brothers laughed at him and rode off.

'Dear father!' cried Blockhead-Hans, 'I must have a horse too.  What a desire for marriage has seized me!  If she will have me, she WILL have me, and if she won't have me, I will have her.'

'Stop that nonsense!' said the old man.  'I will not give you a horse.  YOU can't speak; YOU don't know how to choose your words.  Your brothers!  Ah!  they are very different lads!'

'Well,' said Blockhead-Hans, 'if I can't have a horse, I will take the goat which is mine; he can carry me!'

And he did so.  He sat astride on the goat, struck his heels into its side, and went rattling down the high-road like a hurricane.

'Hoppetty hop! what a ride!' Here I come!' shouted Blockhead-Hans, singing so that the echoes were roused far and near.  But his brothers were riding slowly in front.  They were not speaking, but they were thinking over all the good things they were going to say, for everything had to be thought out.

'Hullo!' bawled Blockhead-Hans, 'here I am!  Just look what

[p. 315]

[paragraph continues] I found on the road!'--and he showed them a dead crow which he had picked up.

'Blockhead!' said his brothers, 'what are you going to do with it?'

'With the crow?  I shall give it to the Princess!'

'Do so, certainly!' they said, laughing loudly and riding on.

'Slap! bang! here I am again!  Look what I have just found!  You don't find such things every day on the road!'  And the brothers turned round to see what in the world he could have found.

'Blockhead!' said they, 'that is an old wooden shoe without the top!  Are you going to send that, too, to the Princess?'

'Of course I shall!' returned Blockhead-Hans; and the brothers laughed and rode on a good way.

'Slap! bang! here I am!' cried Blockhead-Hans; 'better and better--it is really famous!'

'What have you found now?' asked the brothers.

[p. 316]

'Oh,' said Blockhead-Hans, 'it is really too good!  How pleased the Princess will be!'

'Why!' said the brothers, 'this is pure mud, straight from the ditch.'

'Of course it is!' said Blockhead-Hans, 'and it is the best kind!  Look how it runs through one's fingers!' and, so saying, he filled his pocket with the mud.

But the brothers rode on so fast that dust and sparks flew all around, and they reached the gate of the town a good hour before Blockhead-Hans.  Here came the suitors numbered according to their arrival, and they were ranged in rows, six in each row, and they were so tightly packed that they could not move their arms.  This was a very good thing, for otherwise they would have torn each other in pieces, merely because the one was in front of the other.

All the country people were standing round the King's throne, and were crowded together in thick masses almost out of the windows to see the Princess receive the suitors; and as each one came into the room all his fine phrases went out like a candle!

'It doesn't matter!' said the Princess.  'Away!  out with him!'

At last she came to the row in which the brother who knew the dictionary by heart was, but he did not know it any longer; he had quite forgotten it in the rank and file.  And the floor creaked, and the ceiling was all made of glass mirrors, so that he saw himself standing on his head, and by each window were standing three reporters and an editor; and each of them was writing down what was said, to publish it in the paper that came out and was sold at the street corners for a penny.  It was fearful, and they had made up the fire so hot that it was grilling.

'It is hot in here, isn't it!' said the suitor.

'Of course it is!  My father is roasting young chickens to-day!' said the Princess.

[p. 317]

'Ahem!' There he stood like an idiot.  He was not prepared for such a speech; he did not know what to say, although he wanted to say something witty.  'Ahem!'

'It doesn't matter!' said the Princess.  'Take him out!' and out he had to go.

Now the other brother entered.

'How hot it is!' he said.

'Of course!  We are roasting young chickens to-day!' remarked the Princess.

'How do you--um!' he said, and the reporters wrote down.  'How do you--um.'

'It doesn't matter!' said the Princess.  'Take him out!'

Now Blockhead-Hans came in; he rode his goat right into the hall.

'I say!  How roasting hot it is here!' said he.

'Of course!  I am roasting young chickens to-day!' said the Princess.

'That's good!' replied Blockhead-Hans; 'then can I roast a crow with them?'

'With the greatest of pleasure!' said the Princess; 'but have you anything you can roast them in?  for I have neither pot nor saucepan.'

'Oh, rather!' said Blockhead-Hans.  'Here is a cooking implement with tin rings,' and he drew out the old wooden shoe, and laid the crow in it.

'That is quite a meal!' said the Princess; 'but where shall we get the soup from?'

'I've got that in my pocket!' said Blockhead-Hans.  'I have so much that I can quite well throw some away!' and he poured some mud out of his pocket.

'I like you!' said the Princess.  'You can answer, and you can

[p. 318]

speak, and I will marry you; but do you know that every word which we are saying and have said has been taken down and will be in the paper to-morrow?  By each window do you see there are standing three reporters and an old editor, and this old editor is the worst, for he doesn't understand anything!' but she only said this to tease Blockhead-Hans.  And the reporters giggled, and each dropped a blot of ink on the floor.

'Ah! are those the great people?' said Blockhead-Hans.  'Then I will give the editor the best!' So saying, he turned his pockets inside out, and threw the mud right in his face.

'That was neatly done!' said the Princess.  'I couldn't have done it; but I will soon learn how to!'

Blockhead-Hans became King, got a wife and a crown, and sat on the throne; and this we have still damp from the newspaper of the editor and the reporters--and they are not to be believed for a moment.

The Yellow Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[f48]

[p. 319]

A STORY ABOUT A DARNING-NEEDLE

There was once a Darning-needle who thought herself so fine that she believed she was an embroidery-needle.  'Take great care to hold me tight!' said the Darning-needle to the Fingers who were holding her.  'Don't let me fall!  If I once fall on the ground I shall never be found again, I am so fine!'

'It is all right!' said the Fingers, seizing her round the waist.

'Look, I am coming with my train!' said the Darning-needle as she drew a long thread after her; but there was no knot at the end of the thread.

The Fingers were using the needle on the cook's shoe.  The upper leather was unstitched and had to be sewn together.

'This is common work!' said the Darning-needle.  'I shall never get through it.  I am breaking!  I am breaking!'  And in fact she did break.  'Didn't I tell you so!' said the Darning-needle.  'I am too fine!'

'Now she is good for nothing!' said the Fingers; but they had to hold her tight while the cook dropped some sealing-wax on the needle and stuck it in the front of her dress.

'Now I am a breast-pin!' said the Darning-needle.  'I always knew I should be promoted.  When one is something, one will become something!'  And she laughed to herself; you can never see when a Darning-needle is laughing.  Then she sat up as proudly as if she were in a State coach, and looked all round her.

'May I be allowed to ask if you are gold?' she said to her neighbour, the Pin.  'You have a very nice appearance, and a peculiar head; but it is too small!  You must take pains to make it grow, for it is not everyone who has a head of sealing-wax.'   And so saying the Darning-needle raised herself up so proudly that she fell out of the dress, right into the sink which the cook was rinsing out.

'Now I am off on my travels!' said the Darning-needle.  'I do hope I sha'n't get lost!' She did indeed get lost.

[p. 320]

'I am too fine for this world!' said she as she lay in the gutter; 'but I know who I am, and that is always a little satisfaction!'

And the Darning-needle kept her proud bearing and did not lose her good-temper.

All kinds of things swam over her--shavings, bits of straw, and scraps of old newspapers.

'Just look how they sail along!' said the Darning-needle.  'They don't know what is underneath them!  Here I am sticking fast!  There goes a shaving thinking of nothing in the world but of itself, a mere chip!  There goes a straw--well, how it does twist and twirl, to be sure!  Don't think so much about yourself, or you will be knocked against a stone.  There floats a bit of newspaper.  What is written on it is long ago forgotten, and yet how proud it is!  I am sitting patient and quiet.  I know who I am, and that is enough for me!'

One day something thick lay near her which glittered so brightly that the Darning-needle thought it must be a diamond.  But it was a bit of bottle-glass, and because it sparkled the Darning-needle spoke to it, and gave herself out as a breast-pin.

'No doubt you are a diamond?'

'Yes, something of that kind!' And each believed that the other was something very costly; and they both said how very proud the world must be of them.

'I have come from a lady's work-box,' said Darning-needle, 'and this lady was a cook; she had five fingers on each hand; anything so proud as these fingers I have never seen!  And yet they were only there to take me out of the work-box and to put me back again!'

'Were they of noble birth, then?' asked the bit of bottle-glass.

'Of noble birth!' said the Darning-needle; 'no indeed, but proud!  They were five brothers, all called ''Fingers.'' They held themselves proudly one against the other, although they were of different sizes.  The outside one, the Thumb, was short and fat; he was outside the rank, and had only one bend in his back, and could only make one bow; but he said that if he were cut off from a man that he was no longer any use as a soldier.  Dip-into-everything, the second finger, dipped into sweet things as well as sour things, pointed to the sun and the moon, and guided the pen when they wrote.  Longman, the third, looked at the others over his shoulder.  Goldband, the fourth, had a gold sash round his waist; and little Playman did nothing at all, and was the more proud.  There was too much ostentation, and so I came away.'

[p. 321]

'And now we are sitting and shining here!' said the bit of bottle-glass.

At that moment more water came into the gutter; it streamed over the edges and washed the bit of bottle-glass away.

'Ah!  now he has been promoted!' said the Darning-needle.  'I remain here; I am too fine.  But that is my pride, which is a sign of respectability!' And she sat there very proudly, thinking lofty thoughts.

'I really believe I must have been born a sunbeam, I am so fine!  It seems to me as if the sunbeams were always looking under the water for me.  Ah, I am so fine that my own mother cannot find me!  If I had my old eye which broke off, I believe I could weep; but I can't--it is not fine to weep!'

One day two street-urchins were playing and wading in the gutter, picking up old nails, pennies, and such things.  It was rather dirty work, but it was a great delight to them.

'Oh, oh!' cried out one, as he pricked himself with the Darning-needle; 'he is a fine fellow though!'

'I am not a fellow; I am a young lady!' said the Darning-needle; but no one heard.  The sealing-wax had gone, and she had become quite black; but black makes one look very slim, and so she thought she was even finer than before.

'Here comes an egg-shell sailing along!' said the boys, and they stuck the Darning-needle into the egg-shell.

'The walls white and I black--what a pretty contrast it makes!' said the Darning-needle.  'Now I can be seen to advantage!  If only I am not sea-sick!  I should give myself up for lost!'

But she was not sea-sick, and did not give herself up.

'It is a good thing to be steeled against sea-sickness; here one has indeed an advantage over man!  Now my qualms are over.  The finer one is the more one can beat.'

'Crack!' said the egg-shell as a wagon-wheel went over it.

'Oh!  how it presses!' said the Darning-needle.  'I shall indeed be sea-sick now.  I am breaking!' But she did not break, although the wagon-wheel went over her; she lay there at full length, and there she may lie.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: yfhu.txt =====


    
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

YOUR FORCES AND HOW TO USE THEM

  

BY

  

CHRISTIAN D. LARSON

  

Author of

  

"The Ideal Made Real," "The Great Within," "On The
 Heights," "Mastery of Fate," "Poise and Power,"
 "How to Stay Young," "Mastery of Self,"
 "How Great Men Succeed," "The
 Hidden Secret,"
 "The Pathway
 of Roses,"
 etc.

  

L. N. FOWLER & CO.
 7 Imperial Arcade, Ludgate Circus
 LONDON, E. C.

  

THE NEW LITERATURE PUBLISHING COMPANY

  

CHICAGO.

  

[1912]

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, July 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

[p. 2]

Copyright 1912
 BY
 CHRISTIAN D. LARSON

P. F. PETTIBONE & CO.
 Printers and Binders
 Chicago

Click to enlarge
Dust Jacket

Click to enlarge
Front Cover and Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

CONTENTS

         	CHAPTER

      	 

      	PAGE

     
     	I.

      	The Ruling Principle in Man

      	<page 11>

     
     	II.

      	How We Govern the Forces We Possess

      	<page 23>

     
     	III.

      	The Use of Mind in Practical Action

      	<page 37>

     
     	IV.

      	The Forces of the Subconscious

      	<page 59>

     
     	V.

      	Training the Subconscious for Special Results

      	<page 73>

     
     	VI.

      	The Power of Subjective Thought

      	<page 85>

     
     	VII.

      	How Man Becomes What He Thinks

      	<page 109>

     
     	VIII.

      	The Art of Changing for the Better

      	<page 123>

     
     	IX.

      	He Can Who Thinks He Can

      	<page 135>

     
     	X.

      	How We Secure What We Persistently Desire

      	<page 143>

     
     	XI.

      	Concentration and the Power Back of Suggestion

      	<page 157>

     
     	XII.

      	The Development of the Will

      	<page 171>

     
     	XIII.

      	The Building of a Great Mind

      	<page 193>

     
     	XIV.

      	How Character Determines Constructive Action

      	<page 209>

     
     	XV.

      	The Art of Building Character

      	<page 221>

     
     	XVI.

      	The Creative Forces in Man

      	<page 239>

     
     	XVII.

      	The Building Power of Constructive Speech

      	<page 261>

     
     	XVIII.

      	Imagination and the Master Mind

      	<page 279>

     
     	XIX.

      	The Higher Forces in Man

      	<page 295>

     
     	XX.

      	The Greatest Power in Man

      	<page 323>

     
   
     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4] [p. 5]

  

FOREWORD

"There are a million energies in man. What may we not become when we learn to use them all." This is the declaration of the poet; and though poetry is usually inspired by transcendental visions, and therefore more or less impressed with apparent exaggerations, nevertheless there is in this poetic expression far more actual, practical truth than we may at first believe.

How many energies there are in man, no one knows; but there are so many that even the keenest observers of human activity have found it impossible to count them all. And as most of these energies are remarkable, to say the least, and some of them so remarkable as to appear both limitless in power and numberless in possibilities, we may well wonder what man will become when he learns to use them all.

When we look upon human nature in general we may fail to see much improvement in power and worth as compared with what we believe the race has been in the past; and therefore we conclude that humanity will continue to remain about the same upon this planet until the end of time. But when we investigate the lives of such individuals as have recently tried to apply more intelligently the greater powers within them, we come to a different conclusion. We then discover that there is evidence in thousands

[p. 6]

of human lives of a new and superior race of people--a race that will apply a much larger measure of the wonders and possibilities that exist within them.

It is only a few years, not more than a quarter of a century, since modern psychology began to proclaim the new science of human thought and action, so that we have had but a short time to demonstrate what a more intelligent application of our energies and forces can accomplish. But already the evidence is coming in from all sources, revealing results that frequently border upon the extraordinary. Man can do far more with himself and his life than he has been doing in the past; he can call into action, and successfully apply, far more ability, energy and worth than his forefathers ever dreamed of. So much has been proven during this brief introductory period of the new age. Then what greater things may we not reasonably expect when we have had fifty or a hundred years more in which to develop and apply those larger possibilities which we now know to be inherent in us all.

It is the purpose of the following pages, not only to discuss these greater powers and possibilities in man, but also to present practical methods through which they may be applied. We have been aware of the fact for centuries that there is more in man than what appears on the surface, but it is only in recent years that a systematic effort has been made to understand the nature and practical use of this "more,"

[p. 7]

as well as to work out better methods for the thorough and effective application of those things on the surface which we have always employed. In dealing with a subject that is so large and so new, however, it is necessary to make many statements that may, at first sight, appear to be unfounded, or at least exaggerations. But if the reader will thoroughly investigate the basis of such statements as he goes along, he will not only find that there are no unfounded statements or exaggerations in the book, but will wish that every strong statement made had been made many times as strong.

When we go beneath the surface of human life and learn what greater things are hidden beneath the ordinary layers of mental substance and vital energy, we find man to be so wonderfully made that language is wholly inadequate to describe even a fraction of his larger and richer life. We may try to give expression to our thoughts, at such times, by employing the strongest statements and the most forceful adjectives that we can think of; but even these prove little better than nothing; so therefore we may conclude that no statement that attempts to describe the "more" in man can possibly be too strong. Even the strongest fails to say one thousandth of what we would say should we speak the whole truth. We shall all admit this, and accordingly shall find it advisable not to pass judgment upon strong statements but to learn to understand and apply those greater powers within

[p. 8]

ourselves that are infinitely stronger than the strongest statement that could possibly be made.

Those minds who may believe that the human race is to continue weak and imperfect as usual, should consider what remarkable steps in advance have recently been taken in nearly all fields of human activity. And then they should remember that the greater powers in man, as well as a scientific study of the use of his lesser powers, have been almost wholly neglected. The question then that will naturally arise is, what man might make of himself if he would apply the same painstaking science to his own development and advancement as he now applies in other fields. If he did, would we not, in another generation or two, witness unmistakable evidence of the coming of a new and superior race, and would not strong men and women become far more numerous than ever before in the history of the world?

Each individual will want to answer these questions according to his own point of view, but whatever his answer may be, we all must agree that man can be, become and achieve far more than even the most sanguine indications of the present may predict. And it is the purpose of the following pages to encourage as many as possible to study and apply these greater powers within them so that they may not only become greater and richer and more worthy as individuals, but may also become the forerunners of that higher and more wonderful race of which we all have so fondly dreamed.

[p. 9]

  

PROMISE YOURSELF

To be so strong that nothing can disturb your peace of mind.
 To talk health, happiness and prosperity to every person you meet.
 To make all your friends feel that there is something in them.
 To look at the sunny side of everything and make your optimism come true.
 To think only of the best, to work only for the best, and to expect only the best.
 To be just as enthusiastic about the success of others as you are about your own.
 To forget the mistakes of the past and press on to the greater achievements of the future.
 To wear a cheerful countenance at all times and give every living creature you meet a smile.
 To give so much time to the improvement of yourself that you have no time to criticise others.
 To be too large for worry, too noble for anger, too strong for fear; and too happy to permit the presence of trouble.
 To think well of yourself and to proclaim this fact to the world, not in loud words but in great deeds.
 To live in the faith that the whole world is on your side so long as you are true to the best that is in you.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10] [p. 11]

  

YOUR FORCES AND HOW TO USE THEM

  

CHAPTER I

  

THE RULING PRINCIPLE IN MAN

The purpose of the following pages will be to work out the subject chosen in the most thorough and practical manner; in brief, to analyze the whole nature of man, find all the forces in his possession, whether they be apparent or hidden, active or dormant, and to present methods through which all those forces can be applied in making the life of each individual richer, greater and better. To make every phase of this work as useful as possible to the greatest number possible, not a single statement will be made that all cannot understand, and not a single idea will be presented that any one cannot apply to every-day life.

We all want to know what we actually possess both in the physical, the mental and the spiritual, and we want to know how the elements and forces within us can be applied in the most successful manner. It is results in practical life that we want, and we are not

[p. 12]

true to ourselves or the race until we learn to use the powers within us so effectively, that the greatest results possible within the possibilities of human nature are secured.

When we proceed with a scientific study of the subject, we find that the problem before us is to know what is in us and how to use what is in us. After much study of the powers in man, both conscious and subconscious, we have come to the conclusion that if we only knew how to use these powers, we could accomplish practically anything that we may have in view, and not only realize our wants to the fullest degree, but also reach even our highest goal. Though this may seem to be a strong statement, nevertheless when we examine the whole nature of man, we are compelled to admit that it is true even in its fullest sense, and that therefore, not a single individual can fail to realize his wants and reach his goal, after he has learned how to use the powers that are in him. This is not mere speculation, nor is it simply a beautiful dream. The more we study the lives of people who have achieved, and the more we study our own experience every day, the more convinced we become that there is no reason whatever why any individual should not realize all his ambitions and much more..

The basis of this study will naturally be found in the understanding of the whole nature of man, as we must know what we are, before we can know and use what we inherently possess. In analyzing human nature,

[p. 13]

a number of methods have been employed, but there are only three in particular that are of actual value for our present purpose. The first of these declares that man is composed of ego, consciousness and form, and though this analysis is the most complete, yet it is also the most abstract, and is therefore not easily understood. The second analysis, which is simpler, and which is employed almost exclusively by the majority, declares that man is body, mind and soul; but as much as this idea is thought of and spoken of, there are very few who actually understand it. In fact, the usual conception of man as body, mind and soul will have to be completely reversed in order to become absolutely true. The third analysis, which is the simplest and the most serviceable, declares that man is composed of individuality and personality, and it is this conception of human nature that will constitute the phases of our study in this work.

Before we pass to the more practical side of the subject, we shall find it profitable to examine briefly these various ideas concerning the nature of man; in fact, every part of our human analysis that refers to the ego, simply must be understood if we are to learn how to use the forces we possess, and the reason for this is found in the fact that the ego is the "I Am," the ruling principle in man, the center and source of individuality, the originator of everything that takes place in man, and that primary something

[p. 14]

to which all other things in human nature are secondary.

When the average person employs the term "ego," he thinks that he is dealing with something that is hidden so deeply in the abstract, that it can make but little difference whether we understand it or not. This, however, does not happen to be true, because it is the ego that must act before any action can take place anywhere in the human system, and it is the ego that must originate the new before any step in advance can be taken. And in addition, it is extremely important to realize that the power of will to control the forces we possess, depends directly upon how fully conscious we are of the ego as the ruling principle within us. We understand therefore, that it is absolutely necessary to associate all thought, all feeling and all actions of mind or personality with the ego, or what we shall hereafter speak of as the "I Am."

The first step to be taken in this connection, is to recognize the "I Am" in everything you do, and to think always of the "I Am," as being you--the supreme you. Whenever you think, realize that it is the "I Am" that originated the thought. Whenever you act, realize that it is the "I Am" that gives initiative to that action, and whenever you think of yourself or try to be conscious of yourself, realize that the "I Am" occupies the throne of your entire field of consciousness.

[p. 15]

Another important essential is to affirm silently in your own mind that you are the "I Am," and as you affirm this statement, or as you simply declare positively, "I Am," think of the "I Am" as being the ruling principle in your whole world, as being distinct and above and superior to all else in your being, and as being you, yourself, in the highest, largest, and most comprehensive sense. You thus lift yourself up, so to speak, to the mountain top of masterful individuality; you enthrone yourself; you become true to yourself; you place yourself where you belong.

Through this practice you not only discover yourself to be the master of your whole life, but you elevate all your conscious actions to that lofty state in your consciousness that we may describe as the throne of your being, or as that center of action within which the ruling "I Am" lives and moves and has its being. If you wish to control and direct the forces you possess, you must act from the throne of your being, so to speak; or in other words, from that conscious point in your mental world wherein all power of control, direction and initiative proceeds; and this point of action is the center of the "I Am." You must act, not as a body, not as a personality, not as a mind, but as the "I Am," and the more fully you recognize the lofty position of the "I Am," the greater becomes your power to control and direct all other things that you may possess. In brief, whenever

[p. 16]

you think or act, you should feel that you stand with the "I Am," at the apex of mentality on the very heights of your existence, and you should at the same time, realize that this "I Am" is you--the supreme you. The more you practice these methods, the more you lift yourself up above the limitations of mind and body, into the realization of your own true position as a masterful individuality; in fact, you place yourself where you belong, over and above everything in your organized existence.

When we examine the mind of the average person, we find that he usually identifies himself with mind or body. He either thinks that he is body or that he is mind, and therefore he can control neither mind nor body. The "I Am" in his nature is submerged in a bundle of ideas, some of which are true and some of which are not, and his thought is usually controlled by those ideas without receiving any direction whatever from that principle within him that alone was intended to give direction. Such a man lives in the lower story of human existence but as we can control life only when we give directions from the upper story, we discover just why the average person neither understands his forces nor has the power to use them. He must first elevate himself to the upper story of the human structure, and the first and most important step to be taken in this direction is to recognize the "I Am" as the ruling principle, and that the "I Am" is you.

[p. 17]

Another method that will be found highly important in this connection is to take a few moments every day and try to feel that you--the "I Am"--are not only above mind and body, but in a certain sense, distinct from mind and body; in fact, try to isolate the "I Am" for a few moments every day from the rest of your organized being. This practice will give you what may be termed a perfect consciousness of your own individual "I Am," and as you gain that consciousness you will always think of the supreme "I Am" whenever you think of yourself. Accordingly, all your mental actions will, from that time on, come directly from the "I Am;" and if you will continue to stand above all such actions at all times, you will be able to control them and direct them completely.

To examine consciousness and form in this connection is hardly necessary, except to define briefly their general nature, so that we may have a clear idea of what we are dealing with in the conscious field as well as in the field of expression. The "I Am" is fundamentally conscious; that is, the "I Am" knows what exists in the human field or in the human sphere and what is taking place in the human sphere; and that constitutes consciousness. In brief, you are conscious when you know that you exist and have some definite idea as to what is taking place in your sphere of existence. What we speak of as form, is everything in the organized personality that has shape and

[p. 18]

that serves in any manner to give expression to the forces within us.

In the exercise of consciousness, we find that the "I Am" employs three fundamental actions. When the "I Am" looks out upon life we have simple consciousness. When the "I Am" looks upon its own position in life we have self consciousness, and when the "I Am" looks up into the vastness of real life we have cosmic consciousness.

In simple consciousness, you are only aware of those things that exist externally to yourself, but when you begin to become conscious of yourself as a distinct entity, you begin to develop self consciousness. When you begin to turn your attention to the great within and begin to look up into the real source of all things, you become conscious of that world that seemingly exists within all worlds, and when you enter upon this experience, you are on the borderland of cosmic consciousness, the most fascinating subject that has ever been known.

When we come to define body, mind and soul, we must, as previously stated, reverse the usual definition. In the past, we have constantly used the expression, "I have a soul," which naturally implies the belief that "I am a body;" and so deeply has this idea become fixed in the average mind that nearly everybody thinks of the body whenever the term "me" or "myself" is employed. But in this attitude of mind the individual is not above the physical

[p. 19]

states of thought and feeling; in fact, he is more or less submerged in what may be called a bundle of physical facts and ideas, of which he has very little control. You cannot control anything in your life, however, until you are above it. You cannot control what is in your body until you realize that you are above your body. You cannot control what is in your mind until you realize that you are above your mind, and therefore no one can use the forces within him to any extent so long as he thinks of himself as being the body, or as being localized exclusively in the body.

When we examine the whole nature of man, we find that the soul is the man himself, and that the ego is the central principle of the soul; or to use another expression, the soul, including the "I Am," constitutes the individuality, and that visible something through which individuality finds expression, constitutes the personality.

If you wish to understand your forces, and gain that masterful attitude necessary to the control of your forces, train yourself to think that you are a soul, but do not think of the soul as something vague or mysterious. Think of the soul as being the individual you and all that that expression can possibly imply. Train yourself to think that you are master of mind and body, because you are above mind and body, and possess the power to use everything that is in mind and body.

[p. 20] [p. 21]

Man is ever in search of strength. It is the strong man that wins. It is the man with power that scales the heights. To be strong is to be great; and it is the privilege of greatness to satisfy every desire, every aspiration, every need. But strength is not for the few alone; it is for all, and the way to strength is simple. Proceed this very moment to the mountain tops of the strength you now possess, and whatever may happen do not come down. Do not weaken under adversity. Resolve to remain as strong, as determined and as highly enthused during the darkest night of adversity as you are during the sunniest day of prosperity. Do not feel disappointed when things seem disappointing. Keep the eye single upon the same brilliant future regardless of circumstances, conditions or events. Do not lose heart when things go wrong. Continue undisturbed in your original resolve to make all things go right. To be overcome by adversity and threatening failure is to lose strength; to always remain in the same lofty, determined mood is to constantly grow in strength. The man who never weakens when things are against him will grow stronger and stronger until all things will delight to be for him. He will finally have all the strength he may desire or need. Be always strong and you will always be stronger.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22] [p. 23]

  

CHAPTER II

  

HOW WE GOVERN THE FORCES WE POSSESS

Whenever you think or whenever you feel, whenever you speak, whenever you act, or whatever may be taking place in your life, your supreme idea should be that you are above it all, superior to it all, and have control of it all. You simply must take this higher ground in all action, thought and consciousness before you can control yourself and direct, for practical purposes, the forces you possess. Therefore, what has been said in connection with the "I Am," the soul and the individuality as being one, and as standing at the apex of human existence, is just as important as anything that may be said hereafter in connection with the application of the forces in man to practical action. And though this phase of the subject may appear to be somewhat abstract, we shall find no difficulty in understanding it more fully as we apply the ideas evolved. In fact, when we learn to realize that we, by nature, occupy a position that is above mind and body, this part of the subject will be found more interesting than anything else, and its application more profitable.

[p. 24]

We can define individuality more fully by stating that it is the invisible man and that everything in man that is invisible belongs to his individuality. It is the individuality that initiates, that controls or directs. Therefore to control and use a force in your own system, you must understand and develop individuality. Your individuality must be made distinct, determined and positive. You must constantly know what you are and what you want, and you must constantly be determined to secure what you want. It is individuality that makes you different from all other organized entities, and it is a highly developed individuality that gives you the power to stand out distinct above the mass, and it is the degree of individuality that you possess that determines largely what position you are to occupy in the world.

Whenever you see a man who is different, who seems to stand out distinct, and who has something vital about him that no one else seems to possess, you have a man whose individuality is highly developed, and you also have a man who is going to make his mark in the world. Take two men of equal power, ability and efficiency, but with this difference. In the one individuality is highly developed, while in the other it is not. You know at once which one of these two is going to reach the highest places in the world of achievement; and the reason is that the one who possesses individuality, lives above mind and body, thereby being able to control and direct the forces

[p. 25]

and powers of mind and body. The man, however, whose individuality is weak, lives more or less down in mind and body, and instead of controlling mind and body, is constantly being influenced by everything from the outside that may enter his consciousness.

Whenever you find a man or a woman who is doing something worth while, who is creating an impression upon the race, who is moving forward towards greater and better things, you find the individuality strong, positive and highly developed. It is therefore absolutely necessary that you give your best attention to the development of a strong, positive individuality if you wish to succeed in the world and make the best use of the forces in your possession. A negative or weak individuality drifts with the stream of environment, and usually receives only what others choose to give, but a firm, strong, positive, well-developed individuality, actually controls the ship of his life and destiny, and sooner or later will gain possession of what he originally set out to secure. A positive individuality has the power to take hold of things and turn them to good account. This is one reason why such an individuality always succeeds. Another reason is that the more fully your individuality is developed, the more you are admired by everybody with whom you may come in contact. The human race loves power, and counts it a privilege to give lofty positions to those who have power.

[p. 26]

and every man or woman, whose individuality is highly developed, does possess power--usually exceptional power.

To develop individuality, the first essential is to give the "I Am" its true and lofty position in your mind. The "I Am" is the very center of individuality, and the more fully conscious you become of the "I Am" the more of the power that is in the "I Am" you arouse, and it is the arousing of this power that makes individuality positive and strong. Another essential is to practice the idea of feeling or conceiving yourself as occupying the masterful attitude. Whenever you think of yourself, think of yourself as being and living and acting in the masterful attitude. Then in addition, make every desire positive, make every feeling positive, make every thought positive, and make every action of mind positive. To make your wants distinct and positive, that is, to actually and fully know what you want and then proceed to want what you want with all the power that is in you, will also tend to give strength and positiveness to your individuality; and the reason is that such actions of mind will tend to place in positive, constructive action every force that is in your system.

A most valuable method is to picture in your mind your own best idea of what a strong, well-developed individuality would necessarily be, and then think of yourself as becoming more and more like that picture. In this connection it is well to remember that we

[p. 27]

gradually grow into the likeness of that which we think of the most. Therefore, if you have a very clear idea of a highly developed individuality, and think a great deal of that individuality with a strong, positive desire to develop such an individuality, you will gradually and surely move towards that lofty ideal.

Another valuable method is to give conscious recognition to what may be called the bigger man on the inside. Few people think of this greater man that is within them, but we cannot afford to neglect this interior entity for a moment. This greater or larger man is not something that is separate and distinct from ourselves. It is simply the sum-total of the greater powers and possibilities that are within us. We should recognize these, think of them a great deal, and desire with all the power of heart and mind and soul to arouse and express more and more of these inner powers. Thus we shall find that the interior man, our real individuality, will become stronger and more active, and our power to apply our greater possibilities will increase accordingly. The value of individuality is so great that it cannot possibly be overestimated. Every known method that will develop individuality, therefore, should be applied faithfully, thoroughly and constantly. In fact, no one other thing we can do will bring greater returns.

The personality is the visible man. Everything that is visible in the human entity belongs to the

[p. 28]

personality, but it is more than the body. To say that some one has a fine personality may and may not mean that that personality is beautiful, in the ordinary sense of the term. There might be no physical beauty and yet the personality might be highly developed. There might be nothing striking about such a personality, and yet there would be something extremely attractive, something to greatly admire. On the other hand, when the personality is not well developed, there is nothing in the visible man that you can see, besides ordinary human clay. Everything existing in such a personality is crude and even gross; but there is no excuse for any personality being crude, unrefined or undeveloped. There is not a single personality that cannot be so refined and perfected as to become strikingly attractive, and there are scores of reasons why such development should be sought. The most important reason is that all the forces of man act through the personality, and the finer the personality, the more easily can we direct and express the forces we possess. When the personality is crude, we find it difficult to apply in practical life the finer elements that are within us, and here we find one reason why talent or ability so frequently fails to be its best. In such cases the personality has been neglected, and is not a fit instrument through which finer things and greater things can find expression. The personality is related to the individual as the piano is to the musician. If the

[p. 29]

piano is out of tune, the musician will fail, no matter how much of a musician he may be; and likewise, if the piano or instrument is crude in construction, the finest music cannot be expressed through it as a channel. To develop the personality, the principal essential is to learn how to transmute all the creative energies that are generated in the human system, a subject that will be given thorough attention in another chapter.

When we proceed to apply the forces within us, we find three fields of action. The first is the conscious field, the field in which the mind acts when we are awake. The second field is the subconscious, that field in which the mind acts when it goes beneath consciousness. It is also the field in which we act when asleep. The term, "falling asleep," is therefore literally true, as when we go to sleep, the ego goes down, so to speak, into another world--a world so vast, that only portions of it have thus far been explored. The third field is the superconscious, the field in which the mind acts when it touches the upper realm, and it is when acting in this field that we gain real power and real inspiration; in fact, when we touch the superconscious, we frequently feel as if we have become more than mere man. To know how to act in the superconscious field, is therefore highly important, even though the idea may at first sight seem to be vague and somewhat mystical.

[p. 30]

We are constantly in touch, however, with the superconscious, whether we know it or not. We frequently enter the superconscious when we listen to inspiring music, when we read some book that touches the finer intellect, when we listen to someone who speaks from what may be termed the inner throne of authority, when we witness some soul-stirring scene in nature. We also touch the superconscious when we are carried away with some tremendous ambition, and herein we find practical value in a great measure. When men of tremendous ambition are carried away, so to speak, with the power of that ambition, they almost invariably reach the higher and finer state of mind--a state where they not only feel more power and determination than they ever felt before, but a state in which the mind becomes so extremely active that it almost invariably gains the necessary brilliancy to work out those plans or ideas that are required in order that the ambition may be realized.

It can readily be demonstrated that we get our best ideas from this lofty realm, and it is a well-known fact that no one ever accomplishes great or wonderful things in the world, without touching frequently this sublime inspiring state. When we train the mind to touch the superconscious at frequent intervals, we always find the ideas we want. We always succeed in providing the ways and means required. No matter what the difficulties may be, we

[p. 31]

invariably discover something by which we may overcome and conquer completely.

Whenever you find yourself in what may be termed a difficult position, proceed at once to work your mind up into higher and higher attitudes, until you touch the superconscious, and when you touch that lofty state you will soon receive the ideas or the methods that you need. But this is not the only value connected with the superconscious. The highest forces in man are the most powerful, but we cannot use those higher forces without acting through the superconscious field. Therefore, if you want to understand and apply all the forces you possess, you must train the mind to act through the superconscious as well as the conscious and the subconscious.

However, we must not permit ourselves to live exclusively in this lofty state; though it is the source of the higher forces in man, those forces that are indispensable to the doing of great and important things; nevertheless, those forces cannot be applied unless they are brought down to earth, so to speak, and united with practical action. He who lives exclusively in the superconscious, will dream wonderful dreams, but if he does not unite the forces of the superconscious with practical action, he will do nothing else but dream dreams, and those dreams will not come true. It is when we combine mental action in the conscious, subconscious and superconscious that we get the results we desire. In brief, it is the

[p. 32]

full use of all the forces in mind through all the channels of expression that leads to the highest attainment and the greatest achievements.

When we proceed with the practical application of any particular force, we shall not find it necessary to cause that force to act through what may be termed the psychological field, and the reason is that the psychological field in man is the real field of action. It is the field through which the undercurrents flow, and we all understand that it is these undercurrents that determine, not only the direction of action, but the results that follow action. This idea is well illustrated in the following lines:

"Straws upon the surface flow;
 He who would seek for pearls must dive below."

The term "below" as applied to the life and consciousness of man, is synonymous with the psychological field, or the field of the undercurrents. Ordinary minds skim over the surface. Great minds invariably sound these deeper depths, and act in and through the psychological field. Their minds dive below into the rich vastness of what may be termed the gold mines of the mind, and the diamond fields of the soul.

When we enter the psychological field of any force, which simply means the inner and finer field of action of that force, we act through the undercurrents, and thereby proceed to control those currents. It is in the field of the undercurrents that we find both the origin

[p. 33]

and the action of cause, whether physical or mental. It is these currents, when acted upon intelligently, that remove what we do not want and produce those changes that we do want. They invariably produce effects, both physical and mental, according to the action that we give to them, and all those things that pertain to the personality will respond only to the actions of those currents; that is, you cannot produce any effect in any part of the mind or body unless you first direct the undercurrents of the system to produce those effects. To act through the undercurrents therefore is absolutely necessary, no matter what we may wish to do, or what forces we may wish to control, direct or apply; and we act upon those undercurrents only when we enter the psychological field.

In like manner, we can turn to good account all things in practical everyday life only when we understand the psychology of those things. The reason is, that when we understand the psychology of anything, we understand the power that is back of that particular thing, and that controls it and gives it definite action. In consequence, when we understand the psychology of anything in our own field of action or in our own environment, we will know how to deal with it so as to secure whatever results that particular thing has the power to produce. But this law is especially important in dealing with forces within ourselves, whether those forces act through the mind

[p. 34]

or through any one of the faculties, through the personality or through the conscious, subconscious or superconscious fields. In brief, whatever we do in trying to control and direct the powers we possess, we must enter the deeper life of those powers, so that we can get full control of the undercurrents. It is the way those undercurrents flow that determines results, and as we can direct those currents in any way that we desire, we naturally conclude that we can secure whatever results we desire.

[p. 35]

Man lives to move forward. To move forward is to live more. To live more is to be more and do more; and it is being and doing that constitutes the path to happiness. The more you are and the more you do, the richer your life, the greater your joy. But being and doing must always live together as one. To try to be much and not try to do much, is to find life a barren waste. To try to do much and not try to be much, is to find life a burden too heavy and wearisome to bear. The being of much gives the necessary inspiration and the necessary power to the doing of much. The doing of much gives the necessary expression to the being of much. And it is the bringing forth of being through the act of doing that produces happiness that is happiness. Being much gives capacity for doing much. Doing much gives expression to the richest and the best that is within us. And the more we increase the richness of that which is within us, the more we increase our happiness, provided we increase, in the same proportion, the expression of that greater richness. The first essential is provided for by the being of much; the second, by the doing of much; and the secret of both may be found by him who lives to move forward.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36] [p. 37]

  

CHAPTER III

  

THE USE OF MIND IN PRACTICAL ACTION

In the present age, it is the power of mind that rules the world, and therefore it is evident that he who has acquired the best use of the power of mind, will realize the greatest success, and reach the highest places that attainment and achievement hold in store. The man who wins is the man who can apply in practical life every part of his mental ability, and who can make every action of his mind tell.

We sometimes wonder why there are so many capable men and admirable women who do not reach those places in life that they seem to deserve, but the answer is simple. They do not apply the power of mind as they should. Their abilities and qualities are either misdirected or applied only in part. These people, however, should not permit themselves to become dissatisfied with fate, but should remember that every individuality who learns to make full use of the power of his mind will reach his goal; he will realize his desire and will positively win.

There are several reasons why, though the principal reason is found in the fact that when the power

[p. 38]

of the mind is used correctly in working out what we wish to accomplish, the other forces we possess are readily applied for the same purpose, and this fact becomes evident when we realize that the power of mind is not only the ruling power in the world, but is also the ruling power in man himself. All other faculties in man are ruled by the power of his mind. It is the action of his mind that determines the action of all the other forces in his possession. Therefore, to secure the results desired, he must give his first thought to the scientific and constructive application of mental action.

In a preceding chapter, it was stated that the "I Am" is the ruling principle in man, and from that statement the conclusion may be drawn that the "I Am" is the ruling power as well, but this is not strictly correct. There is a difference between principle and power, though for practical purposes it is not necessary to consider the abstract phase of this difference. All that is necessary is to realize that the "I Am" directs the mind, and that the power of the mind directs and controls everything else in the human system. It is the mind that occupies the throne but the "I Am" is the power behind the throne.

This being true, it becomes highly important to understand how the power of the mind should be used, but before we can understand the use of this power, we must learn what this power actually is. Generally speaking, we may say that the power of

[p. 39]

mind is the sum-total of all the forces of the mental world, including those forces that are employed in the process of thinking. The power of mind includes the power of the will, the power of desire, the power of feeling, and the power of thought. It includes conscious action in all its phases and subconscious action in all its phases; in fact, it includes anything and everything that is placed in action through the mind, by the mind or in the mind.

To use the power of the mind, the first essential is to direct every mental action toward the goal in view, and this direction must not be occasional, but constant. Most minds, however, do not apply this law. They think about a certain thing one moment, and about something else the next moment. At a certain hour their mental actions work along a certain line, and at the next hour those actions work along a different line. Sometimes the goal in view is one thing, and sometimes another, so the actions of the mind do not move constantly toward a certain definite goal, but are mostly scattered. We know, however, that every individual who is actually working himself steadily and surely toward the goal he has in view, invariably directs all the power of his thought upon that goal. In his mind not a single mental action is thrown away, not a single mental force wasted. All the power that is in him is being directed to work for what he wishes to accomplish, and the reason that every power responds in this way is because he is not

[p. 40]

thinking of one thing now and something else the next moment. He is thinking all the time of what he wishes to attain and achieve. The full power of mind is turned upon that object, and as mind is the ruling power, the full power of all his other forces will tend to work for the same object.

In using the power of mind as well as all the other forces we possess, the first question to answer is what we really want, or what we really want to accomplish; and when this question is answered, the one thing that is wanted should be fixed so clearly in thought that it can be seen by the mind's eye every minute. But the majority do not know what they really want. They may have some vague desire, but they have not determined clearly, definitely and positively what they really want, and this is one of the principal causes of failure. So long as we do not know definitely what we want, our forces will be scattered, and so long as our forces are scattered, we will accomplish but little, or fail entirely. When we know what we want, however, and proceed to work for it with all the power and ability that is in us, we may rest assured that we will get it. When we direct the power of thinking, the power of will, the power of mental action, the power of desire, the power of ambition, in fact, all the power we possess on the one thing we want, on the one goal we desire to reach, it is not difficult to understand why success

[p. 41]

in a greater and greater measure must be realized.

To illustrate this subject further, we will suppose that you have a certain ambition and continue to concentrate your thought and the power of your mind upon that ambition every minute for an indefinite period, with no cessation whatever. The result will be that you will gradually and surely train all the forces within you to work for the realization of that ambition, and in the course of time, the full capacity of your entire mental system will be applied in working for that particular thing.

On the other hand, suppose you do as most people do under average circumstances. Suppose, after you have given your ambition a certain amount of thought, you come to the conclusion that possibly you might succeed better along another line. Then you begin to direct the power of your mind along that other line. Later on, you come to the conclusion that there is still another channel through which you might succeed, and you proceed accordingly to direct your mind upon this third ambition. Then what will happen? Simply this: You will make three good beginnings, but in every case you will stop before you have accomplished anything. There are thousands of capable men and women, however, who make this mistake every year of their lives. The full force of their mental system is directed upon a certain ambition only for a short time; then it is directed elsewhere.

[p. 42]

[paragraph continues] They never continue long enough along any particular line to secure results from their efforts, and therefore results are never secured.

Then there are other minds who give most of their attention to a certain ambition and succeed fairly well, but give the rest of their attention to a number of minor ambitions that have no particular importance. Thus they are using only a fraction of their power in a way that will tell. The rest of it is thrown away along a number of lines through which nothing is gained. But in this age high efficiency is demanded everywhere in the world's work, and any one who wants to occupy a place that will satisfy his ambition and desire, cannot afford to waste even a small part of the power he may possess. He needs it all along the line of his leading ambition, and therefore should not permit counter attractions to occupy his mind for a moment.

If you have a certain ambition or a certain desire, think about that ambition at all times. Keep that ambition before your mind constantly, and do not hesitate to make your ambition as high as possible. The higher you aim, the greater will be your achievements, though that does not necessarily mean that you will realize your highest aims as fully as you have pictured them in your mind; but the fact is that those who have low aims, usually realize what is even below their aims, while those who have high aims usually realize very nearly, if not fully, what

[p. 43]

their original ambition calls for. The principle is to direct the power of mind upon the very highest, the very largest and the very greatest mental conception of that which we intend to achieve. The first essential therefore, is to direct the full power of mind and thought upon the goal in view, and to continue to direct the mind in that manner every minute, regardless of circumstances or conditions.

The second essential is to make every mental action positive. When we desire certain things or when we think of certain things we wish to attain or achieve, the question should be if our mental attitudes at the time are positive or negative. To answer this we only have to remember that every positive action always goes toward that which receives its attention, while a negative action always retreats. A positive action is an action that you feel when you realize that every force in your entire system is pushed forward, so to speak, and that it is passing through what may be termed an expanding and enlarging state of feeling or consciousness. The positive attitude of mind is also indicated by the feeling of a firm, determined fullness throughout the nervous system. When every nerve feels full, strong and determined, you are in the positive attitude, and whatever you may do at the time will produce results along the line of your desire or your ambition. When you are in a positive state of mind you are never nervous or disturbed, you are never agitated or strenuous; in fact,

[p. 44]

the more positive you are the deeper your calmness and the better your control over your entire system.

The positive man is not one who rushes helter-skelter here and there regardless of judgment or constructive action, but one who is absolutely calm and controlled under every circumstance, and yet so thoroughly full of energy that every atom in his being is ready, under every circumstance, to accomplish and achieve. This energy is not permitted to act, however, until the proper time arrives, and then its action goes directly to the goal in view.

The positive mind is always in harmony with itself, while the negative mind is always out of harmony, and thereby loses the greater part of its power. Positiveness always means strength stored up, power held in the system under perfect control, until the time of action; and during the time of action directed constructively under the same perfect control. In the positive mind, all the actions of the mental system are working in harmony and are being fully directed toward the object in view, while in the negative mind, those same actions are scattered, restless, nervous, disturbed, moving here and there, sometimes under direction, but most of the time not. That the one should invariably succeed is therefore just as evident as that the other should invariably fail. Scattered energy cannot do otherwise but fail, while positively directed energy simply must succeed. A positive mind is like a powerful stream of water that is

[p. 45]

gathering volume and force from hundreds of tributaries all along its course. The further on it goes the greater its power, until when it reaches its goal, that power is simply immense. A negative mind, however, would be something like a stream, that the further it flows the more divisions it makes, until, when it reaches its goal, instead of being one powerful stream, it has become a hundred, small, weak, shallow streams.

To develop positiveness it is necessary to cultivate those qualities that constitute positiveness. Make it a point to give your whole attention to what you want to accomplish, and give that attention firmness, calmness and determination. Try to give depth to every desire until you feel as if all the powers of your system were acting, not on the surface, but from the greater world within. As this attitude is cultivated, positiveness will become more and more distinct, until you can actually feel yourself gaining power and prestige. And the effect will not only be noticed in your own ability to better direct and apply your talents, but others will discover the change. Accordingly, those who are looking for men of power, men who can do things, will look to you as the one to occupy the position that has to be filled.

Positiveness therefore, not only gives you the ability to make a far better use of the forces you possess, but it also gives you personality, that much admired something that will most surely cause you to be selected

[p. 46]

where men of power are needed. The world does not care for negative personalities. Such personalities look weak and empty, and are usually ignored, but everybody is attracted to a positive personality; and it is the positive personality that is always given the preference. Nor is this otherwise but right, because the positive personality has better use of his power, and therefore is able to act with greater efficiency wherever he is called upon to act.

The third essential in the right use of the mind is to make every mental action constructive, and a constructive mental action is one that is based upon a deep seated desire to develop, to increase, to achieve, to attain--in brief, to become larger and greater, and to do something of far greater worth than has been done before. If you will cause every mental action you entertain to have that feeling, constructiveness will soon become second nature to your entire mental system; that is, all the forces of your mind will begin to become building forces, and will continue to build you up along any line through which you may desire to act.

Inspire your mind constantly with a building desire, and make this desire so strong that every part of your system will constantly feel that it wants to become greater, more capable and more efficient. An excellent practice in this connection is to try to enlarge upon all your ideas of things whenever you have spare moments for real thought. This practice

[p. 47]

will tend to produce a growing tendency in every process of your thinking. Another good practice is to inspire every mental action with more ambition. We cannot have too much ambition. We may have too much aimless ambition, but we cannot have too much real constructive ambition. If your ambition is very strong, and is directed toward something definite, every action of your mind, every action of your personality, and every action of your faculties will become constructive; that is, all those actions will be inspired by the tremendous force of your ambition to work for the realization of that ambition.

Never permit restless ambition. Whenever you feel the force of ambition direct your mind at once in a calm, determined manner upon that which you really want to accomplish in, life. Make this a daily practice, and you will steadily train all your faculties and powers not only to work for the realization of that ambition, but become more and more efficient in that direction. Ere long your forces and faculties will be sufficiently competent to accomplish what you want.

In the proper use of the mind therefore these three essentials should be applied constantly and thoroughly. First, direct all the powers of mind, all the powers of thought, and all your thinking upon the goal you have in view. Second, train every mental action to be deeply and calmly positive. Third, train every mental action to be constructive, to be

[p. 48]

filled with a building spirit, to be inspired with a ceaseless desire to develop the greater, to achieve the greater, to attain the greater. When you have acquired these three, you will begin to use your forces in such a way that results must follow. You will begin to move forward steadily and surely, and you will be constantly gaining ground. Your mind will have become like the stream mentioned above. It will gather volume and force as it moves on and on, until finally that volume will be great enough to remove any obstacle in its way, and that force powerful enough to do anything you may have in view.

In order to apply these three essentials in the most effective manner, there are several misuses of the mind that must be avoided. Avoid the forceful, the aggressive and the domineering attitudes, and do not permit your mind to become intense, unless it is under perfect control. Never attempt to control or influence others in any way whatever. You will seldom succeed in that manner, and when you do, the success will be temporary; besides, such a practice always weakens your mind. Do not turn the power of your mind upon others, but turn it upon yourself in such a way that it will make you stronger, more positive, more capable, and more efficient, and as you develop in this manner, success must come of itself. There is only one way by which you can influence others legitimately, and that is through the giving of instruction, but in that case, there is no desire to influence.

[p. 49]

[paragraph continues] You desire simply to impart knowledge and information, and you exercise a most desirable influence without desiring to do so.

A great many men and women, after discovering the immense power of mind, have come to the conclusion that they might change circumstances by exercising mental power upon those circumstances in some mysterious manner, but such a practice means nothing but a waste of energy. The way to control circumstances is to control the forces within yourself to make a greater man of yourself, and as you become greater and more competent, you will naturally gravitate into better circumstances. In this connection, we should remember that like attracts like. If you want that which is better, make yourself better. If you want to realize the ideal, make yourself more ideal. If you want better friends, make yourself a better friend. If you want to associate with people of worth, make yourself more worthy. If you want to meet that which is agreeable, make yourself more agreeable. If you want to enter conditions and circumstances that are more pleasing, make yourself more pleasing. In brief, whatever you want, produce that something in yourself, and you will positively gravitate towards the corresponding conditions in the external world. But to improve yourself along those lines, it is necessary to apply for that purpose, all the power you possess. You cannot afford to

[p. 50]

waste any of it, and every misuse of the mind will waste power.

Avoid all destructive attitudes of the mind, such as anger, hatred, malice, envy, jealousy, revenge, depression, discouragement, disappointment, worry, fear, and so on. Never antagonize, never resist what is wrong, and never try to get even. Make the best use of your own talent and the best that is in store for you will positively come your way. When others seem to take advantage of you, do not retaliate by trying to take advantage of them. Use your power in improving yourself, so that you can do better and better work. That is how you are going to win in the race. Later on, those who tried to take advantage of you will be left in the rear. Remember, those who are dealing unjustly with you or with anybody are misusing their mind. They are therefore losing their power, and will, in the course of time, begin to lose ground; but if you, in the mean time, are turning the full power of your mind to good account, you will not only gain more power, but you will soon begin to gain ground. You will gain and continue to gain in the long run, while others who have been misusing their minds will lose mostly everything in the long run. That is how you are going to win, and win splendidly regardless of ill treatment or opposition.

A great many people imagine that they can promote their own success by trying to prevent the success of others, but it is one of the greatest delusions

[p. 51]

in the world. If you want to promote your own success as thoroughly as your capacity will permit, take an active interest in the success of everybody, because this will not only keep your mind in the success attitude and cause you to think success all along the line, but it will enlarge your mind so as to give you a greater and better grasp upon the fields of success. If you are trying to prevent the success of others, you are acting in the destructive attitude, which sooner or later will react on others, but if you are taking an active interest in the success of everybody, you are entertaining only constructive attitudes, and these will sooner or later accumulate in your own mind to add volume and power to the forces of success that you are building up in yourself.

In this connection, we may well ask why those succeed who do succeed, why so many succeed only in part, and why so many fail utterly. These are questions that occupy the minds of most people, and hundreds of answers have been given, but there is only one answer that goes to rock bottom. Those people who fail, and who continue to fail all along the line, fail because the power of their minds is either in a habitual negative state, or is always misdirected. If the power of mind is not working positively and constructively for a certain goal, you are not going to succeed. If your mind is not positive, it is negative, and negative minds float with the stream. We must remember that we are in the midst

[p. 52]

of all kinds of circumstances, some of which are for us and some of which are against us, and we will either have to make our own way or drift, and if we drift we go wherever the stream goes. But most of the streams of human life are found to float in the world of the ordinary and the inferior. Therefore, if you drift, you will drift with the inferior, and your goal will be failure.

When we analyze the minds of people who have failed, we invariably find that they are either negative, non-constructive or aimless. Their forces are scattered, and what is in them is seldom applied constructively. There is an emptiness about their personality that indicates negativeness. There is an uncertainty in their facial expression that indicates the absence of definite ambition. There is nothing of a positive, determined nature going on in their mental world. They have not taken definite action along any line. They are dependent upon fate and circumstances. They are drifting with some stream, and that they should accomplish little if anything is inevitable. This does not mean, however, that their mental world is necessarily unproductive; in fact, those very minds are in many instances immensely rich with possibilities. The trouble is, those possibilities continue to be dormant, and what is in them is not being brought forth and trained for definite action or actual results.

What those people should do, is to proceed at once to comply with the three essentials mentioned above,

[p. 53]

and before many months there will be a turn in the lane. They will soon cease to drift, and will then begin to make their own life, their own circumstances and their own future.

In this connection, it is well to remember that negative people and non-constructive minds never attract that which is helpful in their circumstances. The more you drift, the more people you meet who also drift, while on the other hand, when you begin to make your own life and become positive, you begin to meet more positive people and more constructive circumstances. This explains why "God helps them that help themselves." When you begin to help yourself, which means to make the best of what is in yourself, you begin to attract to yourself more and more of those helpful things that may exist all about you. In other words, constructive forces attract constructive forces; positive forces attract positive forces. A growing mind attracts elements and forces that help to promote growth, and people who are determined to make more and more of themselves, are drawn more and more into circumstances through which they will find the opportunity to make more of themselves. And this law works not only in connection with the external world, but also the internal world. When you begin to make a positive determined use of those powers in yourself that are already in positive action, you draw forth into action powers within you that have been dormant, and as

[p. 54]

this process continues, you will find that you will accumulate volume, capacity and power in your mental world, until you finally become a mental giant.

As you begin to grow and become more capable, you will find that you will meet better and better opportunities, not only opportunities for promoting external success, but opportunities for further building yourself up along the lines of ability, capacity and talent. You thus demonstrate the law that "Nothing succeeds like success," and "To him that hath shall be given." And here it is well to remember that it is not necessary to possess external things in the beginning to be counted among them "that hath." It is only necessary in the beginning to possess the interior riches; that is, to take control of what is in you, and proceed to use it positively with a definite goal in view. He who has control of his own mind has already great riches. He has sufficient wealth to be placed among those who have. He is already successful, and if he continues as he has begun, his success will soon appear in the external world. Thus the wealth that existed at first in the internal only will take shape and form in the external. This is a law that is unfailing, and there is not a man or woman on the face of the earth that cannot apply it with the most satisfying results.

The reason why so many fail is thus found in the fact that they do not fully and constructively apply the forces and powers they possess, and the reason

[p. 55]

why so many succeed only to a slight degree is found in the fact that only a small fraction of their power is applied properly. But any one can learn the full and proper use of all that is in him by applying faithfully the three essentials mentioned above. The reason why those succeed who do succeed is found in the fact that a large measure of their forces and powers is applied according to those three essentials, and as those essentials can be applied by any one, even to the most perfect degree, there is no reason why all should not succeed.

Sometimes we meet people who have only ordinary ability, but who are very successful. Then we meet others who have great ability but who are not successful, or who succeed only to a slight degree. At first we see no explanation, but when we understand the cause of success as well as the cause of failure, the desired explanation is easily found. The man with ordinary ability, if he complies with the three essentials necessary to the right use of mind, will naturally succeed, though if he had greater ability, his success would of course become greater in proportion. But the man who has great ability, yet does not apply the three essentials necessary to the right use of mind, cannot succeed.

The positive and constructive use of the power of mind, with a definite goal in view will invariably result in advancement, attainment and achievement, but if we wish to use that power in its full capacity,

[p. 56]

the action of the mind must be deep. In addition to the right use of the mind, we must also learn the full use of mind, and as the full use implies the use of the whole mind, the deeper mental fields and forces, as well as the usual mental fields and forces, it is necessary to understand the subconscious as well as the conscious.

[p. 57]

When you think of yourself do not think of that part of yourself that appears on the surface. That part is the smaller part and the lesser should not be pictured in mind. Think of your larger self, the immense subconscious self that is limitless both in power and in possibility.

Believe in yourself but not simply in a part of yourself. Give constant recognition to all that is in you and in that all have full faith and confidence.

Give the bigger man on the inside full right of way. Believe thoroughly in your greater interior self. Know that you have something within you that is greater than any obstacle, circumstance or difficulty that you can possibly meet. Then in the full faith in this greater something proceed with your work.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58] [p. 59]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

THE FORCES OF THE SUBCONSCIOUS

In using the power of the mind, the deeper the action of thought, will and desire, the greater the result. Accordingly, all mental action to be strong and effective, must be subconscious; that is, it must act in the field of the mental undercurrent as it is in this field that things are actually done. Those forces that play upon the surface of mind may be changed and turned from their course by almost any outside influence, and their purpose thus averted. But this is never true of the undercurrents. Anything that gets into the mental undercurrents will be seen through to a finish, regardless of external circumstances or conditions; and it is with difficulty that the course of these currents is changed when once they have been placed in full positive action. It is highly important therefore that we permit nothing to take action in these undercurrents that we do not wish to encourage and promote; and for the same reason, it is equally important that we cause everything to take action in these currents that we do wish to encourage and promote.

[p. 60]

These undercurrents, however, act only through the subconscious, and are controlled by the subconscious. In consequence, it is the subconscious which we must understand and act upon if we want the power of mind to work with full capacity and produce the greatest measure possible of the results desired.

In defining the subconscious mind, it is first necessary to state that it is not a separate mind. There are not two minds. There is only one mind in man, but it has two phases--the conscious and the subconscious. We may define the conscious as the upper side of the mentality, and the subconscious as the under side. The subconscious may also be defined as a vast mental field permeating the entire objective personality, thereby filling every atom of the personality through and through. We shall come nearer the truth, however, if we think of the subconscious as a finer mental force, having distinct powers, functions and possibilities, or as a great mental sea of life, energy and power, the force and capacity of which has never been measured.

The conscious mind is on the surface, and therefore we act through the conscious mind whenever mental action moves through the surface of thought, will or desire, but whenever we enter into deeper mental action and sound the vast depths of this underlying mental life, we touch the subconscious, though we must remember that we do not become

[p. 61]

oblivious to the conscious every time we touch the subconscious, as the two are inseparably united.

That the two phases of the mind are related can be well illustrated by comparing the conscious mind with a sponge, and the subconscious with the water permeating the sponge. We know that every fiber of the sponge is in touch with the water, and/ in the same manner, every part of the conscious mind, as well as every atom in the personality is in touch with the subconscious, and completely filled, through and through, with the life and the force of the subconscious.

It has frequently been stated that the subconscious mind occupies the Fourth Dimension of space, and though this is a matter that cannot be exactly demonstrated, nevertheless, the more we study the nature of the subconscious, as well as the Fourth Dimension, the more convinced we become that the former occupies the field of the latter. This, however, is simply a matter that holds interest in philosophical investigation. Whether the subconscious occupies the Fourth Dimension or some other dimension of space will make no difference as to its practical value.

In order to understand the subconscious, it is well at the outset to familiarize ourselves with its natural functions, as this will convince ourselves of the fact that we are not dealing with something that is beyond normal, mental action. The subconscious mind controls all the natural functions of the body, such as

[p. 62]

the circulation, respiration, digestion, assimilation, physical repair, etc. It also controls all the involuntary actions of the body, and all those actions of mind and body that continue their natural movements without direction from the will. The subconscious perpetuates characteristics, traits and qualities that are peculiar to individuals, species or races. What is called heredity therefore is altogether a subconscious process. The same is true of what is called second nature. Whenever anything has been repeated a sufficient number of times to have become habitual, it becomes second nature, or rather a subconscious action. It frequently happens, however, that a conscious action may become a subconscious action without repetition, and thus becomes second nature almost at once.

When we examine the nature of the subconscious, we find that it responds to almost anything the conscious mind may desire or direct, though it is usually necessary for the conscious mind to express its desire upon the subconscious for some time before the desired response is secured. The subconscious is a most willing servant, and is so competent that thus far we have failed to find a single thing along mental lines that it will not or cannot do. It submits readily to almost any kind of training, and will do practically anything that it is directed to do, whether the thing is to our advantage or not.

[p. 63]

In this connection, it is interesting to learn that there are a number of things in the human system usually looked upon as natural, and inevitable, that are simply the results of misdirected subconscious training in the past. We frequently speak of human weaknesses as natural, but weakness is never natural. Although it may appear, it is invariably the result of imperfect subconscious training. It is never natural to go wrong, but it is natural to go right, and the reason why is simple. Every right action is in harmony with natural law, while every wrong action is a violation of natural law.

It has also been stated that the aging process is natural, but modern science has demonstrated that it is not natural for a person to age at sixty, seventy, or eighty years. The fact that the average person does manifest nearly all the conditions of old age at those periods of time, or earlier, simply proves that the subconscious mind has been trained through many generations to produce old age at sixty, seventy, eighty or ninety, as the case may be; and the subconscious always does what it has been trained to do. It can just as readily be trained, however, to produce greater physical strength and greater mental capacity at ninety than we possess at thirty or forty. It can also be trained to possess the same virile youth at one hundred as the healthiest man or woman of twenty may possess. In fact, practically every condition that appears in the mind, the character and

[p. 64]

the personality of the human race, is the result of what the subconscious mind has been directed to do during past generations. It is therefore evident that as the subconscious is directed to produce different conditions in mind, character and personality--conditions that are in perfect harmony with the natural law of human development, such conditions will invariably appear in the race. Thus we understand how a new race or a superior race may appear upon this planet.

There are a great many people who are disturbed over the fact that they have inherited certain characteristics or ailments from their parents, but what they have inherited is simply subconscious tendencies in that direction, and those tendencies can be changed absolutely. What we inherit from our parents can be eliminated so completely that no one would ever know it had been there. In like manner, we can improve so decidedly upon the good qualities that we have inherited from our parents that any similarity between parent and child in those respects would disappear completely. The subconscious mind is always ready, willing and competent to make any change for the better in our physical or mental makeup that we may desire, though it does not work in some miraculous manner, nor does it usually produce results instantaneously. In most instances its actions are gradual, but they invariably produce the results intended if the proper training continues.

[p. 65]

The subconscious mind will respond to the directions of the conscious mind so long as those directions do not interfere with the absolute laws of nature. The subconscious never moves against natural law, but it has the power to so use natural law that improvement along any line can be secured. It will reproduce in mind and body any condition that is thoroughly impressed and deeply felt by the conscious mind. It will bring forth undesirable conditions when directed to produce such conditions, and it will bring forth health, strength, youth and added power when so directed. If you continue to desire a strong physical body, and fully expect the subconscious to build for you a stronger body, you will find that this will gradually or finally be done. You will steadily grow in physical strength. If you continue to desire greater ability along a certain line and expect the subconscious to produce greater mental. power along that line, your ability will increase as expected, but it is necessary in this connection to be persistent and persevering. To become enthusiastic about these things for a few days is not sufficient. It is when we apply these laws persistently for weeks, months and years that we find the results to be, not only what we expected, but frequently far greater.

Everything has a tendency to grow in the subconscious. Whenever an impression or desire is placed in the subconscious, it has a tendency to become larger and therefore the bad becomes worse

[p. 66]

when it enters the subconscious, while the good becomes better. We have the power, however, to exclude the bad from the subconscious and cause only the good to enter that immense field. Whenever you say that you are tired and permit that feeling to sink into the subconscious, you will almost at once feel more tired. Whenever you feel sick and permit that feeling to enter the subconscious, you always feel worse. The same is true when you are weak, sad, disappointed or depressed. If you let those feelings sink into your subconscious, they will become worse. On the other hand, when we feel happy, strong, persistent and determined, and permit those feelings to enter the subconscious, we always feel better. It is therefore highly important that we positively refuse to give in to any undesirable feeling. Whenever we give in to any feeling, it becomes subconscious, and if that feeling is bad, it becomes worse; but so long as we keep undesirable feelings on the outside, so to speak, we will hold them at bay, until nature can readjust itself or gather reserve force and thus put them out of the way altogether.

We should never give in to sickness, though that does not mean that we should continue to work as hard as usual when not feeling well, or cause mind and body to continue in their usual activities. When we find it necessary, we should give ourselves a complete rest, but we should never give in to the feeling of sickness. The rest that may be taken will help

[p. 67]

the body to recuperate, and when it does the threatening ailment will disappear. When you feel tired or depressed, do not admit it, but turn your attention at once upon something that is extremely interesting--something that will completely turn your mind towards the pleasing, the more desirable or the ideal. Persist in feeling the way you want to feel, and permit only wholesome feelings to enter the subconscious. Thus wholesome feelings will live and grow, and after awhile your power to feel good at all times will have become so strong that you can put out of the way any adverse feeling that may threaten at any time.

In this connection, we may mention something that holds more than usual interest. It has been stated by those who are in a position to know, that no one dies until he gives up; that is, gives in to those adverse conditions that are at work in his system, tending to produce physical death. So long as he refuses to give in to those conditions, he continues to live. How long a person could refuse to give in even under the most adverse circumstances is a question, but one thing is certain, that thousands and thousands of deaths could be prevented every year if the patient in each case refused to give in. In many instances, the forces of life and death are almost equally balanced. Which one is going to win depends upon the mental attitude of the patient. If he gives over his mind and his will to the side of the forces of life, those

[p. 68]

forces are most likely to win, but if he permits the mind to act with death, the forces of death are most certain to win. So long as he continues to persist in living, refusing absolutely to give in to death, he is throwing the full power of mind, thought and will on the side of life. He thereby increases the power of life, and he may increase that power sufficiently to overcome death. Again we say that it is a question how many times a person could overcome death by this method, but the fact remains that this method alone can save life repeatedly in a majority of cases; and all will admit after further thought on this subject that the majority will be very large. This is a method, therefore, that deserves the best of attention in every sickroom. No person should be permitted to die until all available methods for prolonging life have been exhausted, and this last mentioned method is one that will accomplish far more than most of us nay expect; and its secret is found in the fact that whenever we give in to any condition or action, it becomes stronger, due to the tendency of the subconscious to enlarge, increase and magnify whatever it receives. Give in to the forces of death, and the subconscious mind will increase the powers of that force. Give in to the forces of life, and the subconscious mind will increase the power of your life and you will continue to live.

Concerning the general possibilities of the subconscious, we should remember that every faculty has a

[p. 69]

subconscious side, and that it becomes larger and. more competent as this subconscious side is developed. This being true, it is evident that ability and genius might be developed in any mind even to a remarkable degree, as no limit has been found to the subconscious in any of its forces. In like manner, every cell in your body has a subconscious side, and therefore, if the subconscious side of the personality were developed, we can realize what improvement would become possible in that field. There is a subconscious side to all the faculties in human nature, and if these were developed, we understand how man could become ideal, even far beyond our present dreams of a new race.

It is not well however to give the major portion of our attention to future possibilities. It is what is possible now that we should aim to develop and apply, and present possibilities indicate that improvement along any line, whether it be in working capacity, ability, health, happiness and character can be secured without fail if the subconscious is properly directed.

To direct the subconscious along any line, it is only necessary to desire what you want and to make those desires so deep and so persistent that they become positive forces in the subconscious field. When you feel that you want a certain thing give in to that feeling and also make that feeling positive. Give in to your ambitions in the same manner, and also to

[p. 70]

every desire that you wish to realize. Let your thought of all those things that you wish to increase in any line get into your system, because whatever gets into your system, the subconscious will proceed to develop, work out and express.

In using the subconscious, we should remember that we are not using something that is separated from normal life. The difference between the man who makes scientific use of the subconscious and the one who does not, is simply this; the latter employs only a small part of his mind, while the former employs the whole of his mind. And this explains why those who employ the subconscious intelligently have greater working capacity, greater ability and greater endurance. In consequence they sometimes do the work of two or three men, and do excellent work in addition. To train the subconscious for practical action is therefore a matter of common sense. It is a matter of refusing to cultivate only a small corner of your mental field when you can cultivate the entire field.

[p. 71]

  

THE PATH TO GREATER THINGS

Dream constantly of the ideal; work ceaselessly to perfect the real.

Believe in yourself; believe in everybody; believe in all that has existence.

Give the body added strength; give the mind added brilliancy; give the soul added inspiration.

Do your best under every circumstance, and believe that every circumstance will give its best to you.

Live for the realization of more life and for the more efficient use of everything that proceeds from life.

Desire eternally what you want; expect eternally what you desire; and act always as if every expectation were coming true.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72] [p. 73]

  

CHAPTER V

  

TRAINING THE SUBCONSCIOUS FOR SPECIAL RESULTS

When we proceed to train the subconscious along any line, or for special results, we must always comply with the following law: The subconscious responds to the impressions, the suggestions, the desires, the expectations and the directions of the conscious mind, provided that the conscious touches the subconscious at the time. The secret therefore is found in the two phases of the mind touching each other as directions are being made; and to cause the conscious to touch the subconscious, it is necessary to feel conscious action penetrating your entire interior system; that is, you should feel at the time that you are living not simply on the surface, but through and through. At such times, the mind should be calm and in perfect poise, and should be conscious of that finer, greater something within you that has greater depth than mere surface existence.

When you wish to direct the subconscious to produce physical health, first picture in your mind a clear idea of perfect health. Try to see this idea with the mind's eye, and then try to feel the meaning of

[p. 74]

this idea with consciousness, and while you are in the attitude of that feeling, permit your thought and your attention to pass into that deep, quiet, serene state of being wherein you can feel the mental idea of wholeness and health entering into the very life of every atom in your system. In brief, try to feel perfectly healthy in your mind and then let that feeling sink into your entire physical system. Whenever you feel illness coming on, you can nip it in the bud by this simple method, because if the subconscious is directed to produce more health, added forces of health will soon begin to come forth from within, and put out of the way, so to speak, any disorder or ailment that may be on the verge of getting a foothold in the body. Always remember that whatever is impressed on the subconscious will after a while be expressed from the subconscious into the personality; and where the physical conditions that you wish to remove are only slight, enough subconscious power can be aroused to restore immediate order, harmony and wholeness. When the condition you wish to remove has continued for some time, however, repeated efforts may be required to cause the subconscious to act in the matter. But one thing is certain, that if you continue to direct the subconscious to remove that condition, it positively will be removed.

The subconscious does not simply possess the power to remove undesirable conditions from the physical or mental state. It can also produce those better

[p. 75]

conditions that we may want, and develop further those desirable conditions that we already possess. To apply the law for this purpose, deeply desire those conditions that you do want, and have a very clear idea in your mind as to what you want those conditions to be. In giving the subconscious directions for anything desired in our physical or mental makeup, we should always have improvement in mind, as the subconscious always does the best work when we are thoroughly filled with the desire to do better. If we want health, we should direct the subconscious to produce more and more health. If we want power, we should direct the subconscious not simply to give us a great deal or a certain amount of power, but to give us more and more power. In this manner, we shall secure results from the very beginning. If we try to train the subconscious to produce a certain amount, it might be some time before that amount can be developed. In the mean time, we should meet disappointment and delay, but if our desire is for steady increase along all lines from where we stand now, we shall be able to secure, first, a slight improvement and then added improvement to be followed with still greater improvement, until we finally reach the highest goal we have in view.

No effort should be made to destroy those habits or qualities that we may not desire. Whatever we think about deeply or intensely, the subconscious will take up and develop further. Therefore, if we

[p. 76]

think about our failings, shortcomings or bad habits, the subconscious will take them up and give them more life and activity than they ever had before. If there is anything in our nature therefore that we wish to change, we should simply proceed to build up what we want and forget completely what we wish to eliminate. When the good develops the bad disappears. When the greater is built up, the lesser will either be removed or completely transformed and combined with the greater.

That the subconscious can increase your ability and your capacity is a fact that is readily demonstrated. Whenever the subconscious mind is aroused, mental power and working capacity are invariably increased, some times to such an extent that the individual seems to be possessed with a superhuman power. We all know of instances where great things were accomplished simply through the fact that the individual was carried on and on by an immense power within him that seemed to be distinct from himself and greater than himself; but it was simply the greater powers of the subconscious that were aroused and placed in positive, determined action. These instances, however, need not be exceptions. Any man, under any circumstances, can so increase the power of his mind, his thought and his will as to be actually carried away with this same tremendous force; that is, the power within him becomes so strong that he is actually pushed through to the

[p. 77]

goal he has in view regardless of circumstances, conditions or obstacles.

This being true, we should arouse the subconscious no matter what it is we have to do. No day is complete unless we begin that day by making alive everything that we possess in our whole mind, conscious and subconscious. Whenever you have work to do at some future time, direct the subconscious to increase your ability and capacity at the time specified, and fully expect the desired increase to be secured. If you want new ideas on certain studies or new plans in your work, direct the subconscious to produce them and you will get them without fail. The moment the direction is given, the subconscious will go to work along that line; and in this connection, we should remember that though we may fail to get the idea desired through the conscious mind alone, it is quite natural that we should get it when we also enlist the subconscious, because the whole mind is much greater, far more capable and far more resourceful than just a small part of the mind.

When demands are urgent, the subconscious responds more readily, especially when feelings at the time are also very deep. When you need certain results, say that you must have them, and put your whole energy into the "must." Whatever you make up your mind that you must do, you will in some manner get the power to do.

[p. 78]

There are a number of instances on record where people were carried through certain events by what seemed to be a miraculous power, but the cause of it all was simply this--that they had to do it, and whatever you have to do, the subconscious mind will invariably give you the power to do. The reason for this is found in the fact that when you feel that you must do a thing and that you have to do it, your desires are so strong and so deep that they go into the very depths of the subconscious and thus call to action the full power of that vast interior realm.

If you have some great ambition that you wish to realize, direct the subconscious several times each day and each night before you go to sleep, to work out the necessary ways and means; and if you are determined, those ways and means will be forthcoming. But here it is necessary to remember that we must concentrate on the one thing wanted. If your mind scatters, sometimes giving attentions to one ambition and sometimes to another, you will confuse the subconscious and the ways and means desired will not be secured. Make your ambition a vital part of your life, and try to feel the force of that ambition every single moment of your existence. If you do this, your ambition will certainly be realized. It may take a year, it may take five years, it may take ten years or more, but your ambition will be realized. This being true, no one need feel disturbed about the future, because if he actually knows what he wants

[p. 79]

to accomplish, and trains the subconscious to produce the idea, the methods, the necessary ability and the required capacity, all these things will be secured.

If there is any condition from which you desire to secure emancipation, direct the subconscious to give you that, information through which you may find a way out. The subconscious can. We all remember the saying, "Where there is a will there is a way," and it is true, because when you actually will to do a certain thing, the power of the mind becomes so deep and so strong along that line, that the entire subconscious mind is put to work on the case, so to speak; and under such circumstances, the way will always be found. When you put your whole mind, conscious and subconscious, to work on any problem, you will find the solution. If there is any talent that you wish to develop further, direct the subconscious every day, and as frequently as possible, to enlarge the inner life of that talent and to increase its brilliancy and power.

When you are about to undertake anything new, do not proceed until you have submitted the proposition to the subconscious, and here we find the real value of "sleeping over" new plans before we finally decide. When we go to sleep, we go more completely into the subconscious, and those ideas that we take with us when we go to sleep, especially those that engage our serious attention at the time, are completely turned over, so to speak, during the period

[p. 80]

of sleep, and examined from all points of view. Sometimes it is necessary to take those ideas into the subconscious a number of times when we go to sleep, as well as to submit the matter to the subconscious many times in the day during the waking state, but if we persevere, the right answer will finally be secured. The whole mind, conscious and subconscious, does possess the power to solve any problem that may come up, or provide the necessary ways and means through which we can carry out or finish anything we have undertaken.

Here, as elsewhere, practice makes perfect. The more you train the subconscious to work with you, the easier it becomes to get the subconscious to respond to your directions, and therefore the subconscious mind should be called into action, no matter what comes up; in other words make it a practice to use your whole mind, conscious and subconscious, at all times, not only in large matters, but in all matters. Begin by recognizing the subconscious in all thought and in all action. Think that it can do what you have been told it can do, and eliminate doubt absolutely. Take several moments every day and suggest to the subconscious what you want to have done. Be thoroughly sincere in this matter; be determined; have unbounded faith, and you can expect results; but do not permit the mind to become wrought up when giving directions. Always be calm and deeply poised when thinking out or suggesting to the subconscious,

[p. 81]

and it is especially important that you be deeply calm before you go to sleep. Do not permit any idea, suggestion or expectation to enter the subconscious unless it is something that you actually want developed or worked out, and here we should remember that every idea, desire or state of mind that is deeply felt will enter the subconscious. When there are no results, do not lose faith. You know that the cause of the failure was the failure of the conscious to properly touch the subconscious at the time the directions were given, so therefore try again, giving your thought a deeper life and a more persistent desire.

Always be prepared to give these methods sufficient time. Some have remarkable results at once, while others secure no results for months; but whether you secure results as soon as you wish or not, continue to give your directions every day, fully expecting results. Be determined in every effort you may make in this direction, but do not be overanxious. Make it a point to give special directions to the subconscious every day for the steady improvement of mind, character and personality along all lines. You cannot give the subconscious too much to do because its power is immense, and as far as we know, its capacity limitless. Every effort you may make to direct or train the subconscious, will bring its natural results in due time, provided you are always calm, well balanced, persistent, deeply poised and harmonious in all your thoughts and actions.

[p. 82] [p. 83]

When you have made up your mind what you want to do, say to yourself a thousand times a day that you will do it. The best way will soon open. You will have the opportunity you desire.

If you would be greater in the future than you are now, be all that you can be now. He who is his best develops the power to be better. He who lives his ideals is creating a life that actually is ideal.

There is nothing in your life that you cannot modify, change or improve when you learn to regulate your thought.

Our destiny is not mapped out for us by some exterior power; we map it out for ourselves. What we think and do in the present determines what shall happen to us in the future.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84] [p. 85]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

THE POWER OF SUBJECTIVE THOUGHT

The first important fact to consider in connection with the study of thought is that every thought does not possess power. In modern times, when thinking has been studied so closely a great many have come to the conclusion that every thought is itself a force and that it invariably produces certain definite results; but this is not true, and it is well, for if every thought had power we could not last very long as the larger part of ordinary human thinking is chaotic and destructive.

When we proceed to determine what kinds of thought have power and what kinds have not, we find two distinct forms. The one we call objective, the other subjective. Objective thought is the result of general thinking, such as reasoning, intellectual research, analysis, study, the process of recollection, mind-picturing where there is no feeling, and the usual activities of the intellect. In brief, any mental process that calls forth only the activities of the intellect is objective, and such thinking does not affect the conditions of mind and body to any extent;

[p. 86]

that is, it does not produce direct results corresponding to its own nature upon the system. It does not immediately affect your health, your happiness, your physical condition nor your mental condition. It may, however, affect these things in the long run, and for that reason must not be ignored.

Subjective thinking is any form of thinking or mind-picturing that has depth of feeling, that goes beneath the surface in its action, that moves through the undercurrents, that acts in and through the psychological field. Subjective thought is synonymous with the thought of the heart, and it is subjective thought that is referred to in the statement, "As a man thinketh in his heart so is he." Subjective thought proceeds from the very heart of mental existence; that is, it is always in contact with everything that is vital in life. It is always alive with feeling, and originates, so to speak, in the heart of the mind. The term "heart" in this connection has nothing to do with the physical organ by that name. The term "heart" is here used in its metaphysical sense. We speak of the heart of a great city, meaning thereby, the principal part of the city, or that part of the city where its most vital activities are taking place; likewise, the heart of the mind is the most vital realm of the mind, or the center of the mind, or the deeper activities of the mind as distinguished from the surface of the mind.

[p. 87]

Subjective thinking being in the heart of the mind is therefore necessarily the product of the deepest mental life, and for this reason every subjective thought is a force. It will either work for you or against you, and has the power to produce direct effects upon mind or body, corresponding exactly with its own nature. But all thinking is liable to become subjective at times. All thoughts may sink into the deeper or vital realms of mind and thus become direct forces for good or ill. Therefore, all thinking should be scientific; that is, designed or produced with a definite object in view. All thought should be produced according to the laws of right thinking or constructive thinking. Though objective thinking usually produces no results whatever, nevertheless there are many objective thoughts that become subjective and it is the objective mind that invariably determines the nature of subjective thinking. Every thought therefore should have the right tendency, so that it may produce desirable results in case it becomes subjective, or may act in harmony with the objective mind whenever it is being employed in giving directions to the subjective.

In this connection, it is well to remember that subjective thinking invariably takes place in the subconscious mind, as the terms subjective and subconscious mean practically the same; though in speaking of thought, the term subjective is more appropriate in defining that form of thought that is deep,

[p. 88]

vital and alive, or that acts through the mental undercurrents.

To define scientific thinking, it may be stated that your thinking is scientific when your thought has a direct tendency to produce what you want, or when all the forces of your mind are working together for the purpose you desire to fulfill. Your thinking is unscientific when your thought has a tendency to produce what is detrimental, or when your mental forces are working against you.

To think scientifically, the first essential is to think only such thoughts and permit only such mental attitudes as you know to be in your favor; and the second essential is to make only such thoughts subjective. In other words, every thought should be right and every thought should be a force. When every thought is scientific, it will be right, and when every thought is subjective it will be a force. Positively refuse to think of what you do not wish to retain or experience. Think only of what you desire, and expect only what you desire, even when the very contrary seems to be coming into your life. Make it a point to have definite results in mind at all times. Permit no thinking to be aimless. Every aimless thought is time and energy wasted, while every thought that is inspired with a definite aim will help to realize that aim, and if all your thoughts are inspired with a definite aim, the whole power of your mind will be for you and will work with you in realizing

[p. 89]

what you have in view. That you should succeed is therefore assured, because there is enough power in your mind to realize your ambitions, provided all of that power is used in working for your ambitions. And in scientific thinking all the power of mind and thought is being caused to work directly and constantly for what you wish' to attain and achieve.

To explain further the nature of scientific thinking, as well as unscientific thinking, it is well to take several well-known illustrations from real life. When things go wrong, people usually say, "That's always the way;" and though this may seem to be a harmless expression, nevertheless, the more you use that expression the more deeply you convince your mind that things naturally go wrong most of the time. When you train your mind to think that it is usual for things to go wrong, the forces of your mind will follow that trend of thinking, and will also go wrong; and for that reason it is perfectly natural that things in your life should go wrong more and more, because as the forces of your mind are going wrong, you will go wrong, and when you go wrong, those things that pertain to your life cannot possibly go right.

A great many people are constantly looking for the worst. They usually expect the worst to happen; though they may be cheerful on the surface, deep down in their heart they are constantly looking for trouble. The result is that their deeper mental currents

[p. 90]

will tend to produce trouble. If you are always looking for the worst, the forces of your mind will be turned in that direction, and therefore will become destructive. Those forces will tend to produce the very thing that you expect. At first they will simply confuse your mind and produce troubled conditions in your mental world; but this will in turn confuse your faculties, your reason and your judgment, so that you will make many mistakes; and he who is constantly making mistakes will certainly find the worst on many or all occasions.

When things go wrong, do not expect the wrong to appear again. Look upon it as an exception. Call it past and forget it. To be scientific under these circumstances, always look for the best. By constantly expecting the best, you will turn the different forces of your mind and thought to work for the best. Every power that is in you will have a higher and finer ideal upon which to turn its attention, and accordingly, results will be better, which is perfectly natural when your whole system is moving towards the better. A number of people have a habit of saying "Something is always wrong;" but why should we not say instead, "Something is always right" We would thereby' express more of the truth and give our minds a more wholesome tendency. It is not true that something is always wrong. When we compare the wrong with the right, the wrong is always in the minority. However, it is the effect

[p. 91]

of such thinking upon the mind that we wish to avoid, whether the wrong be in our midst or not. When you think that there is always something wrong, your mind is more or less concentrated on the wrong, and will therefore create the wrong in your own mentality; but when you train yourself to think there is always something right, your mind will concentrate upon the right, and accordingly will create the right. And when the mind is trained to create the right it will not only produce right conditions within itself, but all thinking will tend to become right; and right thinking invariably leads to health, happiness, power and plenty.

The average person is in the habit of saying, "The older I get;''' and he thereby calls the attention of his mind to the idea that he is getting older. In brief, he compels his mind to believe that he is getting older and older, and thereby directs the mind to produce more and more age. The true expression in this connection is, "The longer I live." This expression calls the mind's attention to the length of life, which will, in turn, tend to increase the power of that process in you that can prolong life. When people reach the age of sixty or seventy, they usually speak of "the rest of my days," thus implying the idea that there are only a few more days remaining. The mind is thereby directed to finish life in a short period of time, and accordingly, all the forces of the mind will proceed to work for the speedy termination of personal

[p. 92]

existence. The correct expression is "from now on," as, that leads thought into the future indefinitely without impressing the mind with any end whatever.

We frequently hear the expression, "I can never do anything right," and it is quite simple to understand that such a mode of thought would train the mind to act below its true ability and capacity. If you are fully convinced that you can never do anything right, it will become practically impossible for you to do anything right at any time, but on the other hand, if you continue to think, "I am going to do everything better and better," it is quite natural that your entire mental system should be inspired and trained to do things better and better. Hundreds of similar expressions could be mentioned, but we are all familiar with them, and from the comments made above, any one will realize that such expressions are obstacles in our way, no matter what we may do.

In right thinking the purpose should be never to use any expression that conveys to your mind what you do not want, or what is detrimental or unwholesome in any manner whatever. Think only what you wish to produce or realize. If trouble is brewing, think about the greater success that you have in mind. If anything adverse is about to take place, do not think of what that adversity may bring, but think of the greater good that you are determined to realize in your life. When trouble is brewing, the

[p. 93]

average person usually thinks of nothing else. His mind is filled with fear, and not a single faculty in his possession can do justice to itself. And as trouble is usually brewing in most places, more or less, people have what may be called a chronic expectation for trouble; and as they usually get more or less of what they expect, they imagine they are fully justified in entertaining such expectations. But here it is absolutely necessary to change the mind completely. Whatever our present circumstances may be, we should refuse absolutely to expect anything but the best that we can think of. The whole mind, with all its powers and faculties, should be thrown, so to speak, into line with the optimistic tendency, and whatever comes or not, we should think only of the greater things that we expect to realize. In brief, we should concentrate the mind absolutely upon whatever goal we may have in view, and should look neither to the left nor to the right.

When we concentrate absolutely upon the greater things we expect to attain or achieve, we gradually train all the forces of the mind and all they powers of thought to work for those greater things. We shall thereby begin in earnest to build for ourselves a greater destiny; and sooner or later we shall find ourselves gaining ground in many directions. Later on, if we proceed, we shall begin to move more rapidly, and if we pay no attention to the various troubles that may be brewing in our environment,

[p. 94]

those troubles will never effect us nor disturb us in the least.

The mental law involved in the process of scientific thinking may be stated as follows: The more you think of what is right, the more you tend to make every action in your mind right. The more you think of the goal you have in view, the more life and power you will call into action in working for that goal. The more you think of your ambition, the more power you will give to those faculties that can make your ambitions come true. The more you think of harmony, of health, of success, of happiness, of things that are desirable, of things that are beautiful, of things that have true worth, the more the mind will tend to build all those things in yourself, provided, of course, that all such thinking is subjective.

To think scientifically, therefore, is to train your every thought and your every mental action to focus the whole of attention upon that which you wish to realize, to gain, to achieve or attain in your life.

In training the mind along the lines of scientific thinking, begin by trying to hold the mind upon the right, regardless of the presence of the wrong, and here we should remember that the term "right" does not simply refer to moral actions, but to all actions. When the wrong is coming your way, persist in thinking of the right; persist in expecting only the right. And there is a scientific reason for this attitude, besides what has been mentioned above. We

[p. 95]

know that the most important of all is to keep the mind right or moving along right lines, and if we persistently expect the right, regardless of circumstances, the mind will the be kept in the lines of right action. But there is another result that frequently comes from this same practice. It sometimes happens that the wrong which is brewing in your environment, has such a weak foundation that only a slight increase in the force of the right would be necessary to overthrow that wrong completely; in fact, we shall find that most wrongs that threaten can be overcome in a very short time, if we continue to work for the right in a positive, constructive, determined manner. It is when the individual goes all to pieces, so to speak, that adversity gets the best of him; but no individual will go to pieces unless his thinking is chaotic, destructive, scattered, confused and detrimental. Continue to possess your whole mind and you will master the situation, no matter what it may be, and it is scientific thinking that will enable you to perform this great feat.

To make thinking scientific, there are three leading essentials to be observed. The first is to cultivate constructive mental attitudes, and all mental attitudes are constructive when mind, thought, feeling, desire and will constantly face the greater and the better. A positive and determined optimism has the same effect, and the same is true of the practice of keeping the mental eye single on the highest goal in

[p. 96]

view. To make every mental attitude constructive, the mind must never look down, and mental depression must be avoided completely. Every thought and every feeling must have an upward look, and every desire must desire to inspire the same rising tendency in every action of mind.

The second essential is constructive mental imagery. Use the imagination to picture only what is good, what is beautiful, what is beneficial, what is ideal, and what you wish to realize. Mentally see yourself receiving what you deeply desire to receive. What you imagine, you will think, and what you think, you will become. Therefore, if you imagine only those things that are in harmony with what you wish to obtain or achieve, all your thinking will soon tend to produce what you want to attain or achieve.

The third essential is constructive mental action. Every action of the mind should have something desirable in view and should have a definite, positive aim. Train yourself to face the sunshine of life regardless of circumstances. When you face the sunshine, everything looks right, and when everything looks right, you will think right. It matters not whether there is any sunshine in life just now or not. We must think of sunshine just the same. If we do not see any silver lining, we must create one in our own mental vision. However dark the dark side may seem to be, we cannot afford to see anything but the bright side, and no matter how small or insignificant

[p. 97]

the bright side may be, we must continue to focus attention on that side alone. Be optimistic, not in the usual sense of that term, but in the real sense of that term. The true optimist not only expects the best to happen, but goes to work to make the best happen. The true optimist not only looks upon the bright side, but trains every force that is in him to produce more and more brightness in his life, and therefore complies with the three essentials just mentioned. His mental attitudes are constructive because they are always facing greater things. His imagination is constructive because it is always picturing the better and the ideal, and his mental actions are constructive because he is training the whole of his life to produce those greater and better things that his optimism has inspired him to desire and expect.

In this connection, we must remember that there is a group of mental forces at work in every mental attitude, and therefore if that attitude is downcast, those forces will become detrimental; that is, they will work for the lesser and the inferior. On the other hand, if every mental attitude is lifted up or directed towards the heights of the great and the true and the ideal, those forces will become constructive, and will work for the greater things in view.

In the perusal of this study, we shall find it profitable to examine our mental attitudes closely, so as to determine what our minds are actually facing

[p. 98]

the greater part of the time. If we find that we are mentally facing things and conditions that are beneath our expectations, or find that our imaginations are concerned too much about possible failure, possible mistakes, possible trouble, possible adversity, etc., our thinking is unscientific, and no time should be lost in making amends.

When you are looking into the future, do not worry about troubles that might come to pass. Do not mentally see yourself as having a hard time of it. Do not imagine yourself in this hostile condition or that adverse circumstance. Do not wonder what you would do if you should lose everything, or if this or that calamity should befall. Such thinking is decidedly unscientific and most detrimental. If you entertain such thoughts, you are causing the ship of your life to move directly towards the worst precipice that may exist in your vicinity. Besides, you are so weakening this ship through wrong treatment, that it will some day spring a leak and go down.

Think of the future whenever it is unnecessary for you to give your attention to the present, but let your thought of the future be wholesome, constructive, optimistic and ideal. Mentally see yourself gaining the best that life has to give, and you will meet more and more of the best. Think of yourself as gaining ground along all lines, as finding better and better circumstances, as increasing in power and ability, and as becoming more healthful in body, more

[p. 99]

vigorous and brilliant in mind, more perfect in character, and more powerful in soul. In brief, associate your future with the best that you can think of along all lines. Fear nothing for the days that are to be, but expect everything that is good, desirable, enjoyable and ideal. This practice will not only make your present happier, but it will tend to strengthen your mind and your life along wholesome constructive lines to such a degree that you will actually gain the power to realize, in a large measure, those beautiful and greater things that you have constantly expected in your optimistic dreams.

In living and building for a larger future, we should remember that our mind and thoughts invariably follow the leadership of the most prominent mental picture. The man who clearly and distinctly pictures for himself a brilliant future will inspire the powers of his entire mental world to work for such a future; in fact, all the forces of thought, mind, life, personality, character and soul will move in that direction. He may not realize as brilliant a future as he has pictured, but his future is certainly going to be brilliant, and it is quite possible, as is frequently the case, that it may become even more brilliant than he dreamed of in the beginning.

When the average mind thinks of the future, he usually pictures a variety of conflicting events and conditions. He has nothing definite in mind. There

[p. 100]

is no actual leadership therefore in his mind, and nothing of great worth can be accomplished.

When we look into the lives of men and women who have reached high places, we always find that they were inspired with some great idea. That idea was pictured again and again in their mental vision, and they refused to let it go. They clung tenaciously to that idea, and thereby actually compelled every force and element within them to enlist in the working out of that idea. It is therefore simple enough that they should realize every aim and reach the highest places that achievement has in store. Such men and women possibly did not understand the science or the process, but they were nevertheless thinking scientifically to a most perfect degree. Their ambition pictured only that lofty goal which they wanted to reach. All their mental attitudes were constantly facing that lofty goal, and thereby became constructive; and all the actions of mind were directed toward the same goal. Accordingly, everything within them was trained to work for the realization of their dream, and that is what we mean by scientific thinking; that is what we mean by thinking for results. And any one who will train himself to think for results in this manner, will positively secure results; though in this connection it is well to remember that persistence and determination are indispensable every step of the way.

[p. 101]

When we do not secure results at once, we sometimes become discouraged, and conclude that it is no use to try. At such times, friends will usually tell us that we are simply dreaming, and they will advise us to go to work at something practical, something that we really can accomplish; but if we ignore the advice of our friends, and continue to be true to the great idea that we have resolved to work out, we shall finally reach our goal, and when we do, those very same friends will tell us that we took the proper course. So long as the man with ambition is a failure, the world will tell him to let go of his ideal; but when his ambition is realized, the world will praise him for the persistence and the determination that he manifested during his dark hours, and everybody will point to his life as an example for coming generations. This is invariably the rule. Therefore pay no attention to what the world says when you are down. Be determined to get up, to reach the highest goal you have in view, and you will.

There are a great many ambitious men and women, who imagine that they will succeed provided their determination is strong and their persistence continuous, regardless of the fact that their thinking may be unscientific; but the sooner we dispel this illusion, the better. Unscientific thinking, even in minor matters, weakens the will. It turns valuable thought power astray, and we need the full power of thought,

[p. 102]

positively directed along the line of our work if we are going to achieve, and achieve greatly.

The majority of the mental forces in the average person are working against him, because he is constantly entertaining depressed mental states or detrimental habits of thought; and even though he may be ambitious, that ambition has not sufficient power to work itself out, because most of the forces of his mind are thrown away. We therefore see the necessity of becoming scientific in all thinking, and in making every mental habit wholesome and beneficial in the largest sense of those terms. But scientific thinking not only tends to turn the power of thought in the right direction; it also tends to increase mental power, to promote efficiency and to build up every faculty that we may employ.

To illustrate the effect of right thinking upon the faculties, we will suppose that you have musical talent, and are trying to perfect that talent. Then, we will suppose that you are constantly expressing dissatisfaction with the power of that talent. What will be the result? Your mental action upon that faculty will tend to lower its efficiency, because you are depressing its action instead of inspiring those actions. On the other hand, if you encourage this talent, you will tend to expand its life, and thereby increase its capacity for results.

In this respect, talents are similar to people. Take two people of equal ability and place them in circumstances

[p. 103]

that are direct opposites. We will suppose that the one is mistreated every day by those with whom he is associated. He is constantly being criticized and constantly being told that he will never amount to anything; he is blamed for everything that is wrong, and is in every manner discouraged and kept down. What would happen to the ability and efficiency of that man if he continued under such treatment year after year? He simply could not advance unless he should happen to be a mental giant, and even then, his advancement would be very slow; but if he was not a mental giant, just an average man, he would steadily lose ambition, self-confidence, initiative, judgment, reasoning power, and in fact, everything that goes to make up ability and capacity.

We will suppose the other man is encouraged continually. He is praised for everything, he is given every possible opportunity to show and apply what ability he may possess; he is surrounded by an optimistic atmosphere, and is expected by everybody to advance and improve continually. What will happen to this man? The best will be brought out in his power and ability. He will be pushed to the fore constantly, and he will climb steadily and surely until he reaches the top.

Treat your talents in the same way, and you have the same results in every case. To state it briefly, make it a point to encourage your talents, your faculties and your powers. Give every element and

[p. 104]

force within you encouragement and inspiration. Expect them all to do their best, and train yourself to think and feel that they positively will. Train yourself to think of your whole system as all right. Deal with your mental faculties in this manner, under all circumstances, and deal with your physical organs in the same way.

Most people among those who do not have perfect health, have a habit of speaking of their stomachs as bad, their livers as always out of order, their eyes as weak, their nerves as all upset, and the different parts of their systems as generally wrong. But what are they doing to their physical organs through this practice? The very same as was done to the unfortunate man just mentioned, and we shall find, in this connection, one reason why so many people continue to be sick. They are keeping their physical organs down, so to speak, by depressing the entire system with unwholesome thinking; but if they would change their tactics and begin to encourage their physical organs, praise them and expect them to do better, and to treat them right from the mental as well as a physical standpoint, they would soon be restored to perfect health.

In training the mind in scientific thinking, the larger part of attention should be given to that of controlling our feelings. It is not difficult to think scientifically along intellectual lines, but to make our feelings move along wholesome, constructive, optimistic

[p. 105]

lines requires persistent training. Intellectual thought can be changed almost at any time with little effort, but feeling usually becomes stronger and stronger the longer it moves along a certain line, and thus becomes more difficult to change. When we feel discouraged, it is so easy to feel more discouraged; when we feel dissatisfied, it is only a step to that condition that is practically intolerable. It is therefore necessary to stop all detrimental feeling in the beginning. Do not permit a single adverse feeling to continue for a second. Change the mind at once by turning your attention upon something that will make you feel better. Resolve to feel the way you want to feel under all circumstances, and you will gradually develop the power to do so. Depressed mental feelings are burdens, and we waste a great deal of energy by carrying them around on our mental shoulders. Besides, such feelings tend to direct the power of thought towards the lower and the inferior. Whenever you permit yourself to feel bad, you will cause the power of mind and thought to go wrong. Therefore, persist in feeling right and good. Persist in feeling joyous. Persist in feeling cheerful, hopeful, optimistic and strong. Place yourself on the bright side and the strong side of everything that transpires in your life, and you will constantly gain power--power that will invariably be in your favor.

[p. 106] [p. 107]

Life is growth and the object of right thinking is to promote that growth.

Give less time trying to change the opinions of others, and more time trying to improve your own life.

Life becomes the way it is lived; and man may live the way he wants to live when he learns to think what he wants to think.

Create your own thought and you become what you want to become because your thought creates you.

We all know that man is as he thinks. Then we must think only such thoughts as tend to make us what we wish to be.

The secret of right thinking is found in always keeping the mind's eye stayed upon the greater and the better in all things.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 108] [p. 109]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

HOW MAN BECOMES WHAT HE THINKS

Scientific research in the metaphysical field has demonstrated the fact that man is as he thinks, that he becomes what he thinks, and that what he thinks in the present, determines what he is to become in the future; and also that since he can change his thought for the better along any line, he can therefore completely change himself along any line. But the majority who try to apply this law do not succeed to a great degree, the reason being that instead of working entirely upon the principle that man is as he thinks, they proceed in the belief that man is what he thinks he is.

At first sight there may seem to be no difference between the principle that man is as he thinks and the belief that man is as he thinks he is, but close study will reveal the fact that the latter is absolutely untrue. Man is not what he thinks he is, because personality, mentality, and character are not determined by personal opinions. It is the thought of the heart, that is, the mental expression from the subconscious that makes the personal man what he is;

[p. 110]

but the subconscious is effected only by what man actually thinks in the real field of creative thought, and not by what he may think of himself in the field of mere personal opinion.

It is subjective thought that makes you what you are; but to think that you are thus or so, will not necessarily make you thus or so. To create subjective thought you must act directly upon the subconscious, but it is not possible to impress the subconscious while you are forming opinions about your personal self. A mere statement about yourself will not affect or change the subconscious, and so long as the subconscious remains unchanged, you will remain unchanged. While you are thinking simply about your external or personal self you are acting upon the objective, but to change yourself you must act upon the subjective.

Man may think that he is great, but so long as he continues to think small thoughts, he will continue to be small. No matter how high an opinion he may have of himself, while he is living in the superficial, his thoughts will be empty, and empty thoughts are not conducive to high attainments and great achievements. Man becomes great when he thinks great thoughts, and to think great thoughts he must transcend the limitations and circumscribed conditions of the person, and mentally enter into the world of the great and the superior. He must seek to gain a larger and a larger consciousness of the world of real

[p. 111]

quality, real worth and real superiority, and must dwell upon the loftiest mountain peaks of mind that he can possibly reach. He must live in the life of greatness, breathe the spirit of greatness, and feel the very soul of greatness. Then, and only then, will he think great thoughts; and the mind that continues to think great thoughts will continue to grow in greatness.

It is not what you state in your thought but what you give to your thought that determines results. The thought that is merely stated may be empty, but it is the thought with something in it that alone can exercise real power in personal life. And what is to be in your thought will depend upon what you think into your thought. What you give to your thought, your thought will give to you, and you will be and become accordingly, no matter what you may think that you are. The cause that you originate in the within will produce its effect in the without, regardless of what your opinions may be. Your personal life will consequently be the result of what you think, but it will not necessarily be what you think it is.

Having discovered the fact that the physical body is completely renewed every eight or ten months, you will naturally think that you are young, but to simply think you are young will not cause the body to look as young as it really is. To retain your youth you must remove those subconscious tendencies and conditions that produce old age, and you must eliminate

[p. 112]

worry. So long as you worry you will cause your personality to grow older and older in appearance, no matter how persistently you may think that you are young. To simply think that you are young will not avail. You must think thoughts that produce, retain and perpetuate youth. If you wish to look young, your mind must feel young, but you will not feel young until the whole of your mind produces the feeling of youth.

To develop the feeling of youth in the whole mind, you must become fully conscious of the fact that youth is naturally produced in your entire system every minute, and you must train the mind to take cognizance only of the eternal now. So long as we feel that we are passing with time, we will imagine that we feel the weight of more and more years, and this feeling will invariably cause the body to show the mark of years, growing older and older in appearance as more years are added to the imaginary burden of age. You will look young when you feel young, but to simply feel that you are young will not always cause you to feel young. The real feeling of youth comes when we actually think in the consciousness of youth and give the realization of the now to every thought.

You may think that you are well, but you will not secure health until you think thoughts that produce health. You may persistently affirm that you are well, but so long as you live in discord, confusion,

[p. 113]

worry, fear and other wrong states of mind, you will be sick; that is, you will be as you think and not what you think you are. You may state health in your thought, but if you give worry, fear and discord to that thought, your thinking will produce discord. It is not what we state in our thoughts, but what we give to our thoughts that determine results. To produce health, thought itself must be healthful and wholesome. It must contain the quality of health, and the very life of health. This, however, is not possible unless the mind is conscious of health at the time when such thought is being produced. Therefore, to think thoughts that can produce health, the mind must enter into the realization of the being of health, and not simply dwell in the objective belief about health. Again, to produce health, all the laws of life must be observed; that is, the mind must be in that understanding of law, and in that harmony with law where the guiding thought will naturally observe law. To simply think that you are well will not teach the mind to understand the laws of lire and health, nor will that thinking place you in harmony with those laws. That thinking that does understand the laws of life will not come from the mere belief that you are well, but from the effort to enter into the understanding of all law, the spirit of all law, the very life of health, and into the very soul of all truth.

You may think that your mind is brilliant and may undertake most difficult tasks in the belief that

[p. 114]

you are equal to the occasion, but the question is if your conception of brilliancy is great or small. If your conception of brilliancy is small, you may be right to that degree in thinking you are brilliant; that is, you may be brilliant as far as your understanding of brilliancy goes. Whether that is sufficient or not to carry out the task that is before you is another question. Your opinion of your mental capacity may be great, but if your idea of intelligence is crude, your intelligence-producing thought will also be crude, and can produce only crude intelligence. It is therefore evident that to simply think that you are brilliant will not produce brilliancy, unless your understanding of brilliancy is made larger, higher and finer. What you understand and mentally feel concerning intelligence, mental capacity and brilliancy, is what you actually think on those subjects, and it is this understanding or feeling or realization that will determine how much intelligence you will give to your thought. Your thought will be as brilliant as the brilliancy you think into your thought, and how much brilliancy you will think into your thought will depend upon how high your realization of brilliancy happens to be at the time. When your thinking is brilliant, you will be brilliant, but if your thinking is not brilliant you will not be brilliant, no matter how brilliant you may think you are.

To make your thinking more brilliant, try to enter into the consciousness of finer intelligence, larger

[p. 115]

mental capacity, and the highest order of mental brilliancy that you can possibly realize. Do not call yourself brilliant at any time, or do not think of yourself as lacking in brilliancy. Simply fix the mental eye upon absolute brilliancy, and desire with all the power of mind and soul to go on and on into higher steps of that brilliancy.

When all the elements and forces of your system are working in such a way that beauty will naturally be produced, you will be beautiful, whether you think you are beautiful or not, and it is the actions of the subconscious that determine how the elements and forces of the system are to work. Therefore, the beautiful person is beautiful because her real interior thinking is conducive to the creation of the beautiful. That person, however, who is not beautiful, does not necessarily think ugly thoughts, but her interior mental actions have not been brought together in such a way as to produce the expression of beauty; that is, the subconscious actions have not been arranged according to the most perfect pattern. But these actions can be arranged in that manner, not by thinking that one is beautiful, but by thinking thoughts that are beautiful.

When you think that you are beautiful, you are liable to think that you are more beautiful than others, and such a thought is not a beautiful thought. To recognize or criticise ugliness and inferiority in others is to create the inferior and the ugly in yourself,

[p. 116]

and what you create in yourself will sooner or later be expressed through your mind and personality. So long as you worry, hate or fear, your thought will make you disagreeable in mind and character, and later on in the person as well; and no amount of affirming or thinking that you are beautiful will overcome those ugly states of mind that you have created. You will thus be as you think--worried, hateful and ugly, and not beautiful as you may try to think you are.

The personal man is the result, not of beliefs or opinions, but of the quality of all the mental actions that are at work throughout the whole mind. Man is as he thinks in every thought, and not what he thinks he is in one or more isolated parts of his personal self. You may think that you are good, but your idea of goodness may be wrong. Your thought therefore will not be conducive to goodness. On the contrary, the more you praise yourself for being good, the less goodness you will express in your nature. In addition, to think of yourself as good will have a tendency to produce a feeling of self-righteousness. This feeling will cause the mind to look down upon the less fortunate, and a mind that looks down will soon begin to go down, and you will be no better than those whom you criticized before. You are only as good as the sum total of all your good thoughts, and these can be increased in number indefinitely by

[p. 117]

training the mind to perpetually grow in the consciousness of absolute goodness.

To grow in the consciousness of goodness, keep the mental eye upon the highest conception of absolute goodness. Try to enlarge, elevate and define this conception or understanding of goodness perpetually. Pattern your whole life, all your thoughts and all your actions after the likeness of this highest understanding. Then never look back nor try to measure the goodness that you may think you now possess. Press on eternally to the higher and larger realization of absolute goodness, and leave results to the law. More and more real goodness will naturally appear in all your thoughts and actions. You will therefore become good, not by thinking that you are good, but by thinking thoughts that are created in the image and likeness of that which is good.

From the foregoing, it is evident that man is as he thinks, and not necessarily what he thinks he is. But there is still more evidence. That your personal self is the result of your thought has been demonstrated, but what thought? To make yourself thus or so, the necessary thought must first be created, but to think that you are thus or so, will not create the thought that can make you thus or so. The reason is because it is subconscious thought alone that can produce effects in your nature, physical or mental, and you cannot enter the subconscious while you are thinking exclusively of your personal self. What

[p. 118]

you think about yourself is always objective thought, and mere objective thought is powerless to effect or change anything in your nature. To think thoughts that can give you more life, you must enter into the consciousness of absolute life, but you cannot enter the absolute while you are defining or measuring the personal. If you wish to possess more quality, you must give your thoughts more quality and worth, you must forget the lesser worth of the personal and enter into the consciousness of the greater worth of absolute worth itself.

So long as you think that you are thus or so in the personal sense, your thought will be on the surface. You will mentally live among effects. You will not create new causes, therefore will not produce any changes in yourself. You will continue to be as you are thinking deep down in the subconscious where hereditary tendencies, habits, race thoughts and other mental forces continue their usual work, regardless of your personal opinion or empty thoughts on the surface.

To change yourself you must go to that depth of mind where the causes of your personal condition exist. But your mind will not enter the depth of the within so long as your thought is on the surface, and your thought will be on the surface so long as you are thinking exclusively about your personal self. The secret therefore is not to form opinions about yourself or to think about yourself as being thus or

[p. 119]

so, but to form larger conceptions of principles and qualities. Enter the richness of real life and you will think richer thoughts. Forget the limitations, the weaknesses and the shortcomings of your personal self as well as your superficial opinions of your personal self, and enter mentally into the greatness, the grandeur, the sublimity and the splendor of all things. Seek to gain a larger and a larger understanding of the majesty and marvelousness of all life, and aspire to think the thoughts of the Infinite.

This is the secret of thinking great thoughts, and he will positively become great whose thoughts are always great. In like manner, he who thinks wholesome thoughts, and wholesome thoughts only, will become healthful and wholesome. Such thoughts will have the power to produce health, and thoughts never fail to do what they have the power to do. Place in action the necessary subconscious thought and the expected results will invariably follow.

Man therefore is not what he thinks he is because such thinking is personal, and consequently superficial and powerless. The thought that determines his personality, his character, his mentality and his destiny is his subjective thought, the thought that is produced in the subconscious during those moments when he forgets his personal opinions about himself and permits his mind to act with deep feeling and subjective conviction. But those thoughts that enter the subconscious are not always good thoughts.

[p. 120]

[paragraph continues] Man's subjective thinking is not always conducive to the true, the wholesome and the best, as his thinking is not always right. For this reason, man himself is not always good, nor his life as beautiful as he might wish to be. His thinking is in his own hands, however. He can learn to think what he wants to think, and as he is and becomes as he thinks, we naturally conclude that he may, in the course of time, become what he wants to become.

[p. 121]

The greatest remedy in the world is change; and change implies the passing from the old to the new. It is also the only path that leads from the lesser to the greater, from the dream to the reality, from the wish to the heart's desire fulfilled. It is change that brings us everything we want. It is the opposite of change that holds us back from that which we want. But change is not always external. Real change, or rather the cause of all change, is always internal. It is the change in the within that first produces the change in the without. To go from place to place is not a change unless it produces a change of mind--a renewal of mind. It is the change of mind that is the change desired. It is the renewal of mind that produces better health, more happiness, greater power, the increase of life, and the consequent increase of all that is good in life. And the constant renewal of mind--the daily change of mind--is possible regardless of times, circumstances or places. He who can change his mind every day and think the new about everything every day, will always be well; he will always have happiness; he will always be free; his life will always be interesting; he will constantly move forward into the larger, the richer and the better; and whatever is needed for his welfare today, of that he shall surely have abundance.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122] [p. 123]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

THE ART OF CHANGING FOR THE BETTER

Personal man gradually but surely grows into the likeness of that which he thinks of the most, and man thinks the most of what he loves the best. This is the law through which man has become what he is, and it is through the intelligent use of this law that man may change for the better and improve in any way desired. The thought you think not only effects your character, your mind and your body, but also produces the original cause of every characteristic, every habit, every tendency, every desire, every mental quality and every physical condition that appears in your system. Thought is the one original cause of the conditions, characteristics and peculiarities of the human personality, and everything that appears in the personality is the direct or indirect effect of the various actions of thought. It is therefore evident that man naturally grows into the likeness of the thought he thinks, and it also evident that the nature of his thought would be determined by that which he thinks of the most.

The understanding of this fact will reveal to all minds the basic law of change, and though it is basic,

[p. 124]

its intelligent use may become simplicity itself. Through the indiscriminate use of this law, man has constantly been changing, sometimes for the better, sometimes not, but by the conscious, intelligent, use of this law he may change only for the better and as rapidly as the sum total of his present ability will permit.

The fact that mental conditions and dispositions may be changed through the power of thought, will readily be accepted by every mind, but that mental qualities, abilities, personal appearances and physical conditions may be changed in the same way all minds may not be ready to accept. Nevertheless, that thought can change anything in the human system, even to a remarkable degree, is now a demonstrated fact. We have all seen faces change for the worse under the influence of grief, worry and misfortune, and we have observed that all people grow old who expect to do so, regardless of the fact that the body of the octogenarian is not a day older than the body of a little child. We have unlimited evidence to prove that ability will improve or deteriorate according to the use that is made of the mind. A man's face reveals his thought, and we can invariably detect the predominating states of the mind that lives in a groove. When a person changes his mental states at frequent intervals, no one state has the opportunity to produce an individual, clear-cut expression, and therefore cannot be so readily detected,

[p. 125]

but where one predominating state is continued in action for weeks or months or years, any one can say what that state is, by looking at the face of him who has it. Thus we can detect different kinds of disposition, different grades of mind, different degrees of character and different modes of living, and convince ourselves at the same time, that man in general, looks, acts and lives the way he thinks.

The fact that every mental state will express its nature in body, mind and character, proves that we can, through the intelligent use of mental action, cause the body to become more beautiful, the mind more brilliant, character more powerful and the soul life more ideal. To accomplish these things, however, it is necessary to apply the law continuously in that direction where we desire to secure results. When a person thinks of the ordinary for a few weeks, he invariably begins to look ordinary. Then when something impels him to think for a while of the ideal, the true and the beautiful, he begins to look like a new creature; but if reverses threaten, he will feel worried, dejected and afraid, and everybody observes that he looks bad. Then if the tide turns in his favor, he will begin to look content, and if something should suggest to his mind the thought of the wholesome, the sound and the harmonious, he will begin to look remarkably well. In this manner he is daily using the law of change, but never intelligently. He does not take the law into

[p. 126]

his own hands, but uses the law only as suggestions from his environment may direct. He advances one day and falls back the next. One week his physical mansion is painted with colors of health and beauty; the next week only the conditions of age and disease are in evidence. He plants a flower seed today, and tomorrow hoes it up to plant a weed in its place. Thus the average person continues to live, and every change comes from the unconscious, indiscriminate use of the power of his thought. This power, however, can be employed more wisely, and when the many begin to do so, the progress of the race will be remarkable indeed.

The basic law of change must be taken into our own hands, and must be employed directly for producing the change we have in view; and to accomplish this the love nature must be so trained that we shall love only what we want to love, only what is greater and better than that which we have realized up to the present time. In this respect strong, highly developed souls will have no difficulty, because they have the power to see the great, the beautiful and the ideal in all things, but those who have not as yet acquired that power, must train their feelings with care, lest love frequently turns thought upon the low, the common or the ordinary.

What you admire in others will develop in yourself. Therefore, to love the ordinary in any one is to become ordinary, while to love the noble and the

[p. 127]

lofty in all minds is to grow into the likeness of that which is noble and lofty. When we love the person of someone who is in the earth earthy, we tend to keep ourselves down in the same place. We may give our kindness and our sympathies to all, but we must not love anything in any one that is not ideal. It is a misdirection of love to love exclusively the visible person. It is the ideal, the true and the beautiful in every person that should be loved, and as all persons have these qualities, we can love everybody with a whole heart in this more sublime manner.

In this connection a great problem presents itself to many men and women who aspire to a life of great quality. These people feel that they cannot give their personal love to husbands, wives, relatives or friends that persist in living in the mere animal world; but the problem is easily solved. We must not love what is ordinary in any one; in fact, the ordinary must not be recognized, but we can love the real life in every one, and if we will employ our finer perceptions we will find that this real life is ideal in every living creature in the world. We need not love the perversions of a person, but we can love the greater possibilities and the superior qualities that are inherent in the individual. It is not the imperfections or appearances that should be loved, but the greatness that is within; and what we love in

[p. 128]

others we not only awaken in others, but we develop those very things more or less in ourselves.

To promote the best welfare of individuals under all sorts of circumstances, personal loves should be exchanged only by persons who live in the same world. When the woman has found the superior world, the man must not expect her personal love unless he also goes up to live in the same world. It is simply fair that he should do so. The woman who lives in a small world must not expect the love of a man who lives in a great world. He would lose much of his greatness if he should give his personal love to such a woman.

The tendency of all life is onward and upward. Therefore, to ask anything to come down is to violate the very purpose of existence. If we wish to be with the higher, the greater and the superior, we must change ourselves and become higher, greater and superior; and this we all can do.

In the application of the basic law of change, no factor is more important than that of pleasure. We are controlled to a great extent by the pleasures we enjoy, ofttimes so much so that they may even determine our destiny. The reason why is found in the fact that we deeply love what we thoroughly enjoy, and since we think the most of what we love the best, we naturally become like the pleasures we thoroughly enjoy, because man gradually grows into the likeness of his predominating thought. It is therefore

[p. 129]

unwise to permit ourselves to enjoy anything that is beneath our most perfect conception of the ideal, and it is likewise unwise to associate personally with people who care only for the ordinary and the common. What we enjoy becomes a part of ourselves, and for the good of everybody, we cannot afford to go down; but when we love only those pleasures that are as high as our own ideal of joy, then we are truly on the great ascending path.

To overlook the wrongs, the defects and the perversions of life, and to look only for that beautiful something in every soul that we simply want to love, even without trying, is one of the greatest things that we can do; but we must not permit our conception of the beautiful within to become a mere, cold abstraction. It is most important that we be as emotional as we possibly can without permitting ourselves to be controlled by our emotions. The heart should be most tender and warm, and every feeling constantly on fire; but if all such feelings are turned into the secret realms of soul life, we shall find that the forces of love are drawn insistently towards the highest, the truest, the most noble and the most beautiful that our inspired moments have revealed. When this is done we can readily love with the whole heart any noble quality, or high art, or great work upon which we may direct our attention, and what we can love at will, that we can think of as deeply and as long as we may desire.

[p. 130]

When we have formulated in our minds what changes we wish to make, the course to pursue is to love the ideal that corresponds to those changes. This love must be deep and strong, and must be continued until the desired change has actually taken place. Know what better qualities you want; then love those qualities with all your mind and heart and soul.

To love the higher and the greater qualities of life is to cause the creative qualities of mind to produce those same qualities in our own nature; and in consequence, we steadily grow into the likeness of that which we constantly love. This is the great law--the law that governs all change for the better. But to use this law intelligently the power of love must cease to respond to every whim or notion that the suggestibility of environment may present to the mind.

The power of love is the greatest power in the world, but it can cause persons or nations to fall to the lowest state, as well as rise to the highest state. Every fall in the history of the race has been caused largely by the misdirection of love, while every step in advance has been prompted largely by the power of love turned upon better things. To misdirect love is to love that which is beneath our present stage in advancement; it is turning the forces of life backward, and retrogression must inevitably follow.

[p. 131]

In the average person, love is directed almost exclusively upon the personal side of life. In consequence, the love nature becomes so personal, so limited and so superficial, that materialism follows. In many other minds, it is mere appearances that attract the power of admiration, and the finer things in mind, soul and character are wholly ignored. The result is that the finer qualities of such people gradually disappear, and grossness, both in thought and in appearance naturally follow. But we must not conclude in this connection that it is wrong to admire the beautiful wherever it may be seen in the external world. We should love the beautiful everywhere, no matter where it may be found; we should admire the richness of life, both in the external and in the internal; and by living a complete life, we shall enjoy more and more of the richness and the beautiful in life, in the within as well as in the without. But the power of love must direct the greater part of its attention upon that which is rich and beautiful in mind and soul. It is that which is finer than the finest of external things that must be loved if man is to grow into the likeness of the great, the superior and the ideal, because man is as he thinks, and he thinks the most of what he loves the best.

When any individual begins to love the finer qualities in life, and gives all the power of mind and soul to that love, he has taken the first step in the changing of his destiny. He is laying the foundation for

[p. 132]

a great and a better future, and if he continues as he has begun, he will positively reach the loftiest goal that he may have in view. There are many laws to apply in the beginning of a great life, but the law that lies at the foundation of them all is the law of love. It is love that determines what we are to think, what we are to work for, where we are to go, and what we are to accomplish. Therefore, among all great essentials, the principal one is to know how to love.

To apply this essential for all practical purposes, the secret is to love the great, the beautiful and the ideal in everybody and in everything; and to love with such a strong, passionate love that its ascending power becomes irresistible. The whole of life will thus change and go up with the power of love into the great, the superior and the ideal; everything, both in the being of man and in his environment will advance and change accordingly, and the dreams of the soul will come true. The ideal will become real, the desires of the heart will be granted, and what man has hoped to make his own will be absent no more.

[p. 133]

When failure comes be more determined than ever to succeed.

The more feeling there is in your thought the greater its power.

You steadily and surely become in the real what you constantly and clearly think that you are in the ideal.

The more you believe in yourself the more of your latent powers and possibilities you place in action. And the more you believe in your purpose the more of your power you apply in promoting that purpose.

To him who thinks he can everything is an opportunity.

Depend only upon yourself, but work in harmony with all things. Thus you call forth the best that is in yourself and secure the best that external sources have to give.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 134] [p. 135]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

HE CAN WHO THINKS HE CAN

The discovery of the fact that man is as he thinks, has originated a number of strange ideas concerning the power of thought. One of the principal of these is the belief that thought is a domineering force to be used in controlling things and in compelling fate to come our way. But that this belief is unscientific in every sense of the term has been demonstrated any number of times.

Those who have accepted this belief, and who have tried to use thought as a compelling force, have seemingly succeeded in the beginning, but later on have utterly failed, and the reason is that the very moment we proceed to apply thought in this manner, we place ourselves out of harmony with everything,. both within ourselves and in our environment. The seeming success that such people have had in the beginning, or for a season, is due to the fact that a strong compelling force can cause the various elements of life to respond for a while, but the force that compels, weakens itself through the very act of compelling, and finally loses its power completely;

[p. 136]

and then, whatever has been gathered begins to slip away.

This explains why thousands of ardent students of metaphysics have failed to secure the results desired, or have succeeded only in spurts. They have taken the wrong view of the power of thought, and therefore have caused their power to work against them during the greater part of the time. The power of thought is not a compelling force. It is a building force, and it is only when used in the latter sense that desirable results can be produced. The building capacity of thought, however, is practically unlimited. Therefore there is actually no end to what might be accomplished, so long as this power is employed intelligently.

To apply the full building power of thought, we should proceed upon the principle that he can who thinks he can, and we should act in the full conviction that whatever man thinks he can do, he can do, because there is no limit to the power that such thinking can bring forth. The majority among intelligent minds admit that there is some truth in the statement that he can who thinks he can, but they do not, as a rule, believe it to be a very large truth. They admit that we gain more confidence in ourselves when we think that we can do what we have undertaken to do, and also that we become more determined, but aside from that, they see no further value in that particular attitude of mind. They do

[p. 137]

not realize that he who thinks he can, develops the power that can; but this is the truth, and it is one of the most important of all truths in the vast metaphysical domain.

The law that governs this idea, and its process while in action, is absolutely unlimited in its possibilities, and therefore is in a position to promise almost anything to him who is faithful. When a man begins to think that he can do certain things that he desires to do, his mind will naturally proceed to act on those faculties that are required in the working out of his purpose; and so long as the mind acts upon a certain faculty, more and more life, nourishment and energy will accumulate in that faculty. In consequence, that faculty will steadily develop. It will become larger, stronger and more efficient, until it finally is competent to do what we originally wanted done. Thus we understand how he who thinks he can develops the power that can.

When a man begins to think that he can apply the power of invention, his mind will begin to act upon the faculty of invention. The latent powers of this faculty will be aroused. These powers will accordingly be exercised more and more, and development will be promoted. This, however, is not all. Whenever the mind concentrates its attention upon a certain faculty, additional energy will be drawn into that faculty; thus power will be added to power, much will gather more, and as this may continue

[p. 138]

indefinitely there need be no end to the capacity and the ability that can be developed in that faculty. In the course of time, be it in a few months or in a few years, that man will actually have developed the power of invention to such a degree that he can invent successfully; and through the application of the same law, he can further develop this same faculty, year after year, until he may finally become an inventive genius. When a man has some inventive power in the beginning, he will secure, through the application of this law, more remarkable results and in less time than if there were originally no indications of that faculty; but even if there were no original indications of individual power, that power can be developed to a high degree through the faithful application of the great law--he can who thinks he can, or to state it differently--he who thinks he can develops the power that can.

There is no faculty that we all do not possess, either in the active or in the latent state. Every faculty that naturally belongs to the human mind is latent in every mind, and it can be awakened and developed, provided the proper laws are faithfully applied. It should be our object, however, to accomplish as much as possible in the present. It is therefore advisable to proceed in the beginning to work through, and develop, those faculties that already indicate considerable power. The mind that has same talent for invention should proceed to think that be

[p. 139]

can invent. Thus he will accumulate more and more inventive ability or genius. The mind that has some talent for music, should proceed to think that he can master the art of music. He will thereby cause the creative energies of his mentality to accumulate more and more in the faculty of music, until that faculty will be developed to a greater and greater degree. The mind that has some talent for art should apply the same law upon that talent. The mind that has literary ability should proceed to think that he can write what he wants to write, and he will finally secure that literary ability or genius with which he can write what he wants to write. The mind that has ability in any line of business should proceed to think that he can conduct that business in the most successful manner. Should he enter that business and continue to think that he can, combining such thought with good work, enterprise and the full use of his personal ability, his success will continue to grow indefinitely.

Whatever a man may think that he can do, let him proceed to carry out that undertaking, constantly thinking that he can. He will succeed from the beginning, and his advancement will be continuous. However, no mind need be confined to a single purpose. If we have talent for something better than we are doing now, or if we wish to awaken some talent that we long to possess, we may proceed now to think that we can do what we long to do. We shall

[p. 140]

thus give more and more power to that faculty until it becomes sufficiently strong to be applied in actual practice. In the mean time, we should continue to think that we can do better and better what we are doing now. We shall thereby advance steadily in our present work, and at the same time, prepare ourselves for a greater work in the coming days.

When we think that we can, we must enter into the very soul of that thought and be thoroughly in earnest. It is in this manner that we awaken the finer creative energies of mind, those forces that build talent, ability and genius--those forces that make man great. We must be determined to do what we think we can do. This determination must be invincible, and must be animated with that depth of feeling that arouses all the powers of being into positive and united action. The power that can do what we think we can do will thus be placed at our command, and accordingly we may proceed successfully to do what we thought we could do.

[p. 141]

The fact that you have failed to get the lesser proves conclusively that you deserve the greater. So therefore, dry those tears and go in search of the worthier prize.

Count nothing lost; even the day that sees "no worthy action done" may be a day of preparation and accumulation that will add greatly to the achievements of tomorrow. Many a day was made famous because nothing was done the day before.

Know what you want and continue to want it. You will get it if you combine desire with faith. The power of desire when combined with faith becomes invincible.

Some of the principal reasons why so many fail to get what they want is because they do not definitely know what they want, or because they change their wants almost every day.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142] [p. 143]

  

CHAPTER X

  

HOW WE SECURE WHAT WE PERSISTENTLY DESIRE

The purpose of desire is to inform man what he needs at every particular moment to supply the demands of change and growth in his life; and in promoting that purpose, desire gives expression to its two leading functions. The first of these is to give the forces of the human system something definite to do, and the second is to arouse those forces or faculties that have the natural power to do what is to be done.

In exercising its first function, desire not only promotes concentration of action among the forces in man, but also causes those forces to work for the thing that is wanted. Therefore, it is readily understood why the wish, if strong, positive, determined and continuous, will tend to produce the thing wished for. If you can cause all the elements and powers in your being to work for the one thing that you want you are almost certain to get it. In fact, you will get it unless it is so large that it is beyond you, or beyond the power of your present capacity to produce; though in that case you have exercised poor

[p. 144]

judgment; you have permitted yourself to desire what lies outside of your sphere; and what you could neither appreciate nor use were you to get it.

What you can appreciate, enjoy and use in your present sphere of existence, you have the power, in your present state of development, to produce; that is, you can produce it if all your power is applied in your effort to produce it; and when you desire any particular thing with the full force and capacity of your desire you cause all your power to be applied in producing that particular thing.

In exercising its second function, desire proceeds directly into that faculty or group of forces that can, if fully applied, produce the very thing that is desired. In its first function it tends to bring all the forces of the system together, and inspires them with the desire to work for what is wanted. It acts upon the system in general and gives everything in the system something definite to do, that something definite in each case being the one thing desired. In its second function it acts upon certain parts of the system in particular; always upon those parts that can do what is wanted done; and it tends to arouse all the life and power that those particular parts may contain. How desire proceeds, and how it secures results in this respect is easily illustrated.

We will take, for example, a man who is not earning as much as he feels that he needs. Naturally, he will begin to desire more money; and we will

[p. 145]

suppose that this desire becomes stronger and stronger until it actually stirs every atom of his being. Now what happens? He is not only arousing a great deal of latent and unused energy, but all of his active energy is becoming more and more alive. But what becomes of all this energy? It goes directly into his money-making faculties, and tends to increase decidedly the life, the power, the capacity and the efficiency of those faculties.

There is in every mind a certain group of faculties that is made by nature for financial purposes. In some minds these faculties are small and sluggish, while in other minds they are large and active. And that the latter kind should be able to make more money and accumulate things in a greater measure is quite natural. But is it possible to take those faculties that are small and sluggish and make them large and active? If so, those who now have limited means may in the course of time have abundance.

To answer this question, we will ask what it is that can arouse any faculty to become larger and more active, and we find that it is more energy, and energy that is more alive. No matter how sluggish a faculty may be, if it is thoroughly charged, so to speak, with highly active energy, it simply must become more active. And no matter how small it may be, if it continues to receive a steady stream of added life, energy and power, day after day, month after month, year after year, it simply must increase in size and

[p. 146]

capacity. And whenever any faculty becomes greater in capacity and more alive in action it will do better work; that is, it will gradually gain in ability and power until it has sufficient ability and power to produce what you wished for.

Returning to the man in our illustration, we will see how the principle works. His money-making faculties are too small and too sluggish to produce as much money as he needs. He begins to desire for more. This desire becomes strong enough to arouse every element and force in his money-making faculties; for here be it remembered that the force of any desire goes directly into that faculty that can, by nature, produce the thing desired. This is one of the laws of mind. In addition, the action of his desire tends to arouse all the other forces of his system, and tends to concentrate those forces upon the idea of making more money.

In the beginning, no important change in his financial ability may be noticed, except that he feels more and more confidence in his power to secure the greater amount desired. In a short time, however, possibly within a few months, he begins to get new ideas about the advancement of his work. His mind is beginning to. work more actively upon the idea of increased gain. Accordingly, suggestions as to how he might increase the earning capacity of his business are constantly coming up in his mind, and ways

[p. 147]

and means and plans are taking shape and form more and more completely.

The actions of his money-making faculties are also beginning to change; that is, they are becoming finer, more penetrating, and more keen so that his insight into financial matters is steadily improving. He is therefore securing the necessary essentials to greater financial gain, and as he applies them all, things will naturally begin to take a turn. To state it briefly, his strong, persistent desire for more money has aroused his money-making faculties. They have become stronger, more active, more wide-awake and more efficient. And as a strong, wide-awake faculty can do many times as good work as one that is only partly alive, we understand how his desire for more money has given him the ability to make more money. As he continues this desire, making it stronger and more persistent, his financial ability will increase accordingly, and his financial gains continue to increase in proportion.

Many may doubt the efficiency of the plan just presented, because as is well known, most people desire more money but do not always get it. But do they always wish hard enough? It is not occasional desire, or half-hearted desire that gets the thing desired. It is persistent desire; and persistent desire, not only desires continually, but with all the power of life and mind and soul. The force of a half alive desire, when acting upon a certain faculty,

[p. 148]

cannot cause that faculty to become fully alive. Nor can such a desire  all the unused forces of the system and concentrate them all upon the attainment of the one thing wanted. And it is true that the desires of most people are neither continuous nor very deep. They are shallow, occasional wishes without enough power to stir to action a single atom.

Then we must also remember that results do not necessarily follow the use of a single force. Sometimes the force of persistent desire alone may do wonders, but usually it is necessary to apply in combined action all the forces of the human system. The force of desire, however, is one of the greatest of these, and when fully expressed in connection with the best talents we may possess, the thing desired will certainly be secured.

We may take several other illustrations. Suppose you have a strong desire for more and better friends. The action of that desire, if deep, whole-hearted and persistent will tend to impress the qualities of friendship upon every element of your character. In consequence, you will in time become the very incarnation of friendship; that is, you will become a better and a better friend, and he who becomes a better friend will constantly receive more and better friends. In other words, you become like the thing you desire, and when the similarity has become complete, you will get what you want through the law of like attracting like.

[p. 149]

You may desire to succeed in a certain line of work; we will say, in the literary field. If your desire for success in that field is full and persistent, the power of that desire will constantly increase the life, the activity and the capacity of your literary faculties, and you will naturally do better work in that field. The same is true with regard to any other line of work, because your desire for greater success in your work will arouse to fuller action those faculties that you employ in that work. But, in every case, the desire must be deep, whole-souled, persistent and strong.

It is therefore evident that results in all lines of endeavor depend very largely upon the power of desire, and that no one can afford to let his desires lag for a moment. The law should be: Know what you want, and then want it with all the life and power that is in you. Get your mind and your life fully aroused. Persistent desire will do this. And that it is most important to do this is proven by the fact that in thousands of instances, a partly alive mind is the only reason why the goal in view has not been reached.

It is necessary, however, that your desires continue uninterruptedly along the lines you have chosen. You may desire a score or more of different things, but continue each desire without change, unless you should find that certain changes are necessary to secure the greater results you have in mind.

[p. 150]

[paragraph continues] To desire one thing today and another tomorrow means failure. To work for one thing this year and another thing next year is the way to empty handedness at the end of every year.

Before you begin to apply the power of desire, know with a certainty what you want because when you get what you have desired, you may have to take it. If you do not know definitely what you really do want, desire a better judgment, a clearer understanding and a more balanced life. Desire to know what is best for you, and the force of that desire will tend to produce normal action in every part of your system. Then you will feel distinctly what the highest welfare of your nature actually demands.

In deciding upon what you want, however, do not be timid, and do not measure the possible with the yard-stick of general appearances. Let your aspirations be high, only be sure that you are acting within the sphere of your own inherent capacity; though in this connection it is well to remember that your inherent capacity is many times as great as it has been supposed to be; and also that it can be continuously enlarged.

In choosing what you are to desire, act within reason, but go after the best. If the full power of desire is applied upon all the elements of your mind and character, what is latent within you will be aroused, developed and expressed; you will become much

[p. 151]

more than you are and thereby will not only desire the best, but be able to be of service to the best. And this latter fact is important. When we desire the great and the wonderful we must ask what we have to give the great and the wonderful in return. It is not only necessary to get the best--to realize our ideal, but it is also necessary to be so good and so great that we can give to the best as much as we are receiving from the best. Before we begin to wish for an ideal, we must ask what that ideal. is going to get when it comes.

Coupled with our desire for the ideal, therefore, we must have an equally strong desire for the remaking of ourselves so that we may become equal to that ideal in every respect. If we want an ideal companion, we must not only wish for such a companion, but we must also desire the development of those qualities in ourselves that we know would make us agreeable to that companion. If we want a different environment we should wish for such an environment with all the life and soul we possess, and should at the same time wish for the increase of those powers in our own talents that can earn such an environment. If we want a better position we should desire such a position every minute and also desire that we may become more competent to fill it when it comes.

The power of desire not only tends to arouse added life and power in these faculties upon which

[p. 152]

it may act, but it also tends to make the mind as a whole more alert and wide-awake along those lines. This is well illustrated by the fact that when we have a strong, continuous desire for information on a certain subject, we always find someone or something that can give us that information. And the reason is that all the faculties of the mind are prompted by the force of this desire to be constantly on the look-out for that information.

That the same law will apply in the desire or search for wisdom, new ideas, better plans, better opportunities, more agreeable environments and more ideal companions, is clearly understood. And when we couple this fact with the fact that the power of desire tends to increase the life, the ability, the working capacity and the efficiency of these faculties or forces that can produce what we desire, we must certainly admit that those who have found the secret of using desire have made a great find indeed. But, as stated before, and it cannot be repeated too often, the desire must be persistent and strong, as strong as all the life and soul we possess.

In other words, we must wish hard enough, and we wish hard enough when our desires are sufficiently full and deep and strong to thoroughly arouse those faculties that have the natural ability to fulfill those desires. Many desires are only strong enough to arouse their corresponding faculties to a slight degree--not enough to increase the activity or working

[p. 153]

capacity of these faculties, while most desires are too weak to arouse any force or faculty in the least.

The act of wishing hard enough, however, does not imply hard mental work. If you make hard work of your wishing, you will use up your energy instead of turning it into those channels where it can be applied to good account. It is depth of desire and fullness of desire combined in an action that is directed continuously upon the one thing desired that constitutes true desire. To wish hard enough is simply to wish for all that you want with all that is in you. But we cannot wish with all that is in us unless our wish is subconscious as well as conscious because the subconscious is a part of us--the larger part of us.

To make every desire subconscious, the subconscious mind should always be included in the process of desire; that is, whenever we express a desire we should think of the subconscious, and combine the thought of that desire with our thought of the subconscious mind. Every desire should be deeply felt as all deeply felt mental actions become subconscious actions.

It is an excellent practice to let every desire sink into the deeper mental life, so to speak; and also to act in and through that deeper mental life whenever we give expression to desire; or, in other words, when we turn on the full force and power of that desire. To become proficient in these methods requires some practice, though all that is necessary to

[p. 154]

become proficient is to continue to try. No special rule is required.

Begin by feeling your desires through and through. Make them as strong and as deep as you can, and always combine the living action of your desire with your thought of those faculties through which you know that desire is to work. To illustrate: If you desire greater success in your work, think of those faculties that you are using in your work whenever you give full expression to your desire. If you are a business man, think of your business faculties whenever you desire greater business success. If you are a musician, think of your musical faculties whenever you desire greater proficiency in your music. Though in case your desires should be such that you do not know through what kinds of faculties it will naturally be expressed, never mind. Continue to desire what you want; the power of that desire, if persistent and strong, will find a way to make your wish come true.

When we understand how desire works, and know that it works only when it is persistent, we realize that we have found, not only a great secret, but also a simple explanation for many of the failures in life as well as many of its greatest achievements. And from the facts in the case we conclude that no matter what a man's condition or position may be today, if he will decide upon that something better that he wants, he may get it, provided his wish for it is as strong as his own life and as large as his own soul.

[p. 155]

The optimist lives under a clear sky; the pessimist lives in a fog. The pessimist hesitates, and loses both time and opportunity; the optimist makes the best use of everything now, and builds himself up, steadily and surely, until all adversity is overcome and the object in view realized. The pessimist curbs his energies and concentrates his whole attention upon failure; the optimist gives all his thought and power to the attainment of success, and arouses his faculties and forces to the highest point of efficiency. The pessimist waits for better times, and expects to keep on waiting; the optimist goes to work with the best that is at hand now, and proceeds to create better times. The pessimist pours cold water on the fires of his own ability; the optimist adds fuel to those fires. The pessimist links his mind to everything that is losing ground; the optimist lives, thinks and works with everything that is determined to press on. The pessimist places a damper on everything; the optimist gives life, fire and go to everything. The optimist is a building force; the pessimist is always an obstacle in the way of progress. The pessimist lives in a dark, soggy unproductive world, the optimist lives in that mental sunshine that makes all things grow.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156] [p. 157]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

CONCENTRATION AND THE POWER BACK OF SUGGESTION

The purpose of concentration is to apply all the active forces of mind and personality upon that one thing which is being done now, and it may therefore be called the master key to all attainments and achievement. In its last analysis, the cause of all failure can be traced to the scattering of forces, and the cause of all achievement to the concentration of forces. This does not imply however, that concentration is the only essential, but it does imply that concentration must be perfect, or failure is inevitable no matter how many good methods one may employ. The ruling thought of concentration is, "This one thing I do," and it can be stated as an absolute truth that whenever the mind works completely in the attitude of that thought, concentration is perfect.

The value of concentration is very easily illustrated by taking, for example, a wheel of twenty spokes with every spoke a pipe, and all those pipes connected with another conveying steam. The steam will thereby pass out through twenty channels. Then connect an engine with one of the pipes. That engine

[p. 158]

will accordingly receive only one-twentieth of the steam conveyed through the wheel, while nineteen-twentieths will pass out in waste. But suppose the other nineteen pipes were plugged so that all the steam would pass out through the one pipe connected with the engine. The engine would then have twenty times as much power as before.

The average mind is quite similar to such a wheel. An enormous amount of energy is generated at the hub, so to speak, or at the vital center of mental life; but as a rule, that power passes out through a score of channels, so that the channel of action receives only a fraction of the power generated in the human system. But here we must remember that you can apply your power effectively only in one direction at a time; therefore, if all your power is to be applied in that one direction, all other channels must be closed up for the time being; or in other words, all the power of mind and thought must be concentrated where you are acting at the time.

In learning how to concentrate, it is necessary in the beginning to remember that the usual methods are of no value. You cannot develop concentration by fixing thought or attention upon some external object. Real concentration is subjective, and subjective thought is deep; that is, it acts through the deeper or interior realms of mind. When you fix your attention, however, upon some external object, like a spot on the wall, as has been suggested by

[p. 159]

some would-be instructors in this field, your thought goes out towards the surface, so that you are actually getting away from the true field of concentration. Any method, or any line of thinking that tends to draw the mind out towards the surface, will produce a superficial attitude, and when the mind is in such an attitude, deep mental action is not possible; but deep mental action is absolutely necessary in all concentration. There is no use trying to concentrate unless the action of the mind is deep. That is the first essential. In other words, the mind must go into the psychological field; the mind must act, not on the surface of things, but through the deeper life of its thought process.

To develop concentration, all that is necessary is to apply consciously those two factors that are invariably found in natural concentration. In the conscious application of these two factors, the following two methods will be found sufficient; in fact, nothing further will be required in the attainment of concentration to any degree desired.

The first method is to train the mind to act in the subjective or psychological field; in other words, cause all thinking, all feeling and all actions of thought, will and desire to become deeper and finer; in fact, deepen as far as possible all mental action. Whenever you concentrate or turn your attention upon any subject or object, try to feel deeply, try to think deeply and try to turn thought into deeper

[p. 160]

realms of feeling. The moment your mental action begins to deepen, you will find your attention directed upon the object in mind with perfect ease and with full force. Whenever you are thinking about anything, try to feel your thought getting into the vital life of that something, and wherever you turn your attention, try to feel that the force of that attention acts through your whole mind instead of simply on the surface of your mind. To state it briefly, whenever you concentrate, deepen your thought, and the deeper your thought becomes, the more perfectly will the full force of your mind and thought focus upon the point of concentration. Whatever you have to do, deepen your thought while giving that work your attention. You will find that you will thereby give all your energy to that work and this is your purpose.

The second method is to become interested in that upon which you desire to concentrate. If you are not interested in that subject or object, begin at once to look for the most interesting point of view. You will be surprised to find that no matter how uninteresting a subject may seem, the very moment you begin to look for the most interesting viewpoints of that subject, you will almost immediately become interested in that subject itself. And it is a well-known fact that whenever we are thoroughly interested in a subject, we concentrate thoroughly and naturally upon that subject.

[p. 161]

To make concentration perfect, so that you can turn all the power of mind and thought upon any subject or object desired, these two methods should be combined. Always look for the most interesting points of view, and while you are looking for those viewpoints, deepen the action of your mind by trying to feel the real vital life of those actions. You thereby become interested in the subject on the one hand, and you make every action of the mind subjective on the other hand; and when perfect interest is combined with subjective mental action, you have perfect concentration.

The constant practice of these two methods will develop the power of concentration to such an extent that you can concentrate completely at any time and for any length of time, by simply deciding to do so; and that such an attainment is of enormous value is evident when we understand how much power there is in man, and how concentration can turn all of that power upon the one thing that is being done now.

All modern psychologists agree that there is enough power in any man to accomplish what he has in view, provided it is all constructively applied in that one direct. And when man can concentrate perfectly, he can use all of his power wherever he may choose to act. Then, if he combines scientific thinking and constructive mental action with concentration,

[p. 162]

nothing can prevent him from realizing his very highest ambition.

Another important essential in the use of the forces of mind and thought, is that of understanding suggestion and the power back of suggestion; and this becomes especially true when we realize that there is no factor or condition that we may come in contact with anywhere or under any circumstances, that does not suggest something.

To define suggestion, it may be stated that anything is a suggestion that brings into mind some thought, idea or feeling that tends to undermine some similar idea, thought or feeling that happens to be in the mind at the time. When you have certain ideas or feelings, and you meet circumstances that tend to remove those ideas or feelings, the power of suggestion is working in your mind. If your mind is in a wholesome state and an unwholesome picture removes that wholesome state by replacing something that is degrading, your mind is in the power of suggestion. If you feel joyous and some idea given to you makes your mind depressed, you are in the hands of suggestion; in fact, when anything enters your mind in such a manner as to remove certain similar or opposite states already in your mind, it exercises the power of suggestion.

It is therefore necessary to understand how this power works, so that we can take advantage of good suggestions and avoid those that are not good. The

[p. 163]

great majority are receiving all sorts of suggestions every hour, and they respond to a very large number of them; in fact, we can truthfully say that most people are controlled, most of the time, by suggestions that come to them from their environment. Those minds, however, who understand the power of thought, and who know the difference between detrimental and beneficial suggestions, can close their minds to the former and open them fully to the latter. And the method to apply is this, that whenever you are in the presence of an adverse suggestion, concentrate your attention upon some idea or mental state which you know will act as a counter suggestion; in other words, when adverse suggestion is trying to produce in your mind what you do not want, persist in suggesting to yourself what you do want. This practice, if employed frequently, will soon make you so strong in this direction that you will unconsciously, so to speak, be on your guard; in fact, the very moment that an adverse suggestion is given, your mind will spring up of its own accord with a wholesome suggestion to meet the requirements. To avoid becoming a victim to adverse suggestions--and we have such suggestions about us almost constantly--fill your mind so full of good, wholesome thoughts and suggestions that there is no room for anything else. Feel right at all times, and nothing from without can tempt you to think wrong. Make every good thought subconscious, and no adverse thought from

[p. 164]

without can possibly get into your subconscious mind at any time.

A great many suggestions do not produce results, a fact which should be perfectly understood, because every thought that we think does contain some suggestion. When we are trying to impress good thoughts upon our minds, we want the good suggestions conveyed by those thoughts to take effect, but frequently they do not, and the reason is that a suggestion takes effect only when we exercise the power that is back of suggestion. The outward suggestion itself is simply the vehicle through which another power is acting, and that other power is nothing more nor less than the real life of that idea which the suggestion intends to convey.

To simplify this matter, we will suppose that you are suggesting to yourself that you are well. The suggestion itself is simply a vehicle conveying the idea of health, but if your mind is not in touch with the interior or living force of that idea of health at the time you are giving the suggestion, you have not exercised the power back of suggestion, and the idea of health will not be conveyed to your subconscious mind. On the other hand, if you can actually feel the power of this interior idea of health when you are giving the suggestion, you are in mental touch with the power back of that suggestion, and whenever you touch the power back of suggestion you use that power. Results, therefore, will be forthcoming. To

[p. 165]

explain further, we might say that you use the power back of suggestion whenever you mentally feel that vital idea which the suggestion aims to convey. When you feel that idea, you respond to the suggestion, but when you do not feel it, you do not respond.

This explains why the power of suggestion so frequently fails, not only in every day life, but also in mental healing. When you think health, you will produce health in your system if you feel the real or interior life of health at the time. When you think harmony you will produce harmony in your system, if your mind actually goes into the soul of harmony at the time. When you place yourself in the mental world of happiness, whenever you are thinking, happiness, you will actually produce happiness in your mind, because you are applying the power that is back of the thought that suggests happiness.

Two men may present the same proposition under the same circumstances, and you will accept the proposition from the one, while ignoring the arguments of the other completely. The reason will be that while the one is talking about his proposition, the other is talking through his proposition. The mind of the one goes on the outside of his arguments and his suggestions, while the mind of the other goes through the real inner life of those arguments and suggestions. Therefore, the one is only using suggestion, while the other is also using the power

[p. 166]

back of suggestion; and it is the power back of suggestion that produces results, whenever results are secured. The same idea is illustrated when a person is speaking on a certain subject. If his description deals simply with the shell of that subject, he does not attract attention, but the moment he touches the vital or inner factors of that subject, everybody is interested. The reason is, he has touched the power back of his theme. But we all have ideas or suggestions to present at frequent intervals. Therefore, if we can use the power back of our suggestion at such times we may receive a hearing, but if we cannot, we attract little or no attention.

Thus we understand the value of knowing how to use the power back of suggestion, and we can learn to use this power by training ourselves to get into the real life of every idea and every thought that we may try to think or convey. When we try to live our ideas and thoughts, we will begin to express that interior power, and we shall succeed in living our ideas when we try to feel consciously and constantly the real life and the real truth that is contained in those ideas.

To secure the best results from the power of thought in its various modes of application, we must understand that there is something back of everything that takes form or action in life, and that it is through this something that the actions of mind should move whenever we use thought or suggestion

[p. 167]

in any manner whatever. When we are conscious only of the body of our ideas, those ideas convey no power. It is when we become conscious of the soul of those ideas that we have aroused that something within that alone produces results in the mental world. Any thought or suggestion that conveys simply the external form, invariably falls flat. There is nothing to it. It is entirely empty, and produces no impression whatever. But our ideas and suggestions become alive with the fullness of life and power when we also convey the real life or the real soul that is contained within the body of those thoughts. We have, at such times, entered the depths of mental life. We are beginning to act through undercurrents, and we are beginning to draw upon the immensity of that power that exists in the vast interior realms of our own mental world.

[p. 168] [p. 169]

Say to yourself a hundred times every day and mean it with all your heart: I will become more than I am. I will achieve more and more every day because I know that I can. I will recognize only that which is good in myself; only that which is good in others; only that in all things and places that I know should live and grow. When adversity threatens I will be more determined than ever in my life to prove that I can turn all things to good account. And when those whom I have trusted seem to fail me, I will have a thousand times more faith in the honor and nobleness of man. I will think only of that which has virtue and worth. I will wish only for that which can give freedom and truth. I will expect only that which can add to the welfare of the race. I will live to live more. I will speak to give encouragement, inspiration and joy. I will work to be of service to an ever-increasing number. And in every thought, word and action my ruling desire shall be, to enrich, ennoble and beautify existence for all who come my way.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170] [p. 171]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE WILL

No force in the human system can be properly used unless it is properly directed, and as the will is the only factor in man that has the power to direct or control, a thorough development of the will, as well as a clear understanding of its application under every circumstance, becomes absolutely necessary if we are to use all the forces within us to the very best advantage.

To define the will with absolute exactness is hardly possible, though a clear knowledge as to its general nature and special functions must be secured. In a previous chapter, it was stated that the "I Am" is the ruling principle in man, and it may be added here that when the "I Am" exercises this function of rulership anywhere in the human system, will power is the result; or, it may be stated that the will is that attribute of the "I Am" which is employed whenever there is a definite intention followed by actual action, with a view of initiating, controlling or directing. To state it briefly therefore, will power is the result of the "I Am" either taking initiative

[p. 172]

action or controlling and directing any action after it has been taken.

Among the many functions of the will, the principal ones are as follows: The will to initiate; the will to direct; the will to control; the will to think; the will to imagine; the will to desire; the will to act; the will to originate ideas; the will to give expression to those ideas; the will to will into action any purpose; the will to carry through that purpose; the will to employ the highest and most perfect action of any force or faculty in mind; and the will to push up, so to speak, any talent in the mind to its highest point of efficiency. This last mentioned function has been ignored, but it is by far the most important in the practical life of attainment and achievement.

To illustrate this idea, we will suppose that you have a group of faculties, all of which are well developed, and contain a great deal of ability and power. But how can those faculties be caused to act? The fact is they will not act in the least until the will wills them into action. The will therefore must first be applied, but the act of initiating action among those faculties is not its only function. To illustrate again, we will suppose that your will is very weak. It therefore stands to reason that the original impulse given those faculties will also be weak. Then when we understand that it is necessary for the will to continue to prompt or impel the continued action of any faculty we realize how weak,

[p. 173]

half-hearted and limited such an action will necessarily be when the will is weak. On the other hand, if your will is very strong, the original impulse given to the faculty will be strong and the continued action of that faculty will be much stronger, larger and more efficient. In brief, when a faculty is backed up, so to speak, with a powerful will, it easily doubles its capacity and efficiency; in other words, it is pushed up to a higher state of action. We understand therefore the great importance of having a strong will, though such a will is not only an advantage in promoting a fuller and larger expression of any faculty we may possess, but also in promoting a larger and more perfect expression of any force that may be applied, either in the personality, in character or in mind.

A powerful will, however, is never domineering or forceful. In fact, a domineering will is weak. It may be seemingly strong on the spur of the moment, but it cannot be applied steadily for any length of time. A strong will, however, is deep, continuous and persistent. It calls into action your entire individuality, and as you exercise such a will you feel as if a tremendous power from within yourself had been calmly, though persistently aroused.

When we analyze the human mind, in the majority we find the will to be weak, and in fact, almost absent in a great many. Such people do not have the power to take a single original step. They have no initiative,

[p. 174]

and accordingly drift with the stream. Among others, who are a little higher in the mental scale, we find a will somewhat stronger, but not sufficiently strong to exercise with any degree of efficiency a single one of its functions. Among what can be called "the better class," we invariably find the will to be fairly well developed, and among the great leaders in all the different phases of human life and action, we find the will to be very strong; in fact, there is not a single mental or spiritual giant in history, who did not have a tremendous will, and this was one of his great secrets.

To illustrate further with regard to the last mentioned of the special functions, we will suppose that you have some talent for music. If you should will to exercise that talent to a slight degree only, it is evident that your efficiency along that line would not be marked. On the other hand, if your will was so strong that you could push up, so to speak, your musical faculty to its very highest point of efficiency, you would soon find yourself on the verge of musical genius; in fact, musical genius is absolutely impossible unless you have a strong will, no matter how much musical talent you may possess. Though it must be remembered in this connection that it is not sufficient simply to have a strong will.

The majority do not possess a strong will, and most of those who do have a strong will, have not learned how to apply it so as to secure greater efficiency

[p. 175]

in anything they may do; and here it is important to state that any one who will increase the power of his will, and properly train it for the purpose just indicated, may expect to increase his efficiency anywhere from twenty-five to two hundred per cent. The majority have many times as much ability and working capacity as they are using at the present time; in fact, they apply only a small fraction of what is in them, and the principal reason why they do not apply all that is in them, is that they do not have sufficient power of will to act on this larger scale.

In this connection, we find another condition which is very important, and  with regard to overcoming circumstances. A great many people have good intentions, and they have sufficient will power to originate those intentions, but they have not sufficient will power to carry them out; in other words, they have the will to think, but not the will to act. And here we can use our own imagination in picturing that state of human affairs that would inevitably come into being if all good intentions became actions.

Thousands of people start out right, but they have not the power of will to continue, so that where ten thousand make a good beginning, less than a score finish the race. We find this condition in all walks of life and in all undertakings, and it illustrates most

[p. 176]

eloquently the necessity of a strong will in every mind.

Realizing the importance of a strong will, and knowing that the will is weak in the minds of the great majority, we may well ask what might be the cause of this weakness; and the answer is that there are several marked causes, all of which we shall proceed to consider.

The first among these causes is alcohol. The use of alcohol weakens the will, not only in the individual who partakes of it, but in his children and grandchildren, and many generations following. It has been estimated by those who have studied this subject carefully, that the use of alcohol from generation to generation through the centuries is one of the principal causes for this weakness in the human will that we find to be almost universal. And when we study the psychology of the subject we soon discover the reason why.

Nearly every nation, as far back in history as we can go, has been using alcohol in some form or other, and as its weakening effect upon the will is transmissible from one generation to another, we realize that practically every member of the race has been burdened, more or less, with this adverse inheritance. But in this connection, we must remember that it is not necessary to be disturbed by this dark picture, because no matter what we have inherited, we can overcome it absolutely. However, we do not

[p. 177]

wish to do anything that will be in our own way, or in the way of generations that are to follow. It is therefore necessary that we consider this subject thoroughly, and act upon it accordingly.

The fact that the human race has transmitted a weak will from generation to generation explains why the human family does not have enough power to produce more than an occasional mental giant. Here and there we find in history, men and women who tower above the rest. Their minds are strong, their wills powerful, and their souls invincible; but how different is the condition among the majority. Most of them constitute mere driftwood, and follow blindly the leadership of these mental giants the race has produced. This, however, is not the intention of nature. Nature intends all men and women to be mental and spiritual giants, and does not intend that any one should follow the will of another. But the human race has, in this respect, ignored the intentions of nature.

The reason why the use of alcohol weakens the will, is very easily explained. When you take anything into the system that tends to take control over your desires, feelings or intentions, you permit yourself to be controlled by an outside agency, and accordingly, the will for the time being is laid aside; and the law is, that whenever the will is laid aside by anything whatever, it is weakened; that is, you undermine, so to speak, that element of the will which

[p. 178]

gives it the power to direct and control. When this practice is continued and repeated a number of times, we can readily understand how the power of the will is gradually decreased more and more, until its very foundation has been practically removed.

When you permit an outside agency to control your feelings and emotions at frequent intervals for a prolonged period, your system will soon get into the habit of submitting to the control of this outside agency, and will not respond any longer to any effort that the will may make to regain its original power of control. This being true, we find an explanation for a number of perplexing questions. We learn why great men and women are not more numerous. We learn why the majority are so easily influenced by temptations. We learn why powerful characters are found only here and there, and we also learn why every great nation of past history has fallen.

When we study history, we find that every great nation, after coming to a certain point of supremacy, began to decline, and there are several reasons for this strange termination of national power. But there is only one reason that stands out as the most vital of them all, and as possibly the cause of them all. We refer to the fact that a decrease of great men and women invariably precedes the decline of a nation. To keep any great nation up to a high standard of civilization, there must be enough superior characters to hold the balance of power, but the very

[p. 179]

moment the balance of power gets into the hands of second grade men and women, a decline of that nation is inevitable. Therefore, if any great nation in the present age is to continue to grow in real greatness and real power, we must make a special effort to increase the number of great men and women in every generation. The greater a nation becomes, the more great men and women are required to govern and direct the forces of progress and growth that are at work in that nation. We therefore understand what is required of us in this generation if we want present civilization to advance and rise in the scale.

Another cause of this weakness in the will is found in what may be called psychical excess. And it is unfortunate that so many people have permitted themselves to be placed under psychical influences during the last fifty or seventy-five years; though it is a fact that a great many people have permitted their minds to be controlled or influenced by the psychical or the occult in every age. Another tendency therefore towards weakness in the will has been transmitted from generation to generation down through the ages, and we all have the effect of this misuse of mind also to overcome at the present time; but again let us remember that we have the power to overcome anything that we might have inherited.

Whenever you give up your individuality, or any part of your mind or thought, to some unknown force or influence that you know little or nothing about,

[p. 180]

you are permitting an outside agency to usurp the function of the will. You lay the will aside, you undermine its power to some extent, and thereby weaken those elements in its nature that constitute self-mastery and self-control. That psychical excess has this tendency to a most pronounced degree is well illustrated by the fact that every individual, who is fascinated with psychical experience, invariably lacks in self-control. Such people are usually so sensitive that they are swayed in every direction by every suggestion or influence or environment with which they may come in contact.

But here we may well ask what we are living for--if we are living to give up to the influence of environment, visible or invisible, or if we are living to attain such full control over the powers and talents that are within us, that we can not only control, modify and perfect environment, but also so perfectly control ourselves that we can become all that nature intends that we should become. If we are to rise in the scale, we must attain greater degrees of self-mastery, but we cannot learn to master ourselves so long as we are constantly permitting ourselves to be mastered by something else; and those who indulge in psychical experiences to any degree whatever, are permitting themselves to be mastered by something else. They are therefore losing ground every day. Their characters are becoming weaker, their standards of morality and rightness becoming

[p. 181]

more and more lax, as we all have discovered, and their power to apply those faculties and forces in their natures through which they may accomplish more and achieve more, are constantly decreasing, both in working capacity and in efficiency.

If man wants to live his own life as it should be lived; if he wants to master circumstances and determine his own destiny, he must have the power to say under all sorts of conditions what he is going to think and what he is going to do; but he cannot exercise this power unless his own will is permitted to have absolute control over every thought, effort and desire in his life.

Emotional excess is another cause that weakens the will, and by emotional excess we mean the act of giving way to uncontrolled feelings of any kind. To give way to anger, hatred, passion, excitability, intensity, sensitiveness, grief, discouragement, despair, or any other uncontrolled feeling, is to weaken the will. The reason is that you cannot control yourself through your will when you permit yourself to be controlled by your feelings; and any act that rules out the will, weakens the will.

Whenever you permit yourself to become angry, you weaken the will. Whenever you permit yourself to become offended or hurt you weaken your will. Whenever you permit yourself to become  or discouraged, you weaken your will. Whenever you give way to grief, mental intensity

[p. 182]

or excitability, you weaken your will. You permit some artificial mental state to take possession of your mind, and your will at the time is put aside. We therefore should avoid absolutely all emotional excess. We must not permit any feeling whatever to take possession of us, or permit ourselves to be influenced in any form or manner by anything that may enter the mind uncontrolled through the emotions; but this does not mean that we should ignore emotion. Emotion is one of the most valuable factors in human life, and should be used and enjoyed under every normal circumstance, but should never become a ruling factor in mind, thought or feeling.

You may look at a beautiful picture, and lose yourself, so to speak, in its charms. You may listen to exceptional music, and be carried away, or be thrilled through and through by the joy of its harmony; or you may witness some scene in nature that causes your soul to take wings and soar to empyrean heights. You may permit yourself to enjoy any or all of these ecstasies at any time, provided you have conscious control over every movement of your emotions at the time.

Whenever you feel the touch of some sublime emotion, try to direct the force of that emotion, into a finer and a higher state of expression; thus you will not be controlled by it, but will exercise control over it, and accordingly will enjoy the pleasure of that emotion many times as much. It is a well-known

[p. 183]

fact that whenever we control any feeling, whether it be physical or mental or spiritual, and try to turn it into a larger sphere of expression, we enjoy far more the pleasure that naturally comes through the exercise of that feeling. To control our emotions therefore is to lose nothing and gain much.

Another cause of weakness in the will is what might be called mental dependence. To depend upon anybody or anything outside of yourself, is to weaken the will, for the simple reason that you let the will of some one else rule your actions, while your own will remains dormant. Nothing, however, that remains dormant can grow or develop. On the other hand, it will continue to become weaker and weaker, like an unused muscle, until it has no strength whatever. We therefore understand why those multitudes of people, who have followed blindly the will and leadership of others, not only in religion but in all other things, have practically no will power at all. And here we wish to state that it is positively wrong for any individual or any group of individuals to follow any one man or any one woman or any group of men or women under any circumstances whatever. We are here in this life to become something. We are here to make the best use of what we possess in mind, character and personality; but we cannot cause any element, faculty or power within us to express itself to any extent so long as we are mere dependent weaklings.

[p. 184]

In everything, depend upon yourself, but work in harmony with all things. Do not depend even upon the Infinite, but learn to work and live in harmony with the Infinite. The highest teachings of the Christ reveal most clearly the principle that no soul was created to be a mere helpless instrument in the hands of supreme power, but that every soul should act and live in perfect oneness with that power. And the promise is that we all are not only to do the things that Christ did, but even greater things. Man is no credit to supreme creative power if he remains in the puppet stage, but he is a credit to that power if he becomes a giant in character, mind and soul. In our religious worship we have given unbounded praise to God for his wonderful power in creating man, and the very next moment we have announced the hymn, "Oh To Be Nothing." The absurdity of it all is too evident to need comment, but when we understand that character and manhood, as well as practical efficiency in life, are the products of strength and not of weakness, we must come to the conclusion that every system of thought in the present age, be it religious, moral, ethical or philosophical, needs complete reconstruction.

We are here to become great men and women, and with that purpose in view, we must eliminate everything in our religion and philosophy that tends to make the human mind a dependent weakling. If you would serve God and be truly religious, do not kneel

[p. 185]

before God, but learn to walk with God, and do something tangible every day to increase the happiness of mankind. This is religion that is worth while, and it is such religion alone that can please the Infinite.

Another cause which is too large and diversified to outline in detail, is that of intemperance; that is, immoderation in anything in life. To indulge excessively any desire or appetite, be it physical or mental, is to weaken the will. Partake only of that which is necessary and good, and observe moderation. Control yourself under all circumstances, and resolve never to go too far in anything, because too much of the good may be more of an evil than not enough of it.

The effects of weakness in the will are numerous, but there are two in particular that should receive marked attention. The first is that when the will is weak, the human system becomes incapable of resisting temptations, and therefore moral weakness or a complete moral downfall is inevitable. Character in the largest sense of the term is impossible without a strong will, and it is impossible to accomplish anything that is of permanent value without character.

The second is that weakness in the will inevitably implies weak mental actions; that is, no matter how much ability you may possess, if your will is weak, you will apply only a fraction of that ability; and

[p. 186]

there are thousands of able men and women who are failures in life simply because they have not the will to apply all their ability. If they would simply increase the power of their will, and properly train that will, they would immediately pass from failure to success, and, in many instances, remarkable success. It is the power of the strong will alone that can give full expression to every talent or faculty you may possess, and it is only such a power that can push up the actions of every faculty to a point of high efficiency.

In learning to develop the will and to use the will, realize what the will is for. Understand clearly what its functions actually are, and then use it in all of those functions. Avoid anything and everything that tends to weaken the will, and practice every method known that can strengthen the will. Do not give in to any feeling or desire until you succeed in directing that feeling or desire as you like. Feel only the way you want to feel, and then feel with all the feeling that is in you. Whatever comes up in your system, take hold of it with your will and direct it so as to produce even greater results than were at first indicated. Use the will consciously as frequently as possible in pushing up your faculties to the highest point of efficiency; that is, when you are applying those faculties that you employ in your work, try to will them into stronger and larger actions. This is a most valuable practice, and if applied every day

[p. 187]

will, in the course of a reasonable time, not only increase the capacity and ability of those faculties, but will also increase decidedly the power of the will.

Whenever you will to do anything, will it with all there is in you. If no other practice than this were taken, the power of the will would be doubled in a month. Depend upon the power that is in you for everything, and determine to secure the results you desire through the larger expression of that power. Never give in to anything that you do not want. When a certain desire comes up that you do not care to entertain, turn your attention at once upon some favorable desire, and give all the power of your will to that new desire. This is very important, as the average person wastes more than half of his energy entertaining desires that are of no value, and that he does not intend to carry out. Whenever any feeling comes up in the system ask yourself if you want it. If you do not, turn your attention in another direction; but if you do want it, take hold of it with your will and direct it towards the highest states of mind that you can form at the time. In brief, every action that enters the system, whether it comes through thought, feeling, desire or imagination, should be redirected by the power of the will and turned into higher and greater actions.

[p. 188]

Whenever you think, make it a practice to think with your whole mind. Make your thinking wholehearted instead of half-hearted. Whenever you act, act with all there is in you. Make every action firm, strong, positive and determined; in other words, put your whole soul into everything that you feel, think or do. In this way, you turn on, so to speak, the full current of the will, and whenever the will is used to its full capacity, it will grow and develop.

Try to deepen every action of mind and thought; that is, do not think simply on the surface, but also think subconsciously. Think and act with your deeper mental life. You thereby give the power of the will a deeper field of action, and it is established in the larger life of your individuality instead of in the surface thought of your objective mind. The difference between a superficial will and a deeply established will is readily found in everyday experience. When you will to do anything and your intentions are easily thwarted by the suggestion of some one else, your will is on the surface. But when your intentions are so deeply rooted in the subconsciousness of your mind that nothing can thwart those intentions, your will has gained that great depth which you desire.

The more easily you are disturbed, the weaker your will, while the stronger the will, the more difficult it is for anything to disturb your mind. When the will is strong, you live and exercise self-control

[p. 189]

in a deeper or interior mental world, and you look out upon the confusions of the outer world without being affected in the least by what takes place in the external.

Whenever you exercise the will, try to place the action of that will as deeply in the world of your interior mental feeling as you possibly can; that is, do not originate will-action on the surface, but in the depth of your own supreme individuality. Try to feel that it is the "I Am" that is exercising the power of the will, and then remember that the "I Am" lives constantly upon the supreme heights of absolute self-mastery. With this inspiring thought constantly in mind, you will carry the throne of the will, so to speak, farther and farther back into the interior realms of your greater mental world, higher and higher up into the ruling power of the supreme principle in mind. The result will be that you will steadily increase the power of your will, and appropriate more and more the conscious control of that principle in your greater nature through which all the forces in your possession may be governed and directed.

[p. 190] [p. 191]

He who would become great must live a great life.

Happiness adds life, power and worth to all your talents and powers. It is most important, therefore, that every moment should be full of joy.

However much you may do, always remember you have the ability to do more. No one has as yet applied all the ability in his possession. But all of us should learn to apply a greater measure every year.

While you are waiting for an opportunity to improve your time, improve yourself.

The man who never weakens when things are against him, will grow stronger and stronger until he will have the power to cause all things to be for him.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192] [p. 193]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

THE BUILDING OF A GREAT MIND

A great mind does not come from ancestors, but from the life, the thought and the actions of the individual himself; and such a mind can be constructed by any one who understands the art of mind building, and who faithfully applies his art.

You may have a small mind today, and your ancestors for many generations back may have been insignificant in mental power; nevertheless, you may become even exceptional in mental capacity and brilliancy if you proceed to build your mind according to the principles of exact science; and those principles any one can apply.

There are two obstacles, however, that must be removed before this building process can begin, and the first one of these is the current belief in heredity. That we inherit things is true, but the belief that we cannot become any larger or any better than our inheritance is not true. As long as a man believes that greatness is not possible to him because there were no great minds among his ancestors, he is holding himself down, and cannot become any more than

[p. 194]

he subconsciously thinks he can; while on the other hand, the man who expects to become much because he had remarkable grandfathers is liable to be disappointed because he depends too much upon his illustrious forefathers and not enough upon himself. Blood will tell when combined with ambition, energy and enterprise, but the very best of blood will prove worthless in the life of him who expects ancestral greatness to carry him through. When we have received good things we must turn them to good account or nothing is gained. Our success will not come from the acts of our forefathers, but can come alone from what we are doing now.

Those who have inherited rich blood can use that richness in building greatness in themselves, but those who have not the privilege of such inheritance need not be discouraged. They can create their own rich blood and make it as rich as they like. Whether your forefathers were great or small matters not. Do not think of that subject, but live in the conviction that you may become what you wish to become by using well the good you have received, and by creating those essentials that you did not receive. If you have inherited undesirable traits, remember that evil is but valuable power misdirected. Learn to properly direct all your forces and your undesirable traits will be transformed into elements of growth, progress and advancement.

[p. 195]

We all have met men and women with remarkable talents, who persisted in thinking that they would never amount to anything because there was no genius among their ancestors. But if there had been a genius in the family some time during past generations, the question would be where that genius actually received his genius. If we all have to get greatness from ancestors, where did the first great ancestor get his greatness? There must be a beginning somewhere to every individual attainment, and that beginning might just as well be made by us now. What others could originate in their time, we can originate in our time.

The belief that we must inherit greatness from some one in order to attain greatness is without any scientific foundation whatever, and yet there are thousands of most promising minds that remain small simply because they entertain this belief.

To believe that heredity is against you and that you therefore will not accomplish anything worth while, is to make your work a wearing process instead of a building process. In consequence, you will not advance, and you will constantly remain in the rear; but the moment you realize that it is in your power to become as much as you may desire, your work and study will begin to promote your own growth and advancement. When you live, think and act in the belief that you can become much, whatever you do will cause you to become more. Thus all

[p. 196]

your actions will develop power and ability, and living itself will become a building process.

That man may become great regardless of the fact that there were no great minds among his ancestors many thinkers will admit, provided there are indications of exceptional ability in the man himself, but they entertain no hope if they see nothing in the man himself. And here we have the second obstacle to the building of a great mind. This obstacle, however, must be removed in every mind that aims to rise above the ordinary, because the belief that the average person has nothing in him is the cause of fully three-fourths of the mental inferiority we find in the world. But the new psychology has conclusively demonstrated the fact that the man who has nothing in him does not exist. All minds have the same possibilities, though most of those possibilities may be dormant in the minds of the majority.

The difference between a great mind and a small mind is simply this, that in the former the greater possibilities have come forth into objective action, while in the latter those possibilities are still in subjective inaction. When we say that a man has nothing in him we are contradicting the very principle of existence, because to be a man, a man must have just as much in him as any other man. What is in him may not be in action, and his mentality may appear to be small, but the possibilities of greatness

[p. 197]

are there. There is a genius somewhere in his mind, because there is a genius in every mind, though in most minds that genius may as yet be asleep.

When every child is taught the great truth that it has unlimited possibilities within its own subconscious mind, and that it can, through the scientific development of those possibilities, become practically what it may desire to become, we shall have laid the foundation for the greatest race of people that the ages have known. But we need not wait for future generations to demonstrate the possibilities of this truth. Every mind that begins to apply the principle of this truth now may begin to enlarge his mind now, and he may continue this process of enlargement indefinitely.

When we have removed the two obstacles mentioned, and have established ourselves firmly in the conviction that we have unlimited possibilities within us, more than sufficient to become whatever we may desire, we are ready to proceed with the building of a great mind.

To promote the building of a great mind, the two prime essentials, scope and brilliancy, must be constantly kept in the foreground of consciousness. The mind that is not brilliant is of little value even though its scope may be very large. Likewise, the mind that is narrow or circumscribed is extremely limited, however brilliant it may be. A great mind is great both in capacity and ability. It can see

[p. 198]

practically everything and see through practically everything. To see everything is to have remarkable scope. To see through everything is to have exceptional brilliancy.

To give scope to the mind, every action of mind must be trained to move toward that which is greater than all persons or things. Those feelings or desires that cause the mind to become absorbed in some one thing or group of things, will limit the mental scope. Therefore in love, sympathy and purpose the sphere of action must be universal. When we live only with that love that centers attention upon a limited number of persons, one of the greatest actions of mind will work in a limited world. When our sympathies go only to a chosen few, the same thing occurs, and when our purpose in life has a personified goal, we keep the mind within the limitations of that personification.

To give universality to our feelings and actions, may require considerable training of the mental tendencies, but it is absolutely necessary if we will develop a great mind. It is only those mental forces that move towards the verge of the limitless in every direction that can cause the mind to transcend limitations; therefore, all the forces of the mind should be given this transcending tendency.

To develop mental scope, consciousness must move in every direction, and it must move along right lines, so that no obstacle may be met during that continuous

[p. 199]

expansive process. Such obstacles, however, are always produced by limitations of thought. Therefore, they may be avoided when all the actions of mind are placed upon a universal scale. In the mental actions of love, we find many forces, all of which are true in their own places, but all of these forces must be exercised universally; that is, they must act upon a scale that is without bounds in the field of your own consciousness. The mind must go in every direction as far as it possibly can go in that direction, and must act in the conviction that wherever it may go it can go farther still. The understanding must know that there is no obstacle where the mind may seem to cease in its onward action, and that the mind is forever growing, thereby going as far each day as that day's development requires.

When this idea is applied to a personal love between man and woman, the feeling of love must be based upon the principle that those two souls have the power to love each other more and more indefinitely; that the larger the love becomes the more lovable will the objects of that love become, and that the consciousness of perfect unity in pure affection increases constantly as the two souls become more and more individualized in their own sublime nature. It is possible to make conjugal love universal and continuous between one man and one woman when the love of each is directed toward the sublime nature of the other. Through this law, each individual

[p. 200]

develops through the consciousness of the largeness of the real nature of the other, and the more the two love each other in this universal sense, the more they will see in each other to love. In addition, the minds of both will constantly enlarge in scope, because when love acts upon this larger scale, the whole mind will act upon this larger scale, as there is no stronger power in mind than love.

The love between parent and child can, in like manner, be made universal. In this attitude, the parent will love all of the child, not only the visible person, but the undreamed-of wonders that are waiting in that child-mind for expression. The child already loves the parent in this larger sense, and this is one reason why the child-mind lives so much nearer to the limitless, the universal, the ideal and the beautiful. And when the parent will do likewise, there will arise between the two a love that sees more and more to love the more love loves in this larger, sublime sense.

The idea is not only to love the tangible, but also that other something that transcends the tangible--that something that appears to the soul in visions, and predicts wonders yet to be. That such a love will expand and enlarge the mind anyone can understand, because practically all the elements of the mind will tend to follow the actions of the love nature, when that nature is exceptionally strong. But we must not imagine that we shall, through this

[p. 201]

method, love the person less. The fact is, we shall love the person infinitely more, because we shall discern more and more clearly that the person is the visible side of that something in human life that we can only describe as the soul beautiful--that something that alone can satisfy the secret longings of the heart.

The love of everything can, through the same law, become universal. Even friendship, which is always supposed to be confined to a small world, may become universal and limitless in the same way; and when it does, you will see more to admire in your friend every day. You will both have entered the boundless in your admiration for each other, and having entered the boundless, you will daily manifest new things from the boundless, and thus become delightfully surprised at each other constantly. The same may be employed in making sympathy universal; that is, never sympathize with the lesser, but always sympathize with the greater. The lesser is combined in the greater, and by sympathizing with the greater, the mind becomes greater.

In the fields of motives, objects, aims and purposes, we find that nearly every mental action is occupying a limited scope, and is acting in such a manner that its own limitations are being perpetuated. This tendency, however, must be removed if a greater mind is to be constructed, because every action of the mind must aim to change itself into a

[p. 202]

larger action. To cause every aim or purpose to become universal in its action, the mind must transcend shape, form, space and distance in its consciousness of everything that it may undertake to do. When we confine our thought to so far or so much, we place the mind in a state of limitations, but when we promote every object with a desire to go as far as the largest conception of the present may require, and proceed to attain as much as present capacity can possibly appropriate, we are turning all purposes and aims out upon the boundless sea of attainment. And we shall not only accomplish all that is possible in our present state of development, but we will at the same time constantly enlarge the scope of the mind.

It is absolutely necessary to have a fixed goal whatever our purpose in life may be, but we must never give special shape or size to that goal. We must think of our goal as being too large to be measured, even in the imagination. When we have a goal in mind that is only so and so large, all the creative energies of the mind will limit themselves accordingly. They will create only so and so much, regardless of the fact that they may be able to create many times as much. But when we think of our goal as being too large to be measured, the creative energies will expand to full capacity, and will proceed to work for the largest attainment possible. They will act constantly on the verge of the limitless,

[p. 203]

and will cause the mind to outdo itself every day.

In the field of desire, the same law should be applied, and applied constantly, as there are no actions in the mind that exercise a greater influence over the destiny of man than that of desire. When desire is low or perverted, everything goes down or goes wrong, but when desire changes for the better, practically everything else in the human system changes to correspond. To train desire to become universal in action, every individual desire should be changed so as to act only for the promotion of growth. Those desires which when fulfilled, do not make for the enlargement of life, are detrimental. The powers of all such desires therefore must be changed in their course. Your object is to become more and achieve more, and to constantly promote that object, development and growth must be perpetual throughout your system. For this reason, every action must have growth for its purpose, and as every action is the result of some desire, no desire must be permitted that is not conducive to growth. It is not necessary, however, to remove a single desire from the human system to bring about this change, because every desire can be trained to promote the building of a greater life.

When every desire is caused to move towards the larger and the greater through the mind's irresistible desire for the larger and the greater, all the

[p. 204]

creative forces of the mind will move towards the same goal, and will constantly build a greater mind. The principle is this, that when all the actions of mind are trained to move towards the larger, they will perpetually enlarge. The first essential to the building of a great mind will thereby be promoted.

To promote the second essential, mental brilliancy, the actions of mind must be made as high and as fine as possible; that is, the vibrations of the mental life must be in the highest scale attainable. To see through everything, the mind will require the very finest rays of mental light, and as this mental light is produced by the vibrations of the actions of mind, these actions should be as high in the scale as we can possibly reach at every stage of our mental ability. The light of intelligence is created by the mind itself, and the more brilliant this light becomes, the greater will become the powers of intelligence, discernment, insight, understanding, ability, talent and genius. And the power of mind to create a more brilliant mind increases as the mind places itself more and more in the consciousness of the absolute light of universal intelligence.

To cause the mind to become more brilliant, all the tendencies of mind should fix their attention upon the highest mental conception of mental brilliancy. Every expression of the mind should be animated with a refining tendency. Every force of the mind should rise towards the absoluteness of mental light.

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] Those states of mind that tend to magnify the inferior must be eliminated, and this is accomplished by thinking only of the superior that is possible in all things. All mental actions that are critical, depressing or depreciative must be replaced by their constructive opposites, as every action of the mind must concentrate its attention upon the largest and the best in all fields of consciousness. The mind must be kept high in every respect, because the higher in the mental scale the mind functions, the more brilliant will become the mental light.

To increase the rapidity of the vibrations in these higher mental states, creative energy must be supplied in abundance, and to comply with this requirement, all that is necessary is to retain in the human system all the energy that is already created. The human system creates and generates an enormous amount of creative energy every day. Therefore, when all this energy is retained and transmuted into finer mental elements, the mind will be abundantly supplied with those finer energies that can increase both the power and the brilliancy of thought and mind. The mind that is animated with a strong desire to constantly refine itself, and that is thoroughly charged with creative energy, will always be brilliant, and will become more and more brilliant as the laws given above are faithfully and thoroughly applied.

[p. 206] [p. 207]

Remove the sting; remove the whine; remove the sigh. They are your enemies. They are never conducive to happiness; and we all live to gain happiness, to give happiness. From every word remove the sting. Speak kindly. To speak kindly and gently to everybody is the mark of a great soul. And it is your privilege to be a great soul. From the tone of your voice remove the whine. Speak with joy. Never complain. The more you complain, the smaller you become, and the fewer will be your friends and opportunities. Speak tenderly, speak sweetly, speak with love. From all the outpourings of your heart, remove the sigh. Be happy and contented always. Let your spirit sing, let your heart dance, let your soul declare the glory of existence, for truly life is beautiful. Every sigh is a burden, a self-inflicted burden. Every whine is a maker of trouble, a forerunner of failure. Every sting is a destroyer of happiness, a dispenser of bitterness. To live in the world of sighs is to be blind to everything that is rich and beautiful. The more we sigh, the less we live, for every sigh leads to weakness, defeat and death. Remove the sting, remove the whine, remove the sigh. They are not your friends. There is better company waiting for you.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 208] [p. 209]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

HOW CHARACTER DETERMINES CONSTRUCTIVE ACTION

All the elements of life are good in themselves, and should produce good results when in action; that is, when the action is properly directed; but when any action is misdirected, evil follows, and this is the only cause of the ills of human existence.

Everything that is wrong in the world has been produced by the perversion and the misuse of the good. Therefore, to eliminate wrong, man must learn to make the proper use of those things that exist in his sphere of action. The misuse of things comes either from ignorance or lack of character, or both. That person who does not understand the elements and the forces of the world in which he lives will make many mistakes, and he will make the wrong use of nearly everything unless he is guided by instructions of those who understand. The leadership of greater minds is therefore necessary to the welfare of the race, but this leadership is not sufficient. Guidance from great minds will help to a limited degree so long as the actions of the individual are simple, but when greater development is

[p. 210]

sought, with its more complex actions, the individual himself must learn to master the laws of life. He can no longer depend upon others.

Therefore, though the leadership of greater minds be necessary to the welfare of the race, it is also necessary for that leadership to be used, not for keeping the multitude in a state of simple-mindedness and dependence, but for promoting the intelligence of each individual until external guidance is needed no more. The true purpose of the strong is to promote greater strength in the weak, and not to keep the weak in that state where they are at the mercy of the strong. Our united purpose should be to develop more great men and women, and to do everything possible to lead the many from dependence to independence.

Every state of individual attainment is preceded by a childhood period, but this period should not be unnecessarily prolonged, nor will it be, when every strong mind seeks to develop strength in the weak instead of using the weakness of the weak for his own gain. Those who understand the laws of life may inform the ignorant what to do and what not to do, and may thereby prevent most of the mistakes that the ignorant would otherwise make. But this guidance will not prevent all the mistakes, as experience demonstrates, because it requires a certain amount of understanding to even properly apply the advice of another. Those who do not have

[p. 211]

the understanding will therefore misuse the elements of life at every turn, no matter how well they are guided by wiser persons, while those who do have this understanding will invariably begin to do things without consulting their so-called superiors. It is therefore evident that more understanding for every- body is the remedy, as far as this side of the subject is concerned, but there is also another side.

A great many people go wrong because they do not know any better. To them, a better understanding of life is the path to emancipation. They will be made free when they know the truth, but the majority of those who go wrong do know better. Then why do they go wrong. The cause is lack of character. When you fail to do what you want to do, your character is weak. The same is true when you preach one thing and practice another. When you fail to be as perfect, as good or as ideal as you wish to be, or fail to accomplish what you think that you can accomplish, your character is at fault. It is the character that directs the action of the mind. It is the lack of character, or a weak character that produces misdirections; and when you fail to accomplish what you feel you can accomplish, something is being misdirected.

What you feel that you can do that you have the power to do. Therefore, when you fail to do it, some of the powers of your being are being misdirected. To be influenced to do what you would

[p. 212]

not do if you were normal, means that your character is weak, and to be affected by surroundings, events, circumstances and conditions against your will, indicates the same deficiency. A strong character is never influenced against his will. He is never disturbed by anything, never becomes upset, offended or depressed. No one can insult him because he is above small states of mind, and is stronger than those things that may tend to produce small states of mind. All mental tendencies that are antagonistic, critical or resisting indicate a deficiency in character. The desire to criticise becomes less and less as the character is developed. It is the mark of a fine character never to be critical and to mention but rarely the faults of others. A strong character does not resist evil, but uses his strength in building the good. He knows that when the light is made strong, the darkness will disappear of itself. A strong character has no fear, never worries and never becomes discouraged. If you are in the hands of worry, your character needs development. The same is true if you have a tendency to submit to fate, give in to adversity, give up in the midst of difficulties, or surrender to failure or wrong. It may be stated, without any exceptions or modifications whatever, that the more temper, the less character. Anger is always a misdirection of energy, but it is the function of character to properly direct all energies. Therefore,

[p. 213]

there can be no anger when the character is thoroughly developed.

The mind that changes easily, that is readily carried away by every new attraction that may appear, and that does not retain a well-balanced attitude on any subject lacks character. A strong character changes gradually, orderly, and only as each step is thoroughly analyzed and found to be a real step forward. The more individuality, the more character, and the more one is oneself, the stronger the character. Practice being yourself, your very best self, and your very largest self, and your character will be developed. The more one is conscious of flaws and defects, the weaker the character, and the reason is because nearly everything is being misdirected when the character is weak. The strong character is conscious only of the right because such a character is right, and is causing everything in its sphere of action to do right.

To the average person, character is not important as far as this life is concerned; and as most theological systems have declared that it was repentance and not character that would insure human welfare in the world to come, the development of character has naturally been neglected. But when we realize that it is character that determines whether our actions in daily life are to go right or wrong and that every mistake is due to a lack of character, we shall feel that the subject requires attention.

[p. 214]

It is the power of character that directs everything that is done in the human system or by the human system. Character is the channel through which all expressions must pass. It is character that gives human life its tone, its color and its quality, and it is character that determines whether our talents and faculties are to be their best or not.

The man who has a well-developed character is not simply good. He is good for something, because he has the power to turn all his energies to good account. A strong character not only turns all the elements and energies of life to good account, but has the power to hold the mind in the right attitude during the most trying moments of life, so that he will not make mistakes nor fall a victim to insidious temptation. A strong character will keep all the faculties and forces of life moving in the right direction, no matter what obstacles we may meet in the way. We shall turn neither to the right nor to the left, but will continue to move directly towards the goal we have in view, and will reach that goal without fail.

Thousands of people resolve every year to press on to higher attainments and greater achievements. They begin very well, but ere long they are turned off the track. They are misled or switched off by counter attractions. They have not the character to keep right on until they have accomplished what they originally set out to do. True, it is sometimes

[p. 215]

wisdom to change one's plans, but it is only lack of character to change one's plans without reason, simply because there is a change of circumstance. To change with every circumstance is to drift with the stream of circumstance, and he who drifts can only live the life of a log. He will be a victim of every external change that he may meet. He will control little or nothing, and he will accomplish little or nothing.

We all can develop the power to control circumstances or rather to cause all circumstances to work with us and for us in the promotion of the purpose we have in view; and this power is character. Never permit circumstances to change your plans, but give so much character to your plans that they will change circumstances. Give so much character to the current of your work that all things will be drawn into that current, and that which at first was but a tiny rivulet, will thus be swelled into a mighty, majestic stream.

When the various forces of the system are properly directed and properly employed, the development of the entire mentality will be promoted; and this means greatness. The power that directs the forces of the system is character, and it is character that causes the mind to use those forces in the best and most constructive manner. There must be character before there can be true greatness, because any deficiency in character causes energy to be wasted

[p. 216]

and misdirected. It is therefore evident that the almost universal neglect in the development of character is one of the chief reasons why great men and women are not as numerous as we should wish them to be. Many may argue, however, that great minds do not always have good characters, and also that some of our best characters fail to manifest exceptional ability. But we must remember that there is a vast difference between that phase of character that simply tries to follow the moral law, and real character--the character that actually is justice, virtue and truth. Then we must also remember that character does not mean simply obedience to a certain group of laws, but the power to use properly all the laws of life. That person who uses mental laws properly, but fails to comply with moral laws does not possess a complete character. Nevertheless, the character of this person is just as good as that of the person who follows moral laws while constantly violating mental laws.

In the study of character, it is very important to know that the violation of mental laws is just as detrimental as the violation of moral laws, though we have been in the habit of condemning the latter and excusing the former. That person who uses properly the mental laws, will to a degree promote the development of the mind even though he may neglect the moral laws; and this accounts for the fact that a number of minds have attained a fair

[p. 217]

degree of greatness in spite of their moral weakness. But it is a fact of extreme importance, that those minds who attain greatness in spite of their moral weakness could become two or three times as great if they had also developed moral strength. That person who complies with the mental laws but who violates the moral laws, wastes fully one-half of the energies of his mind, and sometimes more. His attainment and achievement will, therefore, be less than one-half of what they might be if he had moral character as well as mental character.

The same is true, however, of that person who complies with the moral laws, but who violates the mental laws; fully one-half of his energy is wasted and misdirected. This explains why the so-called good characters are not any more brilliant than the rest, for though they may be morally good, they are not always mentally good; that is, they do not use their minds according to the laws of mind, and therefore cannot rise above the level of the ordinary.

The true character tries to turn all the energies of the system into the best and most constructive channels, and it is the mark of a real character when all the various parts of the being of man are working together harmoniously for the building of greatness in mind and soul. When the character is weak, there is more or less conflict among the mental actions. Certain actions have a tendency to work for one thing, while other actions are tending to produce

[p. 218]

the very opposite. The same is true of the desires. A character that lacks development will desire one thing today, and something else tomorrow. Plans will change constantly, and little or nothing will be accomplished. In the strong character, however, all actions work in harmony and all actions are constructive. And this is natural because it is the one supreme function of character to make all actions in the human system constructive--to make every force in the human life a building force.

[p. 219]

Be good and kind to everybody and the world will be kind to you. There may be occasional exceptions to this rule, but when they come pass them by and they will not come again.

Ideals need the best of care. Weeds can grow without attention, but not so with the roses.

Not all minds are pure that think they are. Many of them are simply dwarfed.

It does not pay to lose faith in anybody. It is beater to have faith in everybody and be deceived occasionally than to mistrust everybody and be deceived almost constantly.

When you meet a person who does not look well, call his attention to the sunny side of things, and aim to say something that will give him new interest and new life. You will thereby nip in the bud many a threatening evil, and carry healing with you wherever you go.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 220] [p. 221]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

THE ART OF BUILDING CHARACTER

Character is developed by training all the forces and elements of life to act constructively in those spheres for which they were created, and to express themselves in those actions only that promote the original purpose of the being of man.

Every part of the human system has a purpose of its own--a purpose that it was created to fulfill. When those elements that belong to each part express themselves in such a way that the purpose of that part is constantly promoted, all actions are right; and it is character that causes those actions to be right. Character is therefore indispensable, no matter what one's object in life may be. Character is the proper direction of all things, and the proper use of all things in the human system. And the proper use of anything is that use that promotes the purpose for which that particular thing was created.

To develop character it is therefore necessary to know what life is for, to know what actions promote the purpose of that life, and to know what actions

[p. 222]

retard that purpose. When the secret of right action is discovered, and every part of man is steadily trained in the expression of right action, character may be developed. But whatever is done, character must be applied in its fullest capacity. It is only through this full use, right use and constant use that anything may be perpetuated or developed.

Character develops through a constant effort to cause every action in the human system to be a right action; that is, a constructive action, or an action that promotes the purpose of that part of the system in which the action takes place. This is natural because since character is the power of right action, every effort to extend the scope of right action will increase the power of character. To have character is to have the power to promote what you know to be the purpose of life, and to be able to do the right when you know the right. To have character is to know the right, and to be so well established in the doing of the right that nothing in the world can turn you into the wrong.

The first essential is therefore to know the right; to be able to select the right; to have that understanding that can instinctively choose the proper course of action, and that knows how each force and element of life is to be directed so that the original purpose of human life will be fulfilled. The understanding of the laws of life will give this first essential in an intellectual sense, and this is necessary in

[p. 223]

the beginning; but when character develops, one inwardly knows what is right without stopping to reason about it. The development of character enables one to feel what is right and what course to pursue regardless of exterior conditions or intellectual evidence. The intellect discerns that the right is that which promotes growth and development; character inwardly feels that the right leads to greater things and to better things, and that the wrong leads invariably to the inferior and the lesser.

The presence of character produces a consciousness of growth throughout the system; and the stronger the character, the more keenly one can feel that everything is being reconstructed, refined, perfected and developed into something superior. This is but natural because when the character is strong, everything in the system is expressed in right action, and the right action of anything causes the steady development of that particular thing.

To distinguish between the right and the wrong becomes simplicity itself when one knows that the right promotes growth, while the wrong retards growth. Continuous advancement is the purpose of life; therefore, to live the right life is to live that life that promotes progress and growth, development and advancement in everything that pertains to life. For this reason, that action that promotes growth is in harmony with life itself, and must consequently be right. But that action that retards growth is at variance

[p. 224]

with life; therefore it is wrong; and wrong for that reason alone. Everything that promotes human advancement is right. Everything that interferes with human advancement is wrong. Here we have the basis of a system of ethics that is thoroughly complete, and so simple to live that no one need err in the least.

An intellectual understanding of the laws of life will enable any one to know what action promotes growth and what action retards growth, but as character develops, one can feel the difference between right and wrong action in his own system, because the consciousness of right becomes so keen that anything that is not right is discerned at once. It is therefore evident that the power to distinguish the right from the wrong in every instance will come only through the development of character. No matter how brilliant one may be intellectually, he cannot truly know the right until he has a strong character. The external understanding of the right can be misled, but the consciousness of the right is never mistaken; and this consciousness develops only as character develops.

The second essential is to create a subconscious desire for the right--a desire so deep and so strong that nothing can tempt the mind to enter into the wrong. When this desire is developed, one feels a natural preference for the right; to prefer the right, under all circumstances becomes second nature, while

[p. 225]

every desire for the wrong will disappear completely. When every atom in one's being begins to desire the right, the entire system will establish itself in the right attitude, and right action will become the normal action in every force, function and faculty. In addition, this same desire will produce mental tendencies that contain the power of right action, which always means constructive action.

It is a well known fact that all the forces and energies of the system, and all the movements of mind follow mental tendencies; therefore, when the mental tendencies are right actions, everything that takes place in the system will produce right action; and everything will be properly directed.

The desire for the right may be developed by constantly thinking about the right with deep feeling. Every thought that has depth, therefore, will impress itself upon the subconscious, and when that thought is inspired with a strong desire for the right, the conscious impression will convey the right to the subconscious. Every impression that enters the subconscious will cause the subconscious to bring forth a harvest of that which the impression conveyed; therefore, when the right is constantly held in mind with deep feeling, the right thought will soon become the strongest in the mind; and our desires are the results of our strongest thoughts.

You always desire that which is indicated in your strongest thought. You can therefore change those

[p. 226]

desires completely by thinking with deep feeling about that which you want to desire. No desire should be destroyed. All desires should be transmuted into the desire for the right, and when you subconsciously desire the right, every action in your being will be a right action.

The two fundamental essentials, therefore, to the development of character are to know the right and to desire the right, but the term "right" as employed here must not be confounded with that conception of right which includes only a few of the moral laws. To be right, according to the viewpoint of completeness, is to be in harmony with all the principles of life, and all the laws of the present sphere of human existence. To know the right, it is necessary not simply to memorize rules that other minds have formulated, but to inwardly discern what life is for, and what mode of thought and action is conducive to the realization of that which is in life. To desire the right, according to this view of the right, the mind must actually feel the very soul of right action, and must be in such perfect touch with the universal movement of right action, that all lesser and imperfect desires are completely swallowed up in the one desire--the desire that desires all that is in life, and all that is in perfect harmony with that which is in life.

It is the truth, that when we come into perfect touch with the greater, we cease to desire the lesser,

[p. 227]

and the closer we get to the one real desire, the less we care for our mistaken desires. Therefore, to remove an undesirable desire, the course is not to resist that desire, but to cultivate a greater and a better desire along the same line. In this connection, we must remember that the adoption of a greater desire does not compel us to sacrifice those things that we gain from the lesser desires. He who adopts the greater loses nothing, but is on the way to the gaining of everything.

To know the right and to desire the right, according to the complete significance of the right, we must interiorly discern the very right itself. We cannot depend upon another's definition of the right, but must know fully the spirit of the right with our own faculties. That faculty that knows and feels the right, and that naturally knows and desires the right is character. Therefore, it is through the development of character that each individual will know for himself how to live, think and act in perfect harmony with the laws of all life.

When the consciousness of right action has been attained, a clear mental picture should be deeply impressed upon mind and every desire should be focused upon that picture. This concentration should be made as strong as possible, so that all the energies of the system are not only aroused, but caused to move towards the ideal of right action. And by right action, we mean that action that is thoroughly

[p. 228]

constructive, that builds for greater things and greater things only. Everything is right that builds for greater things. If it were not right, it could not produce the greater.

To clearly picture upon the mind the image of right action, and to concentrate with strong desire the whole attention upon that mental image, will cause all the tendencies of mind to move in the same direction. There will therefore be perfect harmony of mental action, and that action will be right action, because everything that moves towards the right must be right. This mental picture of right action should always be complete; that is, one's mental conception of the right should not be confined to certain parts of the system only, but should include every action conceivable in the being of man.

That person who pictures himself as virtuous, but forgets to picture himself above anger, fear and worry, is not forming a complete picture or ideal of the right. He is not giving the creative energies of the system a perfect pattern; the character that those energies are to build will therefore be one-sided and weak.

First ask yourself what you would have all the energies, powers, functions and faculties in your system do. Answer that question in the best manner possible, and upon that answer, base your picture of right action. Whenever a new line of action is undertaken, the mind should continue in that original

[p. 229]

line of action until the object in view has been reached. To do this in all things, even in trivial matters, will not only cause every action to produce the intended results, but real character will steadily be made stronger thereby.

The habit of giving up when the present task is half finished and try something else is one of the chief causes of failure. The development of a strong character, however, will remove this habit completely. To constantly think of the highest and the greatest results that could possibly follow the promotion of any undertaking or line of action will aid remarkably in causing the mind to keep on. To expect much from what we are doing now is to create a strong desire to press on towards the goal in view. To press on towards the goal in view is to reach the goal, and to reach the goal is to get what we expected.

An essential of great importance in the building of character is the proper conception of the ideal. No mind can rise higher than its ideals, but every mind can realize its ideals no matter how high they may be. Our ideals therefore cannot be too high. The ideal should not only be a little better than the present real, but should be perfection itself. Have nothing but absolute perfection in all things as the standard and the goal, and never think of your goal as anything less. Do not simply aim to improve yourself in just one more degree. Aim to reach absolute

[p. 230]

perfection in all your attainments and all your achievements, and make that desire so strong that every atom in your being thrills with its power.

To form all one's ideals in accordance with one's mental conception of absolute perfection, will cause the mind to live above the world of the ordinary, and this is extremely important in the building of character. A great character cannot be developed so long as the mind continues to dwell on the ordinary, the trivial or the superficial. Neither can true quality and true worth find expression so long as thought continues on the common plane; and the life that does not continue to grow into higher quality and greater worth has not begun to live. When character is highly developed, both the personality and the mentality will feel the stamp of quality and worth. High mental color will be given to every characteristic, and the nature of man will cease to be simply human. It will actually be more.

In building character, special attention must be given to hereditary tendencies or those traits of character that are born in us. But as all such traits are subconscious, they can be changed or removed by directing the subconscious to produce the opposite characteristics or tendencies. It matters not in the least what we may have inherited from our ancestors. If we want to change those things, we can do so. The subconscious will not only respond to any direction that we may make, but is fully capable of doing anything 

[p. 231]

in the world of mind or character that we may desire to have done. Examine the tendencies of your mind and character, and fix clearly in consciousness which ones you wish to remove and which ones you wish to retain. Those that you wish to retain should be made strong by daily directing the subconscious to give those tendencies more life, more power and more stability. To remove those tendencies that you do not wish to retain, forget them. Do not resist them nor try to force them out of the mind. Simply forget them and direct the subconscious to create and establish new tendencies that are directly opposite to the nature of the ones that you wish to remove. Build up those qualities that constitute real character, and every bad trait that you have inherited from your ancestors will disappear.

To build up those qualities, picture in your mind the highest conceptions of those qualities that you can possibly form; then impress those conceptions and ideas upon the subconscious. Such impressions should be formed daily, and especially before going to sleep, as the building process in the subconscious is more perfect during sleep.

By impressing the idea of spotless virtue upon the subconscious every day for a few months, your moral tendencies will become so strong that nothing can tempt you to do what you know to be wrong. Not that physical desire will disappear; we do not want any natural desire to disappear, but your control of

[p. 232]

those desires will be so complete that you can follow them or refuse to follow them just as you choose. And your desire to remain absolutely free from all wrong will become so strong that nothing can induce you to do what your finer nature does not wish to have done.

There are millions of people who are morally weak in spite of the fact that they do not wish to be, but if these people would employ this simple method, their weakness would soon disappear, because by impressing the idea of spotless virtue upon the subconscious, the subconscious will produce and express in the personality the power of virtue; and if this process is continued for some time, the power of virtue in the person will become so strong that it can overcome and annihilate instantly every temptation that may appear.

Impress upon the subconscious the idea of absolute justice, and your consciousness of justice will steadily develop until you can discriminate perfectly between the right and the wrong in every imaginable transaction. Whatever quality you wish to develop in your character, you can increase its worth and its power steadily by applying this subconscious law; that is, what is impressed upon the subconscious will be expressed through the personality, and since the seed can bring forth ten, thirty, sixty and a hundred fold, one tiny impression, therefore, may have the power to bring forth a great and powerful expression.

[p. 233]

[paragraph continues] Everything multiplies in the subconscious, whether it be good or otherwise. Therefore, by taking advantage of this law and giving to the subconscious only those ideas and desires that have quality and worth, we place ourselves in the path of perpetual increase of everything good that the heart may desire.

The two predominating factors in character are justice and virtue. The former gives each element in life its proper place. The latter turns each element to proper use. The consciousness of justice is developed through the realization of the fact that nothing can use what is not its own. To try to use what is not one's own will result in misuse.

When the consciousness of justice is thoroughly developed, everything in the human system will be properly placed. That very power of the mind that feels justice--the true placing of things--will cause all things within man to be properly placed. And when justice rules among all things in the interior life of man, that man will naturally be just to all things in the exterior life.

It is not possible for any person to deal justly with men and matters in the external world until he has attained the consciousness of justice within himself. He may think he is just, or he may try to be just, but his dealings will not be absolutely just until he can feel justice in his own life. To feel justice within oneself is to keep the entire system in a state of equilibrium.

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] The mentality will be balanced and no force or element will be misplaced. It is therefore something for which we may work with great profit.

To be virtuous in the complete sense of the term, is to use all things properly, and the proper use of things is that use that works for greater things. Virtue is therefore applicable to every force, function and faculty in the being of man, but in its application there must be no desire or effort to suppress or destroy. Virtue means use--right use--never suppression.

When things cannot be used in their usual channels, the energies in action within those things should be turned in their courses and used elsewhere. When creative energy cannot be properly applied physically, it should be employed metaphysically; and all energy can be drawn into mind for the purpose of building up states, faculties, talents or powers. (Practical methods through which this may be accomplished will be given in the next chapter.)

When a certain desire cannot be expressed with good results in its present purpose, the power of that desire should be changed and caused to desire something else--something of value that can be carried out now. The power of that desire therefore is not lost, neither is enjoyment sacrificed, because all constructive forces, give joy to the mind. "And the greatest of joys shall be the joy of going on."

[p. 235]

The desire for complete virtue is developed through the realization of the fact that the greatest good comes only when each part fulfills, physically and metaphysically, what nature intended. In the application of virtue, the purpose of nature may be fulfilled metaphysically when the physical channel does not permit of true expression at the time; though when physical expression may be secured, the metaphysical action should always be in evidence, because the greatest results always follow when physical and metaphysical actions are perfectly combined.

In the building of character, the two principal objects in view should be the strong and the beautiful. The character that is strong but not beautiful may have force, but cannot use that force in the building of the superior. The character that is beautiful but not strong, will not have sufficient power to carry out its lofty ideals. It is the strong and the beautiful combined that builds mind and character, and that brings into being the superior man.

[p. 236] [p. 237]

When the creative energies are daily transmuted, and turned into muscle, brain and mind, a virtuous life can be lived without inconvenience. Besides, the body will be healthier, the personality stronger and the mind more brilliant.

Hold yourself constantly in a positive, masterful attitude, and fill that attitude with kindness. The result will be that remarkable something that people call personal magnetism.

Creative energy when retained in the system will give vigor to the body, sparkle to the eye and genius to the brain.

There is enough power in any man to enable him to realize all his desires and reach the highest good he has in view. It is only necessary that all of this power be constructively applied.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 238] [p. 239]

  

CHAPTER XVI.

  

THE CREATIVE FORCES IN MAN

The human system may well be termed a living dynamo, as the amount of energy, especially creative energy, generated in the mind and personality of man is simply enormous. If we should try to measure the amount produced in the average healthy person, we should become overwhelmed with surprise; though we should naturally become even more surprised after learning how much power nature gives to man, and then finding that he applies only a fraction of it. We shall soon see the reason for this, however, and learn exactly why all of this vast amount of energy is not turned to practical use.

What is called creative energy in its broadest, largest sense, is that power in man that creates, forms or reproduces anywhere in the human system, and it divides itself into a number of groups, each one having its special function. One group creates thought, another brain cells, another nerve tissues, another muscular tissues, another manufactures the various juices of the system, another produces ideas, another creates talent and ability, another reproduces

[p. 240]

the species, and a number of other groups produce the various chemical formations in the system. We therefore have all kinds of creative processes going on in the human system, and corresponding energies with which these processes are continued.

One of the most interesting facts in connection with this study is that Nature generates more energy for each group than is required for normal functioning through its particular channel. In consequence, we find a great deal of surplus energy throughout the system. Each function supplies a certain percentage, and as it is not used by the function itself, the larger part of it naturally goes to waste. And here is where our subject becomes decidedly important. All kinds of creative energy are so closely related that they can be transformed and transmuted into each other. What is wasted in one function can therefore be turned to actual use in another function. An extra supply can thereby be secured for the creation of thoughts and ideas if such should be necessary, or an extra supply can be secured for the manufacture of the different juices of the system, or for the increase of muscular activity or functional activity in any one of the vital organs. Each group will readily change and combine with any other group, thus producing additional power in any part of the system at any time.

More than half of the energy generated in the human system is surplus energy, and is not needed

[p. 241]

for normal functioning, either in mind or body, though there are many personalities that generate so much energy that fully three-fourths of the amount generated is surplus. The question is therefore what shall be done with this surplus energy, and how any amount of it can be applied through any special function or faculty desired? If a person can accomplish a great deal, sometimes remarkable things by only using a fraction of his energy, it is evident that he could accomplish a great deal more if some means could be found through which he might apply all of his energy. In fact, if such means were found, his working capacity, as well as his ability, might be doubled or trebled, and his achievements increased in proportion. If a certain amount of energy produces a certain degree of working capacity, twice as much energy would naturally double that working capacity, and this has been demonstrated a number of times. A great many people, who have tried to transmute their creative energies, and direct those energies into some special faculty, have found that the working capacity of that faculty has been increased for the time being to a remarkable degree, but this is not the only result secured. The same process will also increase the brilliancy of the mind, and here let us remember that genius, in most instances, is accounted for by the fact that practically all of the surplus energy of the personality flows

[p. 242]

naturally into that faculty where genius is in evidence.

To illustrate the idea further, take two men of equal personal power. Let one of them permit his surplus energy to flow into the different functions as usual, giving over a part to normal requirements, and the other to mere waste. We shall not find this man doing anything extraordinary. But let the other man give over to normal functions only what is actually required, and then turn the remainder into his mind, or those parts of his mind that are being applied in his work. We shall find in this second case that ability will rapidly increase, and that in the course of time actual genius be developed. That genius could be developed by this process in every case, has not been demonstrated, though it is quite probable that it could be demonstrated without a single exception. However, no individual can turn surplus energy into any faculty without becoming more able, more efficient and more competent in that faculty. To learn how this process can be carried out successfully under any circumstances is therefore thoroughly worth while.

To proceed, we must first learn how these different groups of creative energy naturally act; and we find that each group goes, either naturally or through some habit, into its own part of mind or body; in other words, we find in the human system, a number of streams of energy flowing in different directions,

[p. 243]

performing certain functions on their way, using up a fraction of their power in that manner, the rest flowing off into waste. Knowing this, the problem before us is to learn how to redirect those streams of energy so as to turn them to practical use where they can be used now, and thus not only prevent waste, but increase the result of our efforts in proportion. In brief, we want to know how we can take up all surplus energy, that is, all energy that remains after normal functioning has been provided for, and use that surplus in promoting more successfully the work in which we are engaged. And to learn how to do this, we must study the art of transmutation.

What we call transmutation is not some mysterious something that only a few have the power to understand and apply, but one of the simplest things in Nature, as well as one of the most constant of her processes. Nature is continually transmuting her energies, and it is in this manner that extraordinary results are found anywhere in the realms of Nature, or anywhere in human nature where unconscious actions along greater lines have been the cause. Whenever any individual has accomplished more than usual, it is the law of transmutation through which the unusual has been secured. The use of the law may have been unconscious, though everything that is applied in part and unconsciously, can be applied fully and thoroughly through conscious action.

[p. 244]

When any one is using his mind continually along a certain line, and is so thoroughly absorbed in that line of action that it takes up his whole attention, we invariably find that the mind while in that condition, draws an extra amount of energy from the body. Sometimes it draws too much, so that every desire of the body is, for the time being, suspended and the vitality of the different physical organs decreased below normal. A man while in this condition frequently loses desire for food, and we all know of inventors who have been so absorbed in their experiments that they have neither taken nor desired food for days. We have also found the same condition in many others, especially among authors, composers and artists, where the mind was given over completely to the subject at hand. And what is the cause but transmutation? When the mind takes up for its own use a great deal of the energy naturally employed in the body, the power of normal functioning will have so decreased that the desire for normal functioning will have practically disappeared for the time being.

Another illustration with which we are all familiar, is where every natural desire of the body disappears completely, for a time, when the mind is completely absorbed in some entirely different desire; and here we find the law that underlies the cure of all habits. If you would turn your mind upon some desire that was directly opposite to the desire that feeds your

[p. 245]

habit, and if you would give over your whole attention to that opposite desire, you would soon draw all the energy away from that desire which perpetuates the habit. The habit in question therefore would soon die of starvation. In the same way, people who are inclined to be materialistic could overcome that tendency entirely by concentrating attention constantly and thoroughly upon the idealistic side of life. In this case, those forces of the system that are perpetuating materialistic conditions would be transmuted into finer energies, and would thereby proceed to build up idealistic or more refined conditions of body, mind and personality. Both Nature and human experience are full of illustrations of transmutation, so that we are not dealing in this study with something that lies outside of usual human activity. We are dealing with something that is taking place in our systems every minute, and we want to learn how to take better control of this something, so that we can apply the underlying law to the best advantage.

In learning to apply the law of transmutation, our first purpose should be to employ all surplus energy either in promoting our work or in developing faculties and talents. This process alone would practically double the working capacity of any mind, and would steadily increase ability and talent; and also to turn energy to good account that cannot be used in its own channel now.

[p. 246]

To illustrate, suppose you have a desire for a certain physical or mental action, and you know that it would not be possible to carry out that desire at the time. Instead of permitting the energy that is active in that desire to go to waste, you would turn that energy into some other channel where it could be used to advantage now. Our second purpose should be to direct all surplus energy into the brain and the mind in case we had more energy in our body than we could use, or that was required for physical functioning, and thereby become stronger and more efficient in all mental activities. Our third purpose should be to transmute all reproductive energy into talent and genius when there was no need of that energy in its own particular sphere. And in this connection, it is well to mention the fact that a man who is morally clean, other things being equal, has in every instance, greater agility, greater capacity and greater endurance by far than the man who is not. While the latter is wasting his creative energies in useless pleasures, as well as in disease producing habits, the former is turning all of his creative energy into ability and genius, and the result is evident. In carrying out these three purposes we can prevent all waste of mental and personal power. We can control our desires completely; we can eliminate impurity, and we can turn life and power into channels that will invariably result in greater mental

[p. 247]

power and brilliancy, if not marked ability and rare genius.

To experiment, turn your whole attention upon your mind for a few minutes, and desire gently to draw all your surplus energy into the field of mental action. Then permit yourself to think along those lines where the mind is inclined to be most active. In a few moments you will discover the coming of new ideas; and in many instances, you will for several hours receive ideas that are brighter and more valuable than what you have received for some time. Repeat the process later, and again and again for many days in succession, and it will be strange indeed, if you do not finally secure a group of ideas that will be worth a great deal in your special line of thought or work. Whenever you feel a great deal of energy in your system, and try to direct it into the mind, you will have the same result. Ideas will come quickly and rapidly, and among them all you will surely find a few that have exceptional merit.

In learning the art of transmutation, the first essential is to train your mind to think that all surplus energy is being turned into the channel you have decided upon; that is, if you are a business man, you naturally will want all your surplus energy to accumulate in your business faculties. To secure this result, think constantly of your surplus energy as flowing into those faculties. This mode of thinking will soon give your energies the habit of doing what you

[p. 248]

desire to have done. It is a well-known law, that if we continue to think deeply and persistently along a certain line, Nature will gradually take up that thought and carry it out. Another law of importance in this connection is that if we concentrate attention upon a certain faculty or upon a certain part of the system, we create a tendency among our energies to flow towards that faculty or part. We understand therefore the value of constantly bearing in mind the idea that we wish to realize. What we constantly impress upon the mind through our thoughts and desires, finally becomes a subconscious habit, and when any line of action becomes a subconscious habit, it acts automatically; that is, it works of itself.

Before taking up this practice, however, it is necessary to determine positively what you actually desire your surplus energy to do. You must know what you want. Then continue to want what you want with all the power of desire that you can arouse. Most minds fail in this respect. They do not know with a certainty what they wish to accomplish or perfect. Their energies therefore are drawn into one channel today and another tomorrow, and nothing is finished. If you are an inventor, train your mind to think that all your surplus energy is constantly flowing into your faculties of invention. If you are a writer, train your mind to think that all your surplus energy is flowing into your literary talents; or whatever it is that you may be doing or want to do, direct

[p. 249]

your energy accordingly. You will soon find that you will increase in power, ability and capacity along the lines of your choice, and if you continue this process all through life, your ability will continue to increase, no matter how long you may live.

The second essential is to desire deeply and persistently that all your surplus energy shall flow into those functions or faculties that you have selected for greater work. Wherever your desire is directed, there the force of your system will also tend to go, and herein we find another reason why persistent desire has such extreme value. The use of desire in this connection, however, must always be deep and calm, and never excited or overwrought.

The third essential is to place your mind in what may be termed the psychological field, and while acting in that field, to concentrate upon that part or faculty where you want your surplus energy to accumulate. This essential or process constitutes the real art of transmutation, though it is by no means the easiest to acquire. To master this method a great deal of practice will be required, but whenever yol.i can place your mind in the psychological field and concentrate subjectively upon any part of your system where you want surplus energy to accumulate, all your surplus energy positively will accumulate in that part within a few moments' time. Through the same process, you can annihilate any desire instantaneously, and change all the energy of that desire

[p. 250]

into some other force. You can also, in the same way, reach your latent or dormant energies, and draw all of those energies into any channel where a high order of activity is desired; in fact, through this method, you can practically take full possession of all the power, active or latent, in your system, and use it in any way that you may wish. That you should, after you learn to apply this method successfully, become highly efficient in your work, is therefore evident, though this is not all. Extraordinary capacity, mental brilliancy and genius can positively be developed through the constant use of this method, provided, however, that nothing is done, either in thought, life or conduct, to interfere with the underlying law of the process.

To place your mind in the psychological field, try to turn your conscious actions into what may be termed the finer depths of the personality; that is, try to become conscious of your deeper life; try to feel the undercurrents of mind and thought and consciousness, and try to act in perfect mental contact with those deep, underlying forces of personality and mentality that lie at the foundation of your conscious activity. An illustration in this connection will be found valuable. When you listen to music that seems to touch your soul, so that you can feel the vibrations of its harmony thrill every atom of your being, you are in the psychological field. You are alive in another and a finer mental world, a mental

[p. 251]

world that permeates your entire personal existence. You are also in the psychological field when you are stirred by some emotion to the very depth of your innermost life. A deepening of thought, feeling, life and desire will take the mind, more or less, into the psychological field; and whenever the mind begins to act in that field, you should concentrate your attention upon that faculty or part of your system where you wish extra energy to accumulate. Make your concentration alive, so to speak, with interest, and make every action of that concentration as deep as possible, and all your surplus energy will positively flow towards the point of concentration.

The power of this process can be demonstrated in a very simple manner. Place your mind in the psychological field, and then concentrate subjectively upon your hand, arousing at the time a deep desire for the increase of circulation in your hand. In a few moments, the veins on the back of your hand will be filled to capacity, and your hand, even though it might have been cold in the beginning, will become comfortably warm. Another experiment that is not only interesting in this connection, but may prove very valuable, is to concentrate in this same manner upon your digestive organs, in case the digestive process is retarded. You will soon feel more energy accumulating throughout the abdominal region, and any unpleasant sensation that you might have felt on account of indigestion will disappear entirely; in

[p. 252]

fact, even chronic indigestion can be cured in this way if the method is applied for a few minutes immediately before and after each meal. The idea is simply this, that when you give extra energy to an organ, it will be able to perform its function properly, and whenever any function is performed properly, any ailment that might have existed in the organ of that function, will disappear. A number of similar experiments may be tried, all of which will prove equally interesting, and besides, will train the mind to apply this great law of transmutation.

The following effects may be secured through transmutation: Working capacity in any part of the personality or mentality may be constantly increased; all the energy generated in the system may be employed practically and successfully; the mind may be made more brilliant, as it is an extraordinary amount of creative energy going into the mind that invariably causes mental brilliancy. Any faculty selected can be given so much of this surplus energy of the system, that it will almost from the beginning, manifest an increase in ability, and will, in the course of time, manifest rare talent and even genius. Moral purity may become second nature, as all that energy that was previously squandered in impure thought, impure desire or impure action can be transmuted readily, and applied in the building of a more vigorous personality and a more brilliant mind. A better control of all the forces of the personality may be

[p. 253]

obtained, and that mysterious something called personal magnetism may be acquired to a remarkable degree.

The attainment or accumulation of personal magnetism is something that we all desire, and the reason why is evident. What is called personal magnetism is the result of an extra amount of creative energy stored up in the personality and caused to circulate harmoniously throughout the personality. And the effect of this power is very marked. People who possess it are invariably more attractive, regardless of shape and form, and they are invariably more successful, no matter what their work may be. Hundreds of illustrations could be mentioned proving conclusively the extreme value of personal magnetism, though we are all so familiar with the fact that we do not require proof in the matter. What we want to know is what this power really is, how it may be produced, and why those who possess it have such a great advantage over those who do not possess it.

To illustrate, we may take two women who look alike in every respect; who have the same character and the same mentality, and who are equals in every respect but one, and that is that the one has personal magnetism while the other has not. But we need not be told of the fact. The woman who does not possess this power cannot be compared in any way with the woman who does possess it. The woman who does possess this power is far more attractive, far more

[p. 254]

brilliant, and seems to possess qualities of far greater worth; and the reason is that personal magnetism tends to heighten the effect of everything that you are, or that you may do. If we should compare two business men of equal ability and power, the one having personal magnetism and the other one not, we should find similar results. The one having this power would be far more successful, regardless of the fact that his ability and power in other respects were the same as his associate. Even men of ordinary ability succeed remarkably when they have personal magnetism; and we all know of women who are as plain as nature could make them, and yet being in possession of personal magnetism, are counted among the most attractive to be found anywhere. The most ordinary human form becomes a thing of beauty if made alive with this mysterious power, and a personality that had no attraction whatever, will fascinate everybody to a marked degree if charged with this power. We all know this to be true; we are therefore deeply interested to know how this power might be secured.

In the first place, we must remember that personal magnetism does not exercise its power by controlling or influencing other minds as many have supposed. The fact is if you try to influence others, you will lose this power, and lose it completely, no matter how strong it may be at the present time. The secret of personal magnetism simply lies in the fact

[p. 255]

that it tends to bring out into expression the best that is in you, and tends to heighten the effect of every expression; or, in other words, it causes every expression to act to the best advantage; though we find this power exercising its peculiar effect, not only in the personality and in the mentality of the individual, but also in his work.

When a musician has this power, his music charms to a far greater degree than if he does not possess it. There is something not only in the singing voice, but also in the speaking voice that indicates the absence or presence of this power. What it is no one can exactly describe, but we know it is there, and it adds immeasurably to the quality of what is expressed through the voice. In the field of literature we find the action of this power to be very marked. A writer who does not possess this mysterious force may write well, but there is something lacking in what he has written. On the other hand, if he has this power, he gives not only added charm to what he has written, but his ideas invariably appear to be more brilliant. In fact, there seems to be a power in everything he writes that is not ordinarily found on the printed page. On the stage this power is one of the principal factors, and we frequently find that the only difference between the good actor and a poor one, is the possession of a high degree of personal magnetism. No matter how well an actor may act, if he lacks in this power, he cannot succeed on the

[p. 256]

stage. When we go into the social world, we find the same fact. Those who possess this power are invariably the favorites, even though they may be lacking in many other qualities. In the business world we find in every case that a man who is lacking in personal magnetism is at a disadvantage, while the one who has an abundance of this power will have no difficulty, other things being equal, in working himself to the fore.

In a deeper study of this force, we find that it affects every movement of the body, every action of the mind, and every feeling or expression that mind and personality may produce; that is, it seems to give something additional to every action or movement, and makes everything about the individual more attractive. We might say that this force sets off everything about the person to a greater advantage. This power therefore does not act directly upon others, but acts directly upon the one who has it, and thereby makes the individual more striking, as well as more attractive, both in appearance and in conduct. What is good in you is made better if charged with this force, and every desirable effort that you may make produces a better effect in proportion. Added charm, added attractiveness and added efficiency--these invariably follow where the individual is in possession of a marked degree of this power. That which is beautiful is many times as beautiful where personal magnetism is in action, and that

[p. 257]

which is brilliant, becomes far more brilliant when combined with this mysterious force. Many people are born with it and apply it unconsciously, though the majority who have it, have acquired it through various forms of training. Any system of exercise that tends to harmonize the movements of the body, will tend to increase to some extent the power of this force; though when such exercises are combined with the transmutation of creative energy, the results will be far greater. The reason for this is found in the fact that what is called personal magnetism is the result of a great deal of creative energy held in the system, or transmuted into harmonious muscular or mental activity.

The development of this power depends upon the proper training of the body in rhythmic movements, and the training of the surplus energy in the system to act harmoniously along the lines of constructive action in mind and body. A very important essential is to cultivate poise, which means peace and power combined. Try to feel deeply calm throughout your entire system, and at the same time, try to give full and positive action to every power in your system. Try to hold in your system all the energy generated, and the mere desire to do this will tend to bring about what may be called accumulation of energy. To experiment, try for several minutes to hold all your energy in your personality, and at the same time, try to give all of that energy harmonious

[p. 258]

action within your personality. In a few moments, you will actually feel alive with power, and if you have succeeded very well with your experiment, you will really feel like a storage battery for the time being. You will have so much energy that you will feel as if you could do almost anything. Experiment in this way at frequent intervals until you get your system into the habit of carrying out this process unconsciously. You will thereby cause your surplus energy to accumulate more and more in your system, and you will produce what may be called a highly charged condition of your personality, a condition that invariably means the attainment of personal magnetism. To secure this result, however, it is necessary to keep the mind in an undisturbed attitude, to avoid all bad habits, physical or mental, to be in harmony with everything and everybody, and to exercise full self-control under every circumstance.

In cultivating this power, realize that it is the result of surplus energy held in the system, and caused to circulate harmoniously through every part of the system; remember that it is a power that does not act intentionally upon persons or circumstances; that its aim is not to control or influence anybody, but simply to act within the individual self, and heighten the effect of everything that he may be or do.

[p. 259]

Never think or speak of that which you do not wish to happen.

The whine, the sting and the sigh--these three must never appear in a single thought or a single word.

You can win ten times as many friends by talking happiness as you can by talking trouble. And the more real friends you have the less trouble you will have.

Speak well of everything good you find and mean it. When you find what you do not like keep quiet. The less you think or speak of what you do not like the more you have of what you do like.

Magnify the good; emphasize that which has worth; and talk only of those things that should live and grow.

When you have something good to say, say it. When you have something ill to say, say something else.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 260] [p. 261]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

THE BUILDING POWER OF CONSTRUCTIVE SPEECH

There is a science of speech, and whoever wishes to promote his welfare and advancement must understand this science thoroughly and regulate his speech accordingly. Every word that is spoken exercises a power in personal life, and that power will work either for or against the person, depending upon the nature of the word. You can talk yourself into trouble, poverty or disease, and you can talk yourself into harmony, health and prosperity. In brief, you can talk yourself into almost any condition, desirable or undesirable.

Every word is an expression and every expression produces a tendency in some part of the system. This tendency may appear in the mind, in the body, in the chemical life of the body, in the world of desire, in character, among the various faculties, or anywhere in the personality, and will work itself out wherever it appears. Our expressions determine largely where we are to go, what we are to accomplish, and how we are to meet those conditions through which we may pass.

[p. 262]

When our expressions produce tendencies towards sickness and failure, we will begin to move towards those conditions, and if the tendency is very strong, all the creative energies in the system will move in the same direction, focusing their efforts upon sickness and failure, or taking those conditions as their models, and thereby producing such conditions in the system. On the other hand, when our expressions produce tendencies towards health, happiness, power and success, we will begin to move towards those things, and in like manner create them in a measure.

Every word has an inner life force, sometimes called the hidden power of words, and it is the nature of this power that determines whether the expression is to be favorable or not. This power may be constructive or destructive. It may move towards the superior or the inferior. It may promote your purpose in life or it may retard that purpose, and it is the strongest when it is deeply felt. Therefore, the words which we inwardly feel are the words that act as turning points in life. When you feel that trouble is coming, and express that feeling in your speech, you are actually turning in your path and are beginning to move towards that trouble. In addition, you are creating troubled conditions in your system. We all know that the more trouble we feel in the midst of trouble, the more troublesome that trouble will become. And we also know that that person who retains poise and self-control in the

[p. 263]

midst of trouble, will pass through it all without being seriously affected; and when it is over, is much wiser and stronger for the experience.

When you feel that better days are coming, and express that feeling in your speech, you turn all the power of your being towards the ideal of better days, and those powers will begin to create the better in your life. Whenever you talk about success, advancement, or any desirable condition, try to express the feeling of those things in your words. This inner feeling determines the tendencies of your creative powers; therefore, when you feel success in your speech, you cause the creative powers to create qualities in yourself that can produce success, while if you express the feeling of doubt, failure or loss in your words, those creative powers will produce inferiority, disturbance, discord, and a tendency to mistakes. It is in this way that the thing we fear comes upon us. Fear is a feeling that feels the coming of ills or other things we do not want; and as we always express through our words the feelings that we fear, we form tendencies toward those things, and the creative powers within us will produce them.

Whether the inner life force of a word will be constructive or destructive depends upon several factors, the most important of which are the tone, the motive and the idea. The tone of every word should be harmonious, wholesome, pleasing, and

[p. 264]

should convey a deep and serene expression. Words that express whines, discontent, sarcasm, aggressiveness and the like are destructive; so much so, that no one can afford to employ them under any circumstance whatever. Nothing is ever gained by complaints that are complaining, nor by criticisms that criticise. When things are not right, state so in a tone of voice that is firm and strong, but kind. A wronged customer who employs sweetness of tone as well as firmness of expression is one who will receive the first attention and the best attention, and nothing will be left unturned until the matter is set right. The words that wound others do far more injury to the person who gives them expression. No one therefore can afford to give expression to a single word that may tend to wound. Words of constructive power are always deeply felt. They are never loud or confusing, but always quiet and serene, filled with the very spirit of conviction.

Never give expression to what you do not wish to encourage. The more you talk about a thing the more you help it along. The "walls have ears" and the world is full of minds that will act upon your suggestion. Never mention the dark side of anything. It will interfere with your welfare. To tell your troubles may give you temporary relief, but it is scattering seed broadcast that will produce another crop of more trouble. If you have troubles, turn your back upon them and proceed to talk about

[p. 265]

harmony, freedom, attainment and success, and feel deeply the spirit of these new and better conditions. Thus you will begin to create for yourself a new life, new opportunities, new environment and a new world. Never speak unless you have something to say that gives cheer, encouragement, information or wholesome entertainment. To talk for the mere sake of talking is to throw precious energy away, and no human chatterbox will ever acquire greatness.

The motive back of every word should be constructive, and the life expressed in every word should convey the larger, the better and the superior. Such words have building power, and are additions to life of extreme value. Every word should express, as far as possible, the absolute truth, and should never convey ideas that are simply indicated by appearances.

What is meant by speaking the absolute truth, however, is a matter that the majority do not understand, and as it is a very large subject, it would require pages to give even a brief scientific definition. But for practical purposes, the subject can be made sufficiently clear through the use of a few illustrations taken from the world's daily speech. People who think they have to say something and have nothing in particular to say, always take refuge in a brief description of the weather. In their descriptions they usually employ such expressions as "It is terribly hot," "It is an awful day," "This is

[p. 266]

terrible weather," "This is a miserably cold day," and so on. But such expressions do not change the weather, and there is no use of talking if your words are not to be of value in some way. You may say all sorts of disagreeable things about the weather without changing the weather in the least, but will such expressions leave you unchanged? Positively not! Whenever you declare that something is horrible, you cause horrible thoughts to send their actions all through your nervous system. These actions may be weak, but many drops, no matter how small, will finally wear away a rock.

When people talk about themselves, they seldom fail to give expression to a score of detrimental statements. Here are a few: "I can't stand this," "I feel so tired," "I cannot bear to think of it," "I am thoroughly disgusted," "I am so susceptible to climatic changes," "I am so sensitive and so easily disturbed," "I am getting weak and nervous," "My memory is failing," "I am getting old," "I cannot work the way I used to," "My strength is gradually leaving me," "There is no chance for me any more," "Everything in life is uphill work," "I have passed a miserable night," "This has been a hard day," "I have nothing but trouble and bad luck," "You know I am human and so very weak," "There is always something wrong no matter how hard you try," "You know I have to be so very careful

[p. 267]

about what I eat as nearly everything disagrees with me."

A thousand other statements, all of them destructive, might be mentioned, but any one who understands the power of thought will realize at once that such statements can never be otherwise but injurious and should therefore be avoided absolutely. But these statements are not only injurious--they are also untrue--absolutely untrue in every sense of the term.

The fact is you can stand almost anything if you forget your human weakness and array yourself in spiritual strength. You do not have to get tired. Work does not make any one tired so long as he gets eight hours of sleep every night. It is wrong thinking that makes people tired. These are scientific facts. That person who permits himself to become disgusted at anything whatever is talking himself down to the plane of inferiority. When you feel disgusted you think disgusting thoughts, and such thoughts clog the mind. You cannot afford to think disgusting thoughts simply because something else is disgusting, because we daily become like the thoughts we think. We cannot improve disagreeable things by making ourselves disagreeable. Two wrongs never made a right. The proper course is to forgive the wrong-doer, forget the wrong and then do something substantial to right the whole matter. When we think kindly of the weather, place ourselves

[p. 268]

in harmony with Nature, think properly and dress properly, we shall not be susceptible to changes in the atmosphere; but so long as we say that we are effected by changing atmospheres, we not only make ourselves negative and susceptible, but we also produce detrimental effects in our systems through our own unwholesome beliefs. The man who constantly thinks he is easily disturbed disturbs himself. When we are in harmony with everything including ourselves and refuse to be otherwise, nothing will ever disturb us. That person who is nervous can make the matter worse by saying that he is nervous, because such a statement is a nervous statement and is full of discord. When we begin to feel nervous, we can remedy the matter absolutely by resolving to remain calm, and by employing only quiet, wholesome and constructive speech. Your words will cause you to move in the direction indicated by the nature of those words, and it is just as easy to use words that bring calmness and poise, as those that bring inharmony and confusion.

Modern science has demonstrated conclusively that there is nothing about a person that gets old. Therefore, to say that you are getting old is to persist in speaking the untruth, and it is but natural that you should reap as you sow. We must remember that a false appearance comes from the practice of judging from appearances. To state that your strength is failing is likewise to speak the untruth. There is

[p. 269]

but one strength in the universe--the strength of the Supreme--and that strength can never fail. You may have as much of that strength as you desire. All that is necessary for you to do is to live in perfect touch with the Supreme, and never think, do or say anything that will interfere with that sublime oneness. The strength of the Supreme is just as able to fill your system with life and power now as it was at any time in the past. Therefore, there is no real reason whatever why your powers should diminish. Be true to the truth and your power will perpetually increase.

The belief that there are no opportunities for you is caused by the fact that you have hidden yourself in a cave of inferiority. Go out into the life of worth, ability and competence, and you will find more opportunities than you can use. The world is ever in search of competent minds, and modern knowledge has made it possible for man to develop his ability. No one therefore has any legitimate reason for speaking of hard luck or hard times unless he prefers to live in want. The more you complain about hard times, the harder times will become for you, while if you resolve to forget that there is such a thing as failure and proceed to make your own life as you wish it to be, the turn in the lane will surely come.

The idea that the pathway of life is all uphill work is also a false one, and if we give that idea expression we are simply placing obstacles in our way.

[p. 270]

[paragraph continues] Nothing is uphill work when we approach it properly, and there is nothing that helps more to place us in true relationship with things than true expression.

If the night has been unpleasant, never mention the fact for a moment. To talk about it will only produce more unpleasantness in your system. There is nothing wrong about the night. The unpleasantness was most likely produced by your own perverse appetite, or by some reckless inexcusable act. Forgive yourself and declare that you will never abuse nature any more. Such powerful words if repeated often, will turn the tendency of your habits, and your life will become natural and wholesome.

No day would be hard if we met all things with the conviction that we are equal to every occasion. Live properly, think properly, work properly and talk properly, and trouble and ill-luck will not trouble you seriously any more. That person who declares that there is always something wrong is always doing something to make things wrong. When we have wrong on the brain we will make many mistakes, so there will always be something wrong brewing for us. When wrong things come, set them right and look upon the experience as an opportunity for you to develop greater mastership.

When you agree with yourself, all wholesome and properly prepared food will agree with you. But you cannot expect food to agree with you so long as

[p. 271]

you are disagreeable; and to declare that this or that always disagrees with you, is to fill your system with disagreeable thoughts, disturbed actions and conditions of discord. That nature can digest food under such circumstances no one can justly expect. There is nothing that injures digestion more than the habit of finding fault with the food. If you do not think that you can eat this or that, leave it alone, but leave it alone mentally as well as physically. It is not enough to drop a disagreeable thing from your hands; you must also drop it from your mind.

Remember, you are mentally living with everything that you talk about, and there is nothing that affects us more than that which we take into our mental life. It is therefore not only necessary to speak the truth about all things, but also to avoid speaking about those things that are unwholesome. To speak about that which is wrong or inferior is never wholesome, no matter how closely we think we stand by the facts. Seeming facts, or what is called relative truth, should never receive expression unless they deal with that which is conducive to higher worth; and when circumstances compel us to make exceptions to this rule, we should avoid giving any feeling to what we say.

The greatest essential, however, is to make all speech constructive. Search for the real truth that is at the foundation of all life, and then give expression to such words as convey the full significance to

[p. 272]

that truth. The results, to say the least, will be extraordinary.

In daily conversation, the law of constructive speech should be most conscientiously applied. What we say to others will determine to a considerable degree what they are to think, and what tendencies their mental actions are to follow; and since man is the product of his thought, conversation becomes a most important factor in man.

We steadily grow into the likeness of that which we think of the most, and what we are to think about depends largely upon the mode, the nature and the subject matter of our conversation. When conversation originates or intensifies the tendency to think about the wrong, the ordinary or the inferior, it becomes destructive, and likewise it tends to keep before mind the faults and defects that may exist in human nature. To be constructive, conversation should tend to turn attention upon the better side, the stronger side, the superior side of all things, and should give the ideal the most prominent place in thought, speech or expression. All conversation should be so formed that it may tend to move the mind towards the higher domains of thought, and should make everybody more keenly conscious of the greater possibilities that exist within them. No word should ever be spoken that will, in any way, bring the person's faults or short-comings before his mind, nor should any form of speech be permitted that may

[p. 273]

cause sadness, offense, depression or pain. Every word should convey hope, encouragement and sunshine.

To constantly remind a person of his faults is to cause him to become more keenly conscious of those faults. He will think more and more about his faults, and will thereby cause his faults to become more prominent and more troublesome than they ever were before. The more we think about our weakness, the weaker we become; and the more we talk about weakness, the more we think about weakness. Conversation therefore should never touch upon those things that we do not wish to retain or develop. The only way to remove weakness is to develop strength, and to develop strength we must keep attention constantly upon the quality of strength. We develop what we think about provided all thinking has depth, quality and continuity.

Conversation has exceptional value in the training of young minds, and in many instances may completely change the destinies of these minds. To properly train a child, his attention should be directed as much as possible upon those qualities that have worth and that are desired in his development; and the way he is spoken to will largely determine where he is to give the greater part of his attention. To scold a child is to remind him of his faults. Every time he is reminded of his faults he gives more attention, more thought, and more strength to those

[p. 274]

faults. His good qualities are thereby made weaker while his bad qualities are made worse. It is not possible to improve the mind and the character of the child by constantly telling him not to do "this" or "that." As a rule, it will increase his desire to do this other thing, and he will cease only through fear, or after having wasted a great deal of time in experiences that have become both disgusting and bitter.

It is the tendency of every mind to desire to do what it is told not to do, the reason being that negative commands are nearly always associated with fear; and when the mind is in the attitude of fear, or dread or curiosity, it is very easily impressed by whatever it may be thinking about.

When we are warned we either enter a state of fear or one of curiosity, and while in those states, our minds are so deeply and so easily impressed by that from which we are warned, that we give it our whole attention. The result is we think so much about it that we become almost completely absorbed in it; and we are carried away, so to speak, not away from the danger, but into it.

When any one is going wrong, it is a mistake to warn him not to go further. It is also a mistake to leave him alone. The proper course is to call his attention to something better, and frame our conversation in such a way that he becomes wholly absorbed in the better. He will then forget his old mistakes,

[p. 275]

his old faults and his old desires, and will give all his life and power to the building of that better which has engaged his new interest.

The same law may be employed to prevent sickness and failure. When the mind becomes so completely absorbed in perfect health that all sickness is forgotten, all the powers of mind will proceed to create health, and every trace of sickness will soon disappear. When the mind becomes so completely absorbed in higher attainments and in greater achievements that all thought of failure is forgotten, all the forces of mind will begin to work for the promotion of those attainments and achievements. The person will be gaining ground every day, and greater success will positively follow.

To cause the mind to forget the wrong, the lesser and the inferior, constructive conversation may be employed with unfailing results; in fact, such conversation must be employed if the mind is to advance and develop. Our conversation must be in perfect accord with our ambitions, our desires, and our ideals, and all our expressions must aim to promote the real purpose we have in view.

It is the tendency of nearly every mind to try to make his friends perfect according to his own idea of perfection, and he usually proceeds by constantly talking to his friends about their faults, and what they should not do in order to become as perfect as his ideal. Parents, as a rule, do the same with their

[p. 276]

children, not knowing that through this method many are made worse; and it is only those who are very strong in mind and character that are not adversely affected by this method.

To help our friends or our children to become ideal, we should never mention their faults. Our conversation should deal with the strong points of character and the greater possibilities of mind. We should so frame our conversation that we tend to make everybody feel there is something in them. Our conversation should have an optimistic tendency and an ascending tone. It should deal with those things in life that are worth while, and it should always give the ideal the greatest prominence. Weaknesses of human nature should be recognized as little as possible, and should seldom, if ever, be mentioned. When people engage in destructive conversation in our midst we should try to change the subject, by calling their attention to the better side. There always is another and a better side; and when examined closely will be found to be far greater and infinitely more important than the ordinary side. Admirable qualities exist everywhere, and it will prove profitable to give these our undivided attention.

[p. 277]

The first mark of a master mind is that he is able to promote his own perpetual improvement. The second is that he is able to be strong, joyous and serene under every circumstance.

The imagining faculty is the creative faculty of the mind, the faculty that creates plans, methods and ideas. Our imagination therefore must always be clear, lofty, wholesome and constructive if we would create superior ideas and build for greater things.

Before you can have greater success you must become a greater man. Before you can become a greater man you must reach out toward the new and the greater along all lines; and this is possible only through the constructive use of imagination.

You get your best ideas when your mind acts in the upper story. And in all fields of action it is the best ideas that win.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 278] [p. 279]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

IMAGINATION AND THE MASTER MIND

The forces of the human system must have something definite to work for; that is, they must have an ideal upon which to concentrate their attention, or some model or pattern to follow as they proceed with their constructive actions.

To form this model, it is the power of imagination that must be employed, and that power must, in each case, be applied constructively. What we imagine becomes a pattern for the creative energies of mind and personality, and as the creations of these energies determine what we are to become and attain, we realize that the imaging faculty is one of the most important of all our faculties. We therefore cannot afford to lose a moment in learning how to apply it according to the laws of mental construction and growth.

To proceed, imagine yourself becoming and attaining what you wish to become and attain. This will give your energies a model, both of your greater future self and your greater future achievements. When you think of your future, always imagine success

[p. 280]

and greater things, and have no fear as to results. If you fear, you give your creative energies a model of failure, and they will accordingly proceed to create failure. Then we must also remember if we wish to succeed, our faculties must work successfully, but no faculty can work successfully when filled with fear. It is only when constantly inspired by the idea of success than any faculty or power in the human system can do its best.

To inspire our faculties with this idea, we should always imagine ourselves obtaining success. The picture of success should be placed upon all the walls oL the mind, so that the powers within us will see success, and success only as their goal. Hang up pictures in your mind that will inspire you to do your best; hang up pictures in your mind that will cause you to think constantly of that which you desire to accomplish, and this you may do by imagining yourself being that greater something that you want to be and doing that greater something that you want to do.

An excellent practice is to use your spare moments in creating such pictures in your imagination and placing them in the most conspicuous position of your mind, so that all your faculties and powers can see them at all times. We are always imagining something, It is practically impossible to be awake without imagining something. Then why not imagine

[p. 281]

something at all times that will inspire the powers within us to do greater and greater things?

To aid the imagination in picturing the greater, the higher and better, we should "hitch our wagon to a star." The star may be something quite out of reach as far as present circumstances indicate, but if we hitch our wagon to something in such a lofty position, our mind will begin to take wings. It will no longer be like a worm crawling in the dust. We shall begin to rise and continue to rise.

The only thing that can cause the mind to rise is imagination. The only thing that can make the mind larger than it is, is . The only thing that can make the mind act along new lines is imagination. This being true, it is unwise to use the imagination for any other purpose than for the best that we can think or do.

In this connection, there are a few suggestions that will be found of special value. First, make up your mind as to what you really want in every respect. Determine what surroundings or environment you want. Decide upon the kind of friends you want and what kind of work you would prefer. Make all those ideals so good and so perfect that you will have no occasion to change them. Then fix those ideals so clearly in mind that you can see them at all times, and proceed to desire their realization with all the power of mind and soul. Make that your first step.

[p. 282]

Your second step should be to imagine yourself living in those surroundings that you have selected as your ideal; then make it a point to live in that imagination every moment of every day. Instead of imagining a number of useless things during spare moments, as people usually do, imagine yourself living in those surroundings and those ideals. Imagine yourself in the presence of friends that are exactly what you wish your ideal friends to be, and permit your fancy to run as far as it may wish along all of those idealistic lines. If you have not found your work, proceed to imagine yourself doing what you wish to do. If you have already found your work, imagine yourself doing that work as well as you would wish, and imagine the coming of results as large as your greatest desires could expect. Devote every moment of your spare time to the placing of those ideals before your attention, and you will give your power and forces something strong and definite to work for. Every mental force is an artist, and it paints according to the model. What you imagine is the model, and there is not a single mental action that is not inspired or called forth into action by some picture or model which the imagination has produced.

The imagination can call forth the ordinary or the extraordinary. It can give the powers of your being an inferior model or an extraordinary model, and if the imagination is not directed to produce the

[p. 283]

extraordinary and the superior, it is quite likely to produce the ordinary and the inferior. Your second step, therefore, should be to imagine yourself actually living in those surroundings that you have selected as your ideal, and in actually becoming and doing what you are determined to become and do.

This practice would, in the first place, give you a great deal of pleasure, because if you have definite ideals and imagine yourself attaining those ideals, you will certainly enjoy yourself to a marked degree for the time being. But in addition to that enjoyment, you will gradually and steadily be training your mind to work for those greater things. The mind will work for that which is uppermost in thought and imagination. Therefore, we should invariably place our highest ideals uppermost, so that the whole of our attention may be concentrated upon those ideals, and all the powers of our mind and personality directed to work for those ideals.

Your third step should be to proceed to apply the power of desire, the power of will, the power of scientific thought, and in brief, all your powers, in trying to realize those beautiful ideals that you continue to imagine as your own. Do as the ancient Hebrews did. First make your prediction. Then go to work and make it come true. What you imagine concerning your greater future is your prediction, and you can cause that prediction to come true if you apply

[p. 284]

all the power in your possession in working for its realization every day.

The constructive use of imagination therefore will enable you to place a definite model or pattern before the forces of your system, so that those forces may have something better and greater to work for. In brief, instead of permitting most of your energies to go to waste and the remainder to follow any pattern or idea that may be suggested by your environment, or your own helter-skelter thinking, you will cause all your energy to work for the greatest and the best that you may desire.

This is the first use of imagination, and it easily places this remarkable faculty among the greatest in the human mind. Another use of the imagination is found in its power to give the mind something definite to think about at all times, so that the mind may be trained to always think of that which you really want to think; that is, through this use of the imagination, you can select your own thought and think your own thought at all times; and he who can do this is gradually becoming a master mind.

The master mind is the mind that thinks what it wants to think, regardless of what circumstances, environment or associations may suggest. The mind that masters itself creates its own ideas, thoughts and desires through the original use of imagination, or its own imaging faculty. The mind that does not master itself forms its thoughts and desires after

[p. 285]

the likeness of the impressions received through the senses, and is therefore controlled by those conditions from which such impressions come; because as we think, so we act and live. The average mind usually desires what the world desires without any definite thought as to his own highest welfare or greatest need, the reason being that a strong tendency to do likewise is always produced in the mind when the desires are formed in the likeness of such impressions as are suggested by external conditions. It is therefore evident that the person who permits himself to be affected by suggestions will invariably form artificial desires; and to follow such desires is to be mislead.

The master mind desires only that which is conducive to real life and in the selection of its desires is never influenced in the least by the desires of the world. Desire is one of the greatest powers in human life. It is therefore highly important that every desire be normal and created for the welfare of the individual himself. But no desire can be wholly normal that is formed through the influence of suggestion. Such desires are always abnormal to some degree, and easily cause the individual to be misplaced.

A great many people are misplaced. They do not occupy those places wherein they may be their best and accomplish the most. They are working at a disadvantage, and are living a life that is far inferior

[p. 286]

to what they are intended to live. The cause is frequently found in abnormal or artificial desires. They have imitated the desires of others without consulting their present needs. They have formed the desire to do what others are doing by permitting their minds to be influenced by suggestions and impressions from the world, forgetting what their present state of development makes them capable of doing now. By imitating the lives, habits, actions and desires of others, they are led into a life not their own; that is, they are misplaced.

The master mind is never misplaced because he does not live to do what others are doing, but what he himself wants to do now. He wants to do only that which is conducive to real life, a life worth while, a life that steadily works up to the very highest goal in view.

The average mind requires a change of environment before he can change his thought. He has to go somewhere or bring into his presence something that will suggest a new line of thinking and feeling. The master mind, however, can change his thought whenever he so desires. A change of scene is not necessary, because such a mind is not controlled from without. A change of scene will not produce a change of thought in the master mind unless he so elects. The master mind changes his thoughts, ideals or desires by imaging upon the mind the exact likeness

[p. 287]

of the new ideas, the new thoughts and the new desires that have been selected.

The secret of the master mind is found wholly in the intelligent use of imagination. Man is as he thinks, and his thoughts are patterned after the predominating mental images, whether those images are impressions suggested from without, or impressions formed by the ego acting from within. When man permits his thoughts and desires to be formed in the likeness of impressions received from without, he will be more or less controlled by environment and he will be in the hands of fate, but when he transforms every impression received from without into an original idea and incorporates that idea into a new mental image, he uses environment as a servant, thereby placing fate in his own hands.

Every object that is seen will produce an impression upon the mind according to the degree of susceptibility. This impression will contain the nature of the object of which it is a representation. The nature of this object will be reproduced in the mind, and what has entered the mind will be expressed more or less throughout the entire system. Therefore, the mind that is susceptible to suggestions will reproduce in his own mind and system conditions that are similar in nature to almost everything that he may see, hear or feel. He will consequently be a reflection of the world in which he lives. He will think, speak and act as that world may suggest; he will

[p. 288]

float with the stream of that world wherever that stream may flow; he will not be an original character, but an automaton.

Every person that permits himself to be affected by suggestion is more or less an automaton, and is more or less in the hands of fate. To place fate in his own hands, he must use suggestions intelligently instead of blindly following those desires and thoughts that his surroundings may suggest. We are surrounded constantly by suggestions of all kinds, because everything has the power to suggest something to that mind that is susceptible, and we are all more or less susceptible in this respect. But there is a vast difference between permitting oneself to be susceptible to suggestion and training oneself to intelligently use those impressions that suggestions may convey.

The average writer on suggestion not only ignores this difference, but encourages susceptibility to suggestion by impressing the reader with the remark. that suggestion does control the world. If it is true that suggestion controls the world, more or less, we want to learn how to so use suggestion that its control of the human mind will decrease steadily; and this we can accomplish, not by teaching people how to use suggestion for the influencing of other minds, but in using those impressions conveyed by suggestion in the reconstruction of their own minds. Suggestion is a part of life, because everything has

[p. 289]

the power to suggest, and all minds are open to impressions. Nothing therefore can be said against suggestion by itself. Suggestion is a factor in our midst; it is a necessary factor. The problem is to train ourselves to make intelligent use of the impressions received, instead of blindly following the desires produced by those impressions as the majority do.

To proceed in the solution of this problem, never permit objects discerned by the senses to reproduce themselves in your mind against your will. Form your own ideas about what you see, hear or feel, and try to make those ideas superior to what was suggested by the objects discerned. When you see evil do not form ideas that are in the likeness of that evil; do not think of the evil as bad, but try to understand the forces that are back of that evil--forces that are good in themselves, though misdirected in their present state. By trying to understand the nature of the power that is back of evil or adversity, you will not form bad ideas, and therefore will feel no bad effects from experiences that may seem undesirable. At the same time, you will think your own thought about the experiences, thereby developing the power of the master mind.

Surround yourself as far as possible with those things that suggest the superior, but do not permit such suggestions to determine your thought about the superior. Those superior impressions that are

[p. 290]

suggested by superior environment should be used in forming still more superior thoughts. If you wish to be a master mind, your thought must always be higher than the thought your environment may suggest, no matter how ideal that environment may be. Every impression that enters the mind through the senses should be worked out and should be made to serve the mind in its fullest capacity. In this way the original impression will not reproduce itself in the mind, but will become instrumental in giving the mind a number of new and superior ideas.

To work out an impression, try to see through its whole nature. Look at it from every conceivable point of view, and try to discern its actions, tendencies, possibilities and probable defects. Use your imagination in determining what you want to think or do, what you are to desire and what your tendencies are to be. Know what you want, and then image those things upon the mind constantly. This will develop the power to think what you want to think, and he who can think what he wants to think is on the way to becoming what he wants to become.

The principal reason why the average person does not realize his ideals is because he has not learned to think what he wants to think. He is too much affected by the suggestions that are about him. He imitates the world too much, following desires that are not his own. He is therefore mislead and misplaced. Whenever you permit yourself to think what

[p. 291]

persons, things, conditions or circumstances may suggest, you are not following what you yourself want to think. You are not following your own desires but borrowed desires. You will therefore drift into strange thinking, and thinking that is entirely different from what you originally planned. To obey the call of every suggestion and permit your mind to be carried away by this, that or the other, will develop the tendency to drift until your mind will wander. Concentration will be almost absent and you will become wholly incapable of actually thinking what you want to think. One line of constructive thinking will scarcely be begun when another line will be suggested, and you will leave the unfinished task to begin something else, which in turn will be left incomplete. Nothing, therefore, will be accomplished.

To become a master mind, think what you want to think, no matter what your surroundings may suggest; and continue to think what you want to think until that particular line of thought or action has been completed. Desire what you want to desire and impress that desire so deeply upon consciousness that it cannot possibly be disturbed by those foreign desires that environment may suggest; and continue to express that desire with all the life and power that is in you until you get what you want. When you know that you are in the right desire, do not permit anything to influence your mind to change.

[p. 292]

Take such suggestions and convert them into the desire you have already decided upon, thereby giving that desire additional life and power. Never close your mind to impressions from without. Keep the mind open to the actions of all those worlds that may exist in your sphere and try to gain valuable impressions from every source, but do not blindly follow those impressions. Use them constructively in building up your own system of original thought. Think what you want to think, and so use every impression you receive that you gain greater power to think what you want to think. Thus you will gradually become a master mind.

[p. 293]

Follow the vision of the soul. Be true to your ideals no matter what may happen now. Then things will take a turn and the very things you wanted to happen will happen.

The ideal has a positive drawing power towards the higher, the greater and the superior. Whoever gives his attention constantly to the ideal, therefore, will steadily rise in the scale.

Take things as they are today and proceed at once to make them better.

Expect every change to lead you to something better and it will. As your faith is so shall it be.

To be human is not to be weak. To be human is to be all that there is in man, and the greatness that is contained in the whole of man is marvelous indeed.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 294] [p. 295]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

THE HIGHER FORCES IN MAN

It is the most powerful among the forces of the human system that we least understand, and though this may seem unfortunate, it is not unnatural. All advancement is in the ascending scale. We learn the simplest things first and the least valuable in the beginning. Later on, we learn that which is more important. We find therefore the greatest forces among those that are almost entirely hidden, and for that reason they are sometimes called the hidden forces, the finer forces, or the higher forces.

As it is in man, so it is also in nature. We find the most powerful among natural forces to be practically beyond comprehension. Electricity is an illustration. There is no greater force known in nature, and yet no one has thus far been able to determine what this force actually is. The same is true with regard to other natural forces; the greater they are and the more powerful they are, the more difficult it is to understand them. In the human system, there are a number of forces of exceptional value that we know nothing about; that is, we do not

[p. 296]

understand their real nature, but we can learn enough about the action, the purpose and the possibilities of those forces to apply them to practical life; and it is practical application with which we are most concerned.

The field of the finer forces in mind may be termed the unconscious mental field, and the vastness of this field, as well as the possibilities of its functions, is realized when we learn that the greater part of our mental world is unconscious. Only a fraction of the mental world of man is on the surface or up in consciousness; the larger part is submerged in the depths of what might be called a mental sea of subconsciousness. All modern psychologists have come to this conclusion, and it is a fact that any one can demonstrate in his own experience if he will take the time.

In the conscious field of the human mind, we find those actions of which we are aware during what may be called our wide-awake state; and they are seemingly insignificant in comparison with the actions of the vast unconscious world, though our conscious actions are found to be highly important when we learn that it is the conscious actions that originate unconscious actions. And here let us remember that it is our unconscious actions that determine our own natures, our own capabilities, as well as our own destiny. In our awakened state we continue to think and act in a small mental field,

[p. 297]

but all of those actions are constantly having their effect upon this vast unconscious field that is found beneath the mental surface.

To realize the existence of this unconscious mental world, and to realize our power to determine the actions of that world, is to awaken within us a feeling that we are many times as great and as capable as we thought we were, and the more we think of this important fact, the larger becomes our conscious view of life and its possibilities.

To illustrate the importance of the unconscious field and your finer forces, we will take the force of love. No one understands the nature of this force, nor has any one been able to discover its real origin or its actual possibilities; nevertheless, it is a force that is tremendously important in human life. Its actions are practically hidden, and we do not know what constitutes the inner nature of those actions, but we do know how to control those actions in a measure for our own good; and we have discovered that when we do control and properly direct the actions of love, its value to everybody concerned is multiplied many times. It is the same with a number of other forces with which we are familiar. They act along higher or finer lines of human consciousness, and they are so far beyond ordinary comprehension that we cannot positively know what they are. But we do know enough about them to control them and direct them for our best and greatest good.

[p. 298]

[paragraph continues] In like manner, the unconscious mental field, though beyond scientific analysis, is sufficiently understood as to its modes of action, so that we can control and direct those actions as we may choose. When we analyze what comes forth from the unconscious field at any time, we find that it is invariably the result of something that we caused to be placed in that field during some past time. This leads up to the discovery of unconscious mental processes, and it is not difficult to prove the existence of such processes.

Many a time ideas, desires, feelings or aspirations come to the surface of thought that we are not aware of having created at any time. We come to the conclusion, therefore, that they were produced by some unconscious process, but when we examine those ideas or desires carefully, we find that they are simply effects corresponding exactly with certain causes that we previously placed in action in our conscious world. When we experiment along this line we find that we can produce a conscious process at any time, and through deep feeling cause it to enter the unconscious mental world. In that deeper world, it goes to work and produces according to its nature, the results coming back to the surface of our conscious mentality days, weeks or months later. The correspondence between conscious and unconscious mental processes may be illustrated by a simple movement in physical action. If a physical movement

[p. 299]

began at a certain point, and was caused to act with a circular tendency, it would finally come back to its starting point. It is the same with every conscious action that is deeply felt. It goes out into the vastness of the unconscious mental field, and having a circular tendency, as all mental actions have, it finally comes back to the point where it began; and in coming back, brings with it the result of every unconscious experience through which it passed on its circular journey.

To go into this subject deeply, and analyze every phase of it would be extremely interesting; in fact, it would be more interesting than fiction. It would require, however, a large book to do it justice. For this reason, we can simply touch upon the practical side of it, but will aim to make this brief outline sufficiently clear to enable any one to direct his unconscious process in such a way as to secure the best results.

Every mental process, or every mental action, that takes place in our wide-awake consciousness will, if it has depth of feeling or intensity, enter the unconscious field, and after it has developed itself according to the line of its original nature, will return to the conscious side of the mind. Here we find the secret of character building, and also the secret of building faculties and talents. Everything that is done in the conscious field to improve the mind, character, conduct or thought will, if it has sincerity and

[p. 300]

depth of feeling, enter the unconscious field; and later will come back with fully developed qualities, which when in expression, constitutes character. Many a man, however, after trying for some time to improve himself and seeing no results, becomes discouraged. He forgets that some time always intervenes between the period of sowing and the period of reaping. What he does in the conscious field to improve himself, constitutes the sowing, when those actions enter the conscious field to be developed; and when they come back, it may be weeks or months later, the reaping time has arrived. Many a time, after an individual has given up self-improvement, he discovers, after a considerable period, that good qualities are beginning to come to the surface in his nature, thereby proving conclusively that what he did months ago along that line was not in vain. The results of past efforts are beginning to appear. We have all had similar experiences, and if we would carefully analyze such experiences, we would find that not a single conscious process that is sufficiently deep or intense to become an unconscious process will fail to come back finally with its natural results. Many a time ideas come into our minds that we wanted weeks ago, and could not get them at that time; but we did place in action certain deep, strong desires for those ideas, at that particular time, and though our minds were not prepared to develop those

[p. 301]

ideas at once, they finally were developed and came to the surface.

The fact that this process never fails indicates the value of giving the mind something to work out for future need. If we have something that we want to do months ahead, we should give the mind definite instruction now and make those instructions so deep, that they will become unconscious processes. Those unconscious processes will, according to directions, work out the ideas and plans that we want for that future work, and in the course of time, will bring results to the surface. To go into detail along the line of this part of our study would also be more interesting than fiction, but again, a large book would be required to do it justice. However, if we make it a practice to place in action our best thoughts, our best ideas and our best desires now and every moment of the eternal now, we will be giving the unconscious mental field something good to work for at all times; and as soon as each product is finished, or ready to be delivered from the unconscious world, it will come to the surface, and will enter the conscious mind ready for use.

Some of the best books that have been written have been worked out during months of unconscious mental processes; the same is true with regard to inventions, dramas, musical compositions, business plans, and in fact, anything and everything of importance that could be mentioned. Every idea, every

[p. 302]

thought, every feeling, every desire, every mental action, may, under certain circumstances, produce an unconscious process corresponding with itself, and this process will in every instance bring back to consciousness the result of its work. When we realize this, and realize the vast possibilities of the unconscious field, we will see the advantage of placing in action as many good unconscious processes as possible. Give your unconscious mental world something important to do every hour. Place a new seed in that field every minute. It may take weeks or months before that seed brings forth its fruit, but it will bring forth, after its kind, in due time without fail.

We understand, therefore, how we can build character by sowing seeds of character in this field, and how we can, in the same way, build desirable conduct, a different disposition, different mental tendencies, stronger and greater mental faculties, and more perfect talents along any line. To direct these unconscious processes, it is necessary to apply the finer forces of the system, as it is those forces that invariably determine how those processes are to act. Those forces, however, are very easily applied, as all that is necessary in the beginning is to give attention to the way we feel. The way we feel determines largely what our finer forces are to be and how they are to act, and there is not an hour when we do not feel certain energies at work in our system. All the

[p. 303]

finer forces are controlled by feeling. Try to feel what you want done either in the conscious or the unconscious mental fields, and you will place in action forces that correspond to what you want done. Those forces will enter the unconscious mental world and produce processes through which the desired results will be created.

Whenever you want to redirect any force that is highly refined, you must feel the way you want that force to act. To illustrate, we will suppose you have certain emotions in your mental world that are not agreeable. To give the energies of those emotions a new and more desirable force of action, change your emotions by giving your whole attention in trying to feel such emotions as you may desire. And here let us remember that every emotion that comes up in the system is teeming with energy; but as most emotions continue to act without any definite control, we realize how much energy is wasted through uncurbed emotions. We know from experience, that whenever we give way to our feelings, we become weak. The reason is that every uncontrolled feeling wastes energy. A great many people who are very intense in their feelings, actually become sick whenever they give way to strong or deep emotions. On the other hand, emotions that are controlled and properly directed, not only prevent waste, but will actually increase the strength of mind and body. Here is a good practice. Whenever you feel the way you do

[p. 304]

not wish to feel, begin to think deeply and in the most interesting manner possible, of those things that you wish to accomplish. If you can throw your whole soul, so to speak, into those new directions, you will soon find your undesired feelings disappearing completely. Every individual should train himself to feel the way he wants to feel, and this is possible if he will always direct his attention to something desirable whenever undesired feelings come up. Through this practice he will soon get such full control over his feelings that he can always feel the way he wants to feel, no matter what the circumstances may be. He will thus gain the power not only of controlling his emotions and using constructively all those energies that invariably appear in his emotions, but he will also have found the secret of continued happiness. Whenever mental energy moves in a certain direction, it tends to build up power for good along that line. We realize therefore the value of directing all our attention upon those things in mind, character and life that we wish to build and develop.

In building character we find the results to be accumulative; that is, we make an effort to improve our life or conduct, and thereby produce an unconscious process, which will later on, give us more strength of character to be and live the way we wish to be and live. This in turn will enable us to produce more and stronger unconscious processes along

[p. 305]

the line of character building, which will finally return with a greater number of good qualities. The result of this action will be to give us more power to build for a still greater character, and so this process may be continued indefinitely.

The same is true with regard to building the mind. The more you build the mind, the greater becomes your mental power to build a still greater mind; but in each case, it is the unconscious process that must be produced in order that the greater character or greater mind may be developed from within. In this connection, it is well to remember that the principal reason why so many people fail to improve along any line is because their desires or efforts for improvement are not sufficiently deep and strong to become unconscious processes. To illustrate, it is like placing seed on stony ground. If the seed is not placed in good, deep soil it will not grow. You may desire self-improvement for days, but if those desires are weak or superficial, they will not enter the unconscious field; and no action, however good it may be, if it fails to enter the unconscious field, will also fail to produce results along the line of self-improvement.

With regard to the building of character, we must also remember that character determines in a large measure the line of action of all the other forces in the human system. If your character is strong and well developed, every force that you place in action

[p. 306]

will be constructive; while if your character is weak, practically all your forces will go astray. This is not true in the moral field alone, but also in the field of mental achievement. If the character is weak, your ability will be mostly misdirected no matter how hard you may work, or how sincere you may be in your effort to do your best. This explains why a great many people do not realize their ideals. They have paid no attention to character building, and therefore, nearly every effort that they may have made in trying to work up towards their ideals, has been misdirected and sent astray. Whatever our ideals may be therefore, or how great our desires may be to realize those ideals, we must first have character; and even though we may be able to place in action the most powerful forces in the human system, we will not get results until we have character. It is character alone that can give the powers of man constructive direction, and it is a well-known fact chat those people who have a strong, firm, well-developed character easily move from the good to the better, no matter what the circumstances.

What may be called the higher forces in man act invariably through our most sublime states of consciousness, and as it is these higher forces that enable man to become or accomplish more than the average, it is highly important that we attain the power to enter sublime consciousness at frequent intervals. No man or woman of any worth was ever

[p. 307]

known, who did not have experience in these sublime states; in fact, it is impossible to rise above the ordinary in life or achievement without drawing, more or less, upon the higher realms of consciousness. People are sometimes criticised for not being on the earth all the time, but it is necessary to get above the earth occasionally in order to find something worth while to live for and work for while upon earth. The most powerful forces in human life can  drawn down to earth for practical use, but to get them we must go to the heights frequently. No one can write music unless his consciousness touches the sublime. No one can write real poetry unless he has the same experience. No one can evolve ideas worth while unless his mind transcends the so-called practical sphere of action, and no individual can rise in the world of attainment and achievement unless his mind dwells almost constantly on the verge of the sublime. Examine the minds of people of real worth, people who have something in them, people who are beyond the average, people who are rising in the scale, people whom we truly admire, people that we look up to, people who occupy high positions--positions that they have actually won through merit--and we find in every instance, that their minds touch frequently the sublime state of consciousness. When we touch that state, our minds are drawn up above the ordinary, and mental actions are developed and worked out that are superior to ordinary or average

[p. 308]

mental actions. It is therefore simply understood that experience in sublime consciousness if properly employed, will invariably make man greater and better.

When we look upon a man that we can truthfully say is a real man, we find that something unusual has been or is being expressed in his personality; and that something unusual is hidden in every personality. It is a hidden power, a hidden force, which, when placed in action, gives man superior worth, both as to character, ability and life. Real men and real women, people who are real in the true sense of the term, are always born from the sublime state of consciousness; that is, they have, through coming in contact with higher regions of thought, evolved greater worth in their own minds and personalities; and as this possibility is within reach of every man or woman, we see the importance of dealing thoroughly with these higher powers in human nature.

Whenever we touch those finer states in the upper regions of the mind, we invariably feel that we have gained something superior, something that we did not possess before; and the gaining of that something invariably makes life stronger as well as finer. The ordinary has been, in a measure, overcome, and that which is beyond the ordinary is being gradually evolved. If we would rise in the scale in the fullest and best sense of the term, we must pay close attention to those higher forces and make it a practice to

[p. 309]

enter frequently into close touch with higher states of consciousness; in fact, we simply must do it, because if we do not, we will continue to move along a very ordinary level. Then we must also bear in mind that it is our purpose to use all the forces we possess, not simply those that we can discern on the outside or that we are aware of in external consciousness, but also those finer and more powerful forces which we can control and direct only when we ascend to the heights.

In dealing with these greater powers in man, it will be worth our while to reconsider briefly the psychological field. As long as the mind acts on the surface of consciousness, we have very little control of those finer elements in human life, but when the mind goes into the depths of feeling, into the depths of realization, or into what is called the psychological field, then it is that it touches everything that has real worth or that has the power to evolve, produce or develop still greater worth. It is the active forces of the psychological field that determine everything that is to take place in the life of man, both within himself and in his external destiny. We must therefore learn to act through the psychological field if we would master ourselves and create our own future.

The psychological field can be defined as that field of subconscious action that permeates the entire personality, or that fills, so to speak, every atom of the

[p. 310]

physical man on a finer plane. The psychological field is a finer field, permeating the ordinary tangible physical elements of life, and we enter this field whenever our feelings are deep and sincere. The fact that the psychological field determines real worth, as well as the attainment of greater worth, is easily demonstrated in every day experience. When a man has anything in him, his nature is always deep. The same is true of people of refinement or culture; there is depth to their natures, and the man of character invariably lives in that greater world of life and power that is back of, or beneath, the surface of consciousness. If there is something in you, you both live and act through the deeper realms of your life, and those realms constitute the psychological field.

Among the many important forces coming directly through emotion or feeling, one of the most valuable is that of enthusiasm. In the average mind, enthusiasm runs wild, but we have found that when this force is properly directed it becomes a great constructive power. When you are enthusiastic about something, it is always about something new or something better--something that holds possibilities that you did not realize before. Your enthusiasm, if properly directed, will naturally cause your mind to move towards those possibilities, and enthusiasm is readily directed when you concentrate attention exclusively upon that something new that inspires enthusiasm.

[p. 311]

[paragraph continues] By turning your attention upon the thing that produces enthusiasm, the mind will move forward toward those greater possibilities that are discerned. This forward movement of the mind will tend to renew and enlarge the mind so that it will gain a still greater conception of those possibilities. This will increase your enthusiasm, which will in turn impel your mind to move forward still further in the same direction. Thus a still larger conception of those possibilities will be secured, which in turn will increase your enthusiasm and the power of your mind to take a third step in advance. We thus realize that if enthusiasm is directed upon the possibilities that originally inspired that enthusiasm, we will not only continue to be enthused, but we will in that very manner, cause the mind to move forward steadily and develop steadily, so that in time it will gain sufficient power to actually work out those possibilities upon which attention has been directed. In this connection, we must also remember that we can grow and advance only as we pass into the new. It is new life, new thought, new states of consciousness that are demanded if we are to take any steps at all in advance, and as enthusiasm tends directly to inspire the mind to move towards the new, we see how important it is to continue, not only to live in the spirit of enthusiasm, but to direct that spirit upon the goal in view. It is invariably the enthusiastic

[p. 312]

mind that moves forward, that does things, and that secures results.

Two other forces of great value, belonging to this group, are appreciation and gratitude. Whenever you appreciate a certain thing you become conscious of its real quality, and whenever you become conscious of the quality of anything, you begin to develop that quality in yourself. When we appreciate the worth of a person, we tend to impress the idea of that worth in our own minds, and thereby cause the same effect to be produced, in a measure, in ourselves. The same is true if we appreciate our own worth, in a sensible and constructive manner. If we appreciate what we already are, and are ambitious to become still more, we focus our minds upon the greater, and employ what we already possess as stepping stones towards the greater attainment; but when we do not appreciate ourselves, there are no stepping stones that we can use in attaining greater things. We thus realize why people that do not appreciate themselves never accomplish much, and why they finally go down grade in nearly every instance.

When we appreciate the beautiful in anything, we awaken our minds to a higher and better understanding of the beautiful. Our minds thus become, in a measure, more beautiful. The same is true with regard to any quality. Whatever we appreciate, we tend to develop in ourselves, and here we find a remarkable aid to the power of concentration, because

[p. 313]

we always concentrate attention perfectly, naturally and thoroughly upon those things that we fully appreciate. Thus we understand why it is that we tend to develop in ourselves the things that we admire in others.

Whenever you feel grateful for anything, you always feel nearer to the real quality of that particular thing. A person who is ungrateful, however, always feels that there is a wall between himself and the good things in life. Usually there is such a wall, though he has produced it himself through his ingratitude. But the man who is grateful for everything, places himself in that attitude where he may come in closer contact with the best things everywhere; and we know very well that the most grateful people always receive the best attention everywhere. We all may meet disappointment at some time and not get exactly what we wanted, but we shall find that the more grateful we are, the less numerous will those disappointments become. It has been well said that no one feels inclined to give his best attention to the man who is always "knocking," and it is literally true. On the other hand, if you are really grateful and mean it, it is very seldom that yon do not receive the best attention from everybody wherever you may go.

The most important side of this law, however, is found in the fact that the more grateful you are for everything good that comes into your life, the more

[p. 314]

closely you place your mind in contact with that power in life that can produce greater good.

Another among the finer forces is that of aspiration. No person should fail to aspire constantly and aspire to the very highest that he can possibly awaken in his life. Aspiration always tends to elevate the mind and tends to lift the mind into larger and greater fields of action. And when the mind finds itself in this larger field of action, it will naturally gain power to do greater things. We all realize that so long as we live down in the lower story, we can not accomplish very much; it is when we lift our minds to the higher stories of the human structure that we begin to gain possession of ideas and powers through which greater things may be achieved.

The same is true of ambition. Ambition not only tends to draw the mind up into higher and larger fields, but also tends to build up those faculties through which we are to work. If you are tremendously ambitious to do a certain thing, the force of that ambition will tend to increase the power and ability of that faculty through which your ambition may be realized. To illustrate, if you are ambitious to succeed in the business world, the force of that ambition, is very strong, will constantly make your business faculties stronger and more able, so that finally your business ability will have become sufficiently great to carry your ambition through. You

[p. 315]

cannot be too ambitious, provided you are ambitious for something definite and continue to give your whole life and soul to that which you expect or desire to accomplish through that ambition. When we know the power of ambition, and know that anybody can be ambitious, we realize that any one can move forward. No matter what his position may be, or where he may be, he can, through the power of ambition begin to gain ground, and continue to gain ground indefinitely. The average mind, however, has very little ambition, and makes no effort to arouse this tremendous force; but we may depend upon the fact that when this force is fully aroused in any mind, a change for the better must positively come before long.

The force of an ideal is another among the finer forces that should receive constant and thorough attention. When you have an ideal and live for it every second of your existence, you place yourself in the hands of a drawing power that is immense, and that power will tend to draw out into action every force, power and faculty that you may possess, especially those forces and qualities that will have to be developed in order that you may realize that ideal.

Have an ideal, and the highest that you can picture. Then worship it every hour with your whole soul. Never come down, and do not neglect it for a moment. We all know very well that it is the people

[p. 316]

who actually worship their high ideals with mind and heart and soul that finally realize those ideals. It is such people who reach the high places and the reason why is easily explained. Give your attention, or rather, your whole life to some lofty ideal, and you will tend to draw into action all the finer and higher forces of your system--those forces that can create greater ability, greater talent, greater genius--those forces that can increase your capacity, bring into action all your finer elements and give you superior power and superior worth in every sense of the term--those forces which, when aroused, cannot positively fail to do the work you wish to have done.

A fact well known in this connection is that when the mind is turned persistently upon a certain ideal, every power that is in you begins to flow in that direction, and this is the very thing you want. When we can get all that is in us to work for our ideals and to work towards our ideals, then we shall positively reach whatever goal we have in view.

Closely connected with our ideals, we find our visions and dreams. The man without a vision will never be anything but an ordinary man, and the people who never dream of greater things, will never get beyond ordinary things. It is our visions and dreams that lift our minds to lofty realms, that make us feel that there is something greater and better to work for; and when we become inspired with a desire to work for greater and better

[p. 317]

things, we will not only proceed to carry out those desires, but will finally secure sufficient power to fulfill those desires. "The nation that has no vision shall perish." This is a great truth that we have heard a thousand times, and we know the reason why; but the same truth is applicable to man. If he has no vision, he will go down; but if he has visions, the highest and most perfect visions he can possibly imagine, and lives constantly for their realization, he will positively ascend in the scale. He will become a greater and a greater man, and those things that were at one time simply dreams, will, in the course of time, become actual realities.

The power of love is another force in this higher group that is extremely valuable, and the reason is that it is the tendency of love to turn attention upon the ideal, the beautiful and the more perfect. When you love somebody, you do not look for their faults; in fact, you do not see their faults. Your whole attention is turned upon their good qualities, and here let us remember that whatever we continue to see in others, we develop in ourselves. The power of real love always tends to draw out into expression the finer elements of mind, character and life. For that reason, we should always love, love much, and love the most ideal and the most perfect that we can discover in everybody and in everything that we may meet in life. We have all discovered that when. a man really loves an ideal woman, or the woman

[p. 318]

that constitutes his ideal, he invariably becomes stronger in character, more powerful in personality, and more able in mind. When a woman loves an ideal man, or her ideal, she invariably becomes more attractive. The beautiful in her nature comes forth into full expression and many times the change is so great that we can hardly believe that she is the same woman. The power of love, if genuine, constant and strong, tends to improve everything in human life; and as this power is one of the higher forces in human nature, we readily understand the reason why. We can therefore without further comment, draw our own conclusions as to how we will use this power in the future.

The last of these finer forces that we shall mention, and possibly the strongest, is that of faith; but we must remember if we wish to use this force, that faith does not constitute a belief or any system of beliefs; it is a mental action--an action that goes into the very spirit of those things which we may think of or apply at the time we exercise faith. When you have faith in yourself you place in action a force that goes into the very depth of your being and tends to arouse all the greater powers and finer elements that you may possess. The same is true when you have faith in a certain faculty or in a certain line of action. The power of faith goes into the spirit of things and makes alive, so to speak, the all that is in you. The power of faith also produces perfect

[p. 319]

concentration. Whenever you have faith along a certain line, you concentrate perfectly along that line, and you cause all the power that is in your mind or system to work for the one thing you are trying to do. It has been discovered that the amount of energy latent in the human system is nothing less than enormous, and as faith tends to arouse all this energy, we realize how important and how powerful is faith.

The effect of faith upon yourself therefore is beneficial in the highest and largest sense, but this is not its only effect. The more faith you have in yourself, the more faith people will have in you. If you have no confidence in yourself you will never inspire confidence in anybody; but if you thoroughly believe in yourself, people will believe in you and in your work. And when people believe in you, you can accomplish ten times as much as when they have no confidence in you whatever.

When a man has tremendous faith in himself, he becomes a live wire, so to speak. It is such a man that becomes a real and vital power wherever he may live or go. It is such a man who leads the race on and on. It is such a man who really does things, and it is people of such a type that we love the best. They invariably inspire others to love the nobler life and to attempt greater things in life, and for this reason their presence is of exceptional value to the progress of the race. To go into details, however,

[p. 320]

is not necessary. We all know and appreciate the value of faith. We all know that it is one of the highest and one of the greatest forces that man can exercise; we therefore realize how important it becomes to train ourselves to have unbounded faith in everything and in everybody at all times, and under all circumstances.

[p. 321]

  

With All Thy Faults I Love Thee Still

Thus sings the poet, and we call him sentimental; that is, at first thought we do. But upon second thought we change our minds. We then find that faults and defects are always in the minority, and that the larger part of human nature is so wonderful and so beautiful that it needs must inspire admiration and love in everybody. With all their defects there is nothing more interesting than human beings; and the reason is that for every shortcoming in man there are a thousand admirable qualities. The poet, being inspired by the sublime vision of truth, can see this; therefore, what can he do but love? Whenever his eyes are lifted and whenever his thoughts take wings, his soul declares with greater eloquence than ever before, "What a piece of work is man!" Thus every moment renews his admiration, and every thought rekindles the fire of his love.

     
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 322] [p. 323]

  

CHAPTER XX

  

THE GREATEST POWER IN MAN

It is the conclusion of modern psychology that the powers and the possibilities inherent in man are practically unbounded. And this conclusion is based upon two great facts. First, that no limit has been found to anything in human nature; and second, that everything in human nature contains a latent capacity for perpetual development.

The discovery of these two facts--and no discovery of greater importance has appeared in any age--gives man a new conception of himself, a conception, which, when applied, will naturally revolutionize the entire field of human activity.

To be able to discern the real significance of this new conception becomes, therefore, the greatest power in man, and should, in consequence, be given the first thought in all efforts that have advancement, attainment or achievement in view. The purpose of each individual should be, not simply to cultivate and apply those possibilities that are now in evidence, but also to develop the power to discern and fathom what really exists within him. This

[p. 324]

power is the greatest power, because it prepares the way for the attainment and expression of all other powers. It is the power that unlocks the door to all power, and must be understood and applied before anything of greater value can be accomplished through human thought or action.

The principal reason why the average person remains weak and incompetent is found in the fact that he makes no effort to fathom and understand the depths of his real being. He may try to use what is in action on the surface, but he is almost entirely unconscious of the fact that enormous powers are in existence in the greater depths of his life. These powers are dormant simply because they have not been called into action, and they will continue to lie dormant until man develops his greatest power--the power to discern what really exists within him.

The fundamental cause of failure is found in the belief that what exists on the surface, is all there is of man, and the reason why greatness is a rare exception instead of a universal rule can be traced to the same cause. When the mind discovers that its powers are inexhaustible and that its faculties and talents can be developed to any degree imaginable, the fear of failure will entirely disappear. In its stead will come the conviction that man may attain anything or achieve anything. Whatever circumstances may be today, such a mind will know that all can be changed, that the limitations of the

[p. 325]

person can be made to pass away, and that the greater desires of the heart can be realized.

That mind that can discern what exists in the depths of the real life of man does not simply change its views as to what man may attain and achieve, but actually begins to draw, in a measure, upon those inexhaustible powers within; and begins accordingly to develop and apply those greater possibilities that this deeper discernment has revealed. When man can see through and understand what exists beneath the surface of his life, the expression of his deeper life will begin, because whatever we become conscious of, that we tend to bring forth into tangible expressions, and since the deeper life contains innumerable possibilities as well as enormous power, it is evident that when this deeper life is clearly discerned and completely taken possession of in the consciousness, practically anything may be attained or achieved. The idea that there is more of man than what appears on the surface should be so constantly and so deeply impressed upon the mind that it becomes a positive conviction, and no thoughts should be placed in action unless it is based upon this conviction. To live, think and act in the realization that "there is more of me" should be the constant aim of every individual, and this more will constantly develop, coming forth in greater and greater measure, giving added power and capacity in life to everything that is in action in the human system.

[p. 326]

When the average individual fails, he either blames circumstances or comes to the conclusion that he was not equal to the occasion. He therefore easily gives up and tries to be content with the lesser. But if he knew that there was more in him than what he had applied in his undertaking he would not give up. He would know by developing and applying this more, he positively would succeed where he had previously failed. It is therefore evident that when man gives attention to his greater power--the power to discern the more that is in him--he will never give up until he does succeed, and in consequence, he invariably will succeed.

That individual who knows his power does not judge according to appearances. He never permits himself to believe that this or that cannot be done. He knows that those things can be done, because he has discovered what really exists within him. He works in the conviction that he must, can and will succeed, because he has the power; and it is the truth--he does have the power--we all have the power. To live, think and work in the conviction that there is more of you within the real depths of your being, and to know that this more is so immense that no limit to its power can be found, will cause the mind to come into closer and closer touch with this greater power within, and you will consequently get possession of more and more of this power.

[p. 327]

The mind that lives in this attitude opens the door of consciousness, so to speak, to everything in human life that has real quality and worth. It places itself in that position where it can respond to the best that exists within itself, and modern psychology has discovered that this best is extraordinary in quality, limitless in power, and contains possibilities that cannot be numbered.

It is the truth that man is a marvelous being--nothing less than marvelous; and the greatest power in man is the power to discern the marvelousness that really does exist within him.

It is the law that we steadily develop and bring forth whatever we think of the most. It is therefore profitable to think constantly of our deeper nature and to try to fathom the limitlessness and the inexhaustibleness of these great and marvelous depths.

In practical life this mode of thinking will have the same effect upon the personal mind as that which is secured in a wire that is not charged when it touches a wire that is charged. The great within is a live wire; when the mind touches the great within, it becomes charged more and more with those same immense powers; and the mind will constantly be in touch with the great within when it lives, thinks and works in the firm conviction that "there is more of me,"--so much more that it cannot be measured.

We can receive from this deeper life only that

[p. 328]

which we constantly recognize and constantly realize, because consciousness is the door between the outer life and the great within, and we open the door to those things only of which we become conscious.

The principal reason therefore why the average person does not possess greater powers and talents, is because he is not conscious of more; and he is not conscious of more because he has not vitally recognized the great depths of his real life, and has not tried to consciously fathom the possibilities that are latent within him. The average person lives on the surface. He thinks that the surface is all there is of him, and consequently does not place himself in touch with the live wire of his interior and inexhaustible nature. He does not exercise his greatest power--the power to discern what his whole nature actually contains; therefore, he doer not unlock the door to any of his other powers.

This being true, we can readily understand why mortals are weak--they are weak simply because they have chosen weakness; but when they begin to choose power and greatness, they will positively become what they have chosen to become.

We all must admit that there is more in man than what is usually expressed in the average person. We may differ as to how much more, but we must agree that the more should be developed, expressed and applied in everybody. It is wrong, both to the individual

[p. 329]

and to the race, for any one to remain in the lesser when it is possible to attain the greater. It is right that we all should ascend to the higher, the greater and the better now. And we all can.

    
Your Forces and How to Use Them, by Christian D. Larson, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

TEXT ON FRONT COVER OF DUST JACKET

  

BOOKS OF POWER AND PROGRESS

IT is only a few years, not more than a quarter of a century, since modern psychology began to proclaim the new science of human thought and action, so that we have had but a short time to demonstrate what a more intelligent application of our energies and forces can accomplish. But already the evidence is coming in from all sources, revealing results that frequently border upon the extraordinary. Man can do far more with himself and his life than he has been doing in the past; he can call into action, and successfully apply, far more ability, energy and worth than his forefathers ever imagined.

It is the purpose of these books not only to discuss these greater powers and possibilities in man, but also to present practical methods through which they may be applied, and to encourage as many as possible to study and apply these greater powers within them so that they may not only become greater and richer and more worthy as individuals, but may also become the forerunners of that higher and more wonderful race of which we all have so fondly dreamed.

  

WHAT READERS SAY

"A great help and inspiration to me." Montpelier, Miss.

"The best books I have ever read. I am sorry I did not become interested in your books years ago." Los Angeles, Calif.

"I recommend your writings to the whole human family. They are, indeed, great." New Orleans, La.

"Such literature is doing great good in the world, truly an Emancipator of the race from the old creeds and dogmas." Los Angeles, Calif.

"You are king of New Thought writers. Your works contain more inspiration than all the others." Memphis, Tenn.

"I could not exchange them for all the other books in the house" Bridgeport, O.

  

READ THE LARSON BOOKS

  

TEX ON FRONT DUST JACKET FLAP

  

My Ideal of Marriage

By CHRISTIAN D. LARSON, author of "Poise and Power," etc. 16mo, net 50c. (postage extra).

When one undertakes to write something new about an institution so old as marriage, one must, at least, have the courage of one's convictions--plus something to say. The many readers of the Larson books will be assured at the outset of these two assets. Their chief curiosity will he as to how gently he will deal with this sacred theme. Mr. Larson has taught in all his books that progress is the inevitable law of life, and all that does not progress must be thrust aside. We are not surprised, therefore, to find him stating that "among the many institutions that will be affected directly and immediately by the great changes that are rapidly coming over the world, the institution of marriage is by no means the least important." Again he says, "Marriage today does not measure up to .the new ideals of life; and the modern home, with a few noble exceptions, does not possess those finer elements that alone can lift the race to a higher level of conduct and existence. A decided change, therefore, must come, both in the ideals of the home and in the ideals of the marital state; but we must understand the psychology of sex before we can proceed to bring about the change required." The author, however, is not iconoclastic in the present book. His .criticism is constructive, and as it is presented by a series of logical steps it is hardly fair to make brief excerpts. Instead, the reader is invited to follow for himself the arguments through which the author reaches his "ideal." Whether or not one agrees, the book will provide abundant food for thought.

Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York

TEX ON BACK DUST JACKET FLAP

  

In the Light of the Spirit

By CHRISTIAN D. LARSON, author of "Your Forces and How to Use Them," etc. 195 pages, 8vo, net $1.00 (postage extra).

With his accustomed sane and broad theology, Mr. Larson here presents' a series of talks upon the spiritual life. He is especially interested in the life of the hereafter, which, he points out, is bound up with the now. "The true pathway of life is the eternal path of an endless ascension--the soul rising ever and ever into higher and higher states of existence. It is the path of wisdom and light, the path of freedom and truth--the straight and narrow path--the path leading directly toward the spiritual heights; but it is not a path of suffering. There is neither suffering nor bondage upon this path. It is when we step outside this path that we suffer."

The author divides his discussion into eighteen chapters: "Leave it to God," "The Highest Prayer," "The Religion of the Soul," "The Secret of Spiritual Power," and "Regions of Infinite Repose," are among suggestive captions. To read the Larson books is to get a refreshing, common-sense view of life's larger questions. He is not concerned with creeds and isms. He pictures the soul as constantly expanding and therefore requiring the broadest limits in its search for the truth. The final life is the spiritual. When, therefore, "the human entity begins to realize that the spiritual side is more real than the physical side, consciousness will begin to function more definitely upon the spiritual side; that is, life will he lived, not from the body, but from the soul; and when we live in the soul, and from the soul, we will give expression to an ever-increasing measure of life. wisdom and power."

Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York

  

TEX ON BACK COVER OF JACKET FLAP

The following is a catalog of Larson's books which appeared on the back cover of the dust jacket of the original 1912 edition. It is included for completeness.--JBH

  

BOOKS BY CHRISTIAN D. LARSON

YOUR FORCES AND HOW TO USE THEM

This book will help you to think with your whole mind. $1.25 Net.

BRAINS AND HOW TO GET THEM

Declared by experts to be truly a remarkable book. $1.25 Net.

THE PATHWAY OF ROSES

Twenty-eight inspiring chapters on the finer things in human life. $1.25 Net.

HOW TO STAY WELL

On how to secure perfect health through the use of the higher powers. $1.25

HOW TO STAY YOUNG

Learn to stay young; there is so much to learn, so much to live for. $1.00 Net.

THE IDEAL MADE REAL

or Applied Metaphysics For Beginners. Chapters of instruction, inspiration and power. $1.00 Net.

WHAT IS TRUTH

A book that will give to everybody a higher and a finer vision of real truth. $1.00

HOW THE MIND WORKS

This is something we all must understand. Twenty chapters of invaluable information $1.00 Net.

BUSINESS PSYCHOLOGY

A subject in which all wide-awake business men have become deeply interested. $1.00 Net.

THINKING FOR RESULTS

How to use the wonderful powers of the mind for practical results in every day 50c Net.

POISE AND POWER

Methods that will cure all nervousness, and increase your working capacity. 50c Net.

THE GREAT WITHIN

The best book on the subconscious mind ever published. 50c Net.

THE HIDDEN SECRET

Something new on the wonderful power of faith--the faith that moves mountains. 50c Net.

MASTERY OF FATE

We can change fate and control circumstances. This book explains how. 50c Net.

HOW GREAT MEN SUCCEED

A book that should be in the hands of every ambitious man or woman. 50c Net.

SCIENTIFIC TRAINING OF CHILDREN

Invaluable information on a great and vital subject. 50c Net.

MASTERY OF SELF

The man who masters himself can master his destiny. 50c Net.

THE MIND CURE

The book you want if you want a strong mind, a well-balanced mind. 50c Net.

PERFECT HEALTH

A scientific treatise on "The Highest Curative Power In Man." 50c Net.

ON THE HEIGHTS

For those who yearn for the lofty, the beautiful, the sublime. 50c Net.

JUST BE GLAD

If you want sunshine and gladness, this book will give you the secret. 50c Net.

NOTHING SUCCEEDS LIKE SUCCESS

A thoughtful exposition of the mainsprings of success. 16mo. 50c Net.

IN THE LIGHT OF THE SPIRIT

The answer to questions being asked by almost every one at the present time. $1.00 Net.

MY IDEAL OF MARRIAGE

An elevating book. Should be in every family. 50c Net.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ysp.txt =====


     
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE YOGA SUTRAS OF PATANJALI

  

The Book of the Spiritual Man

  

An Interpretation By

  

Charles Johnston

  

Indian Civil Service, Sanskrit Prizeman
 Dublin University, Sanskrit Prizeman

  

New York: Charles Johnston

  

[1912]

Formatted, with additional proofing at sacred-texts.com, October, 2007. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

      
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTRODUCTION TO BOOK I

The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali are in themselves exceedingly brief, less than ten pages of large type in the original. Yet they contain the essence of practical wisdom, set forth in admirable order and detail. The theme, if the present interpreter be right, is the great regeneration, the birth of the spiritual from the psychical man: the same theme which Paul so wisely and eloquently set forth in writing to his disciples in Corinth, the theme of all mystics in all lands.

We think of ourselves as living a purely physical life, in these material bodies of ours. In reality, we have gone far indeed from pure physical life; for ages, our life has been psychical, we have been centred and immersed in the psychic nature. Some of the schools of India say that the psychic nature is, as it were, a looking-glass, wherein are mirrored the things seen by the physical eyes, and heard by the physical ears. But this is a magic mirror; the images remain, and take a certain life of their own. Thus within the psychic realm of our life there grows up an imaged world wherein we dwell; a world of the images of things seen and heard, and therefore a world of memories; a world also of hopes and desires, of fears and regrets. Mental life grows up among these images, built on a measuring and comparing, on the massing of images together into general ideas; on the abstraction of new notions and images from these; till a new world is built up within, full of desires and hates, ambition, envy, longing, speculation, curiosity, self-will, self-interest.

The teaching of the East is, that all these are true powers overlaid by false desires; that though in manifestation psychical, they are in essence spiritual; that the psychical man is the veil and prophecy of the spiritual man.

The purpose of life, therefore, is the realizing of that prophecy; the unveiling of the immortal man; the birth of the spiritual from the psychical, whereby we enter our divine inheritance and come to inhabit Eternity. This is, indeed, salvation, the purpose of all true religion, in all times.

Patanjali has in mind the spiritual man, to be born from the psychical. His purpose is, to set in order the practical means for the unveiling and regeneration, and to indicate the fruit, the glory and the power, of that new birth.

Through the Sutras of the first book, Patanjali is concerned with the first great problem, the emergence of the spiritual man from the veils and meshes of the psychic nature, the moods and vestures of the mental and emotional man. Later will come the consideration of the nature and powers of the spiritual man, once he stands clear of the psychic veils and trammels, and a view of the realms in which these new spiritual powers are to be revealed.

At this point may come a word of explanation. I have been asked why I use the word Sutras, for these rules of Patanjali's system, when the word Aphorism has been connected with them in our minds for a generation. The reason is this: the name Aphorism suggests, to me at least, a pithy sentence of very general application; a piece of proverbial wisdom that may be quoted in a good many sets of circumstance, and which will almost bear on its face the evidence of its truth. But with a Sutra the case is different. It comes from the same root as the word 'sew,' and means, indeed, a thread, suggesting, therefore, a close knit, consecutive chain of argument. Not only has each Sutra a definite place in the system, but further, taken out of this place, it will be almost meaningless, and will by no means be self-evident. So I have thought best to adhere to the original word. The Sutras of Patanjali are as closely knit together, as dependent on each other, as the propositions of Euclid, and can no more be taken out of their proper setting.

In the second part of the first book, the problem of the emergence of the spiritual man is further dealt with. We are led to the consideration of the barriers to his emergence, of the overcoming of the barriers, and of certain steps and stages in the ascent from the ordinary consciousness of practical life, to the finer, deeper, radiant consciousness of the spiritual man.

      
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK I

  

1. OM: Here follows Instruction in Union.

Union, here as always in the Scriptures of India, means union of the individual soul with the Oversoul; of the personal consciousness with the Divine Consciousness, whereby the mortal becomes immortal, and enters the Eternal. Therefore, salvation is, first, freedom from sin and the sorrow which comes from sin, and then a divine and eternal well-being, wherein the soul partakes of the being, the wisdom and glory of God.

  

2. Union, spiritual consciousness, is gained through control of the versatile psychic nature.

The goal is the full consciousness of the spiritual man, illumined by the Divine Light. Nothing except the obdurate resistance of the psychic nature keeps us back from the goal. The psychical powers are spiritual powers run wild, perverted, drawn from their proper channel. Therefore our first task is, to regain control of this perverted nature, to chasten, purify and restore the misplaced powers.

  

3. Then the Seer comes to consciousness in his proper nature.

Egotism is but the perversion of spiritual being. Ambition is the inversion of spiritual power. Passion is the distortion of love. The mortal is the limitation of the immortal. When these false images give place to true, then the spiritual man stands forth luminous, as the sun, when the clouds disperse.

  

4. Heretofore the Seer has been enmeshed in the activities of the psychic nature.

The power and life which are the heritage of the spiritual man have been caught and enmeshed in psychical activities. Instead of pure being in the Divine, there has been fretful, combative. egotism, its hand against every man. Instead of the light of pure vision, there have been restless senses nave been re and imaginings. Instead of spiritual joy, the undivided joy of pure being, there has been self-indulgence of body and mind. These are all real forces, but distorted from their true nature and goal. They must be extricated, like gems from the matrix, like the pith from the reed, steadily, without destructive violence. Spiritual powers are to be drawn forth from the psychic meshes.

  

5. The psychic activities are five; they are either subject or not subject to the five hindrances (Book II, 3).

The psychic nature is built up through the image-making power, the power which lies behind and dwells in mind-pictures. These pictures do not remain quiescent in the mind; they are kinetic, restless, stimulating to new acts. Thus the mind-image of an indulgence suggests and invites to a new indulgence; the picture of past joy is framed in regrets or hopes. And there is the ceaseless play of the desire to know, to penetrate to the essence of things, to classify. This, too, busies itself ceaselessly with the mind-images. So that we may classify the activities of the psychic nature thus:

  

6. These activities are: Sound intellection, unsound intellection, predication, sleep, memory.

We have here a list of mental and emotional powers; of powers that picture and observe, and of powers that picture and feel. But the power to know and feel is spiritual and immortal. What is needed is, not to destroy it, but to raise it from the psychical to the spiritual realm.

  

7. The elements of sound intellection are: direct observation, inductive reason, and trustworthy testimony.

Each of these is a spiritual power, thinly veiled. Direct observation is the outermost form of the Soul's pure vision. Inductive reason rests on the great principles of continuity and correspondence; and these, on the supreme truth that all life is of the One. Trustworthy testimony, the sharing of one soul in the wisdom of another, rests on the ultimate oneness of all souls.

  

8. Unsound intellection is false understanding, not resting on a perception of the true nature of things.

When the object is not truly perceived, when the observation is inaccurate and faulty. thought or reasoning based on that mistaken perception is of necessity false and unsound.

  

9. Predication is carried on through words or thoughts not resting on an object perceived.

The purpose of this Sutra is, to distinguish between the mental process of predication, and observation, induction or testimony. Predication is the attribution of a quality or action to a subject, by adding to it a predicate. In the sentence, 'the man is wise,' 'the man' is the subject; 'is wise' is the predicate. This may be simply an interplay of thoughts, without the presence of the object thought of; or the things thought of may be imaginary or unreal; while observation, induction and testimony always go back to an object.

  

10. Sleep is the psychic condition which rests on mind states, all material things being absent.

In waking life, we have two currents of perception; an outer current of physical things seen and heard and perceived; an inner current of mind-images and thoughts. The outer current ceases in sleep; the inner current continues, and watching the mind-images float before the field of consciousness, we 'dream.'

Even when there are no dreams, there is still a certain consciousness in sleep, so that, on waking, one says, 'I have slept well,' or 'I have slept badly.'

  

11. Memory is holding to mind-images of things perceived, without modifying them.

Here, as before, the mental power is explained in terms of mind-images, which are the material of which the psychic world is built, Therefore the sages teach that the world of our perception, which is indeed a world of mind-images, is but the wraith or shadow of the real and everlasting world. In this sense, memory is but the psychical inversion of the spiritual, ever-present vision. That which is ever before the spiritual eye of the Seer needs not to be remembered.

  

12. The control of these psychic activities comes through the right use of the will, and through ceasing from self-indulgence.

If these psychical powers and energies, even such evil things as passion and hate and fear, are but spiritual powers fallen and perverted, how are we to bring about their release and restoration? Two means are presented to us: the awakening of the spiritual will, and the purification of mind and thought.

  

13. The right use of the will is the steady, effort to stand in spiritual being.

We have thought of ourselves, perhaps, as creatures moving upon this earth, rather helpless, at the mercy of storm and hunger and our enemies. We are to think of ourselves as immortals, dwelling in the Light, encompassed and sustained by spiritual powers. The steady effort to hold this thought will awaken dormant and unrealized powers, which will unveil to us the nearness of the Eternal.

  

14. This becomes a firm resting-place, when followed long, persistently, with earnestness.

We must seek spiritual life in conformity with the laws of spiritual life, with earnestness, humility, gentle charity, which is an acknowledgment of the One Soul within us all. Only through obedience to that shared Life, through perpetual remembrance of our oneness with all Divine Being, our nothingness apart from Divine Being, can we enter our inheritance.

  

15. Ceasing from self-indulgence is conscious mastery over the thirst for sensuous pleasure here or hereafter.

Rightly understood, the desire for sensation is the desire of being, the distortion of the soul's eternal life. The lust of sensual stimulus and excitation rests on the longing to feel one's life keenly, to gain the sense of being really alive. This sense of true life comes only with the coming of the soul, and the soul comes only in silence, after self-indulgence has been courageously and loyally stilled, through reverence before the coming soul.

  

16. The consummation of this is freedom from thirst for any mode of psychical activity, through the establishment of the spiritual man.

In order to gain a true understanding of this teaching, study must be supplemented by devoted practice, faith by works. The reading of the words will not avail. There must be a real effort to stand as the Soul, a real ceasing from self-indulgence. With this awakening of the spiritual will, and purification, will come at once the growth of the spiritual man and our awakening consciousness as the spiritual man; and this, attained in even a small degree, will help us notably in our contest. To him that hath, shall be given.

  

17. Meditation with an object follows these stages: first, exterior examining, then interior judicial action, then joy, then realization of individual being.

In the practice of meditation, a beginning may be made by fixing the attention upon some external object, such as a sacred image or picture, or a part of a book of devotion. In the second stage, one passes from the outer object to an inner pondering upon its lessons. The third stage is the inspiration, the heightening of the spiritual will, which results from this pondering. The fourth stage is the realization of one's spiritual being, as enkindled by this meditation.

  

18. After the exercise of the will has stilled the psychic activities, meditation rests only on the fruit of former meditations.

In virtue of continued practice and effort, the need of an external object on which to rest the meditation is outgrown. An interior state of spiritual consciousness is reached, which is called 'the cloud of things knowable' (Book IV, 29).

  

19. Subjective consciousness arising from a natural cause is possessed by those who have laid aside their bodies and been absorbed into subjective nature.

Those who have died, entered the paradise between births, are in a condition resembling meditation without an external object. But in the fullness of time, the seeds of desire in them will spring up, and they will be born again into this world.

  

20. For the others, there is spiritual consciousness, led up to by faith, valour right mindfulness, one-pointedness, perception.

It is well to keep in mind these steps on the path to illumination: faith, velour, right mindfulness, one-pointedness, perception. Not one can be dispensed with; all must be won. First faith; and then from faith, velour; from valour, right mindfulness; from right mindfulness, a one-pointed aspiration toward the soul; from this, perception; and finally, full vision as the soul.

  

21. Spiritual consciousness is nearest to those of keen, intense will.

The image used is the swift impetus of the torrent; the kingdom must be taken by force. Firm will comes only through effort; effort is inspired by faith. The great secret is this: it is not enough to have intuitions; we must act on them; we must live them.

  

22. The will may be weak, or of middle strength, or intense.

Therefore there is a spiritual consciousness higher than this. For those of weak will, there is this counsel: to be faithful in obedience, to live the life, and thus to strengthen the will to more perfect obedience. The will is not ours, but God's, and we come into it only through obedience. As we enter into the spirit of God, we are permitted to share the power of God.

Higher than the three stages of the way is the goal, the end of the way.

  

23. Or spiritual consciousness may be gained by ardent service of the Master.

If we think of our lives as tasks laid on us by the Master of Life, if we look on all duties as parts of that Master's work, entrusted to us, and forming our life-work; then, if we obey, promptly, loyally, sincerely, we shall enter by degrees into the Master's life and share the Master's power. Thus we shall be initiated into the spiritual will.

  

24. The Master is the spiritual man, who s free from hindrances, bondage to works, and the fruition and seed of works.

The Soul of the Master, the Lord, is of the same nature as the soul in us; but we still bear the burden of many evils, we are in bondage through our former works, we are under the dominance of sorrow. The Soul of the Master is free from sin and servitude and sorrow.

  

25. In the Master is the perfect seed of Omniscience.

The Soul of the Master is in essence one with the Oversoul, and therefore partaker of the Oversoul's all-wisdom and all-power. All spiritual attainment rests on this, and is possible because the soul and the Oversoul are One.

  

26. He is the Teacher of all who have gone before, since he is not limited by Time.

From the beginning, the Oversoul has been the Teacher of all souls, which, by their entrance into the Oversoul, by realizing their oneness with the Oversoul, have inherited the kingdom of the Light. For the Oversoul is before Time, and Time, father of all else, is one of His children.

  

27. His word is OM.

OM: the symbol of the Three in One, the three worlds in the Soul; the three times, past, present, future, in Eternity; the three Divine Powers, Creation, Preservation, Transformation, in the one Being; the three essences, immortality, omniscience, joy, in the one Spirit. This is the Word, the Symbol, of the Master and Lord, the perfected Spiritual Man.

  

28. Let there be soundless repetition of OM and meditation thereon.

This has many meanings, in ascending degrees. There is, first, the potency of the word itself, as of all words. Then there is the manifold significance of the symbol, as suggested above. Lastly, there is the spiritual realization of the high essences thus symbolized. Thus we rise step by step to the Eternal.

  

29. Thence come the awakening of interior consciousness, and the removal of barriers.

Here again faith must be supplemented by works, the life must be led as well as studied, before the full meaning can be understood. The awakening of spiritual consciousness can only be understood in measure as it is entered. It can only be entered where the conditions are present: purity of heart, and strong aspiration, and the resolute conquest of each sin.

This, however, may easily be understood: that the recognition of the three worlds as resting in the Soul leads us to realize ourselves and all life as of the Soul; that, as we dwell, not in past, present or future, but in the Eternal, we become more at one with the Eternal; that, as we view all organization, preservation, mutation as the work of the Divine One, we shall come more into harmony with the One, and thus remove the barriers in our path toward the Light.

In the second part of the first book, the problem of the emergence of the spiritual man is further dealt with. We are led to the consideration of the barriers to his emergence, of the overcoming of the barriers, and of certain steps and stages in the ascent from the ordinary consciousness of practical life, to the finer, deeper, radiant consciousness of the spiritual man.

  

30. The barriers to interior consciousness, which drive the psychic nature this way and that, are these: sickness, inertia, doubt, lightmindedness, laziness, intemperance, false notions, inability to reach a stage of meditation, or to hold it when reached.

We must remember that we are considering the spiritual man as enwrapped and enmeshed by the psychic nature, the emotional and mental powers; and as unable to come to clear consciousness, unable to stand and see clearly, because of the psychic veils of the personality. Nine of these are enumerated, and they go pretty thoroughly into the brute toughness of the psychic nature.

Sickness is included rather for its effect on the emotions and mind, since bodily infirmity, such as blindness or deafness, is no insuperable barrier to spiritual life, and may sometimes be a help, as cutting off distractions. It will be well for us to ponder over each of these nine activities, thinking of each as a psychic state, a barrier to the interior consciousness of the spiritual man.

  

31. Grieving, despondency, bodily restlessness, the drawing in and sending forth of the life-breath also contribute to drive the psychic nature to and fro.

The first two moods are easily understood. We can well see bow a sodden psychic condition, flagrantly opposed to the pure and positive joy of spiritual life, would be a barrier. The next, bodily restlessness, is in a special way the fault of our day and generation. When it is conquered, mental restlessness will be half conquered, too.

The next two terms, concerning the life breath, offer some difficulty. The surface meaning is harsh and irregular breathing; the deeper meaning is a life of harsh and irregular impulses.

  

32. Steady application to a principle is the way to put a stop to these.

The will, which, in its pristine state, was full of vigour, has been steadily corrupted by self-indulgence, the seeking of moods and sensations for sensation's sake. Hence come all the morbid and sickly moods of the mind. The remedy is a return to the pristine state of the will, by vigorous, positive effort; or, as we are here told, by steady application to a principle. The principle to which we should thus steadily apply ourselves should be one arising from the reality of spiritual life; valorous work for the soul, in others as in ourselves.

  

33. By sympathy with the happy, compassion for the sorrowful, delight in the holy, disregard of the unholy, the psychic nature moves to gracious peace.

When we are wrapped up in ourselves, shrouded with the cloak of our egotism, absorbed in our pains and bitter thoughts, we are not willing to disturb or strain our own sickly mood by giving kindly sympathy to the happy, thus doubling their joy, or by showing compassion for the sad, thus halving their sorrow. We refuse to find delight in holy things, and let the mind brood in sad pessimism on unholy things. All these evil psychic moods must be conquered by strong effort of will. This rending of the veils will reveal to us something of the grace and peace which are of the interior consciousness of the spiritual man.

  

34. Or peace may be reached by the even sending forth and control of the life-breath.

Here again we may look for a double meaning: first, that even and quiet breathing which is a part of the victory over bodily restlessness; then the even and quiet tenor of life, without harsh or dissonant impulses, which brings stillness to the heart.

  

35. Faithful, persistent application to any object, if completely attained, will bind the mind to steadiness.

We are still considering how to overcome the wavering and perturbation of the psychic nature, which make it quite unfit to transmit the inward consciousness and stillness. We are once more told to use the will, and to train it by steady and persistent work: by 'sitting close' to our work, in the phrase of the original.

  

36. As also will a joyful, radiant spirit.

There is no such illusion as gloomy pessimism, and it has been truly said that a man's cheerfulness is the measure of his faith. Gloom, despondency, the pale cast of thought, are very amenable to the will. Sturdy and courageous effort will bring a clear and valorous mind. But it must always be remembered that this is not for solace to the personal man, but is rather an offering to the ideal of spiritual life, a contribution to the universal and universally shared treasure in heaven.

  

37. Or the purging of self-indulgence from the psychic nature.

We must recognize that the fall of man is a reality, exemplified in our own persons. We have quite other sins than the animals, and far more deleterious; and they have all come through self-indulgence, with which our psychic natures are soaked through and through. As we climbed down hill for our pleasure, so must we climb up again for our purification and restoration to our former high estate. The process is painful, perhaps, yet indispensable.

  

38. Or a pondering on the perceptions gained in dreams and dreamless sleep.

For the Eastern sages, dreams are, it is true, made up of images of waking life, reflections of what the eyes have seen and the ears heard. But dreams are something more, for the images are in a sense real, objective on their own plane; and the knowledge that there is another world, even a dream-world, lightens the tyranny of material life. Much of poetry and art is such a solace from dreamland. But there is more in dream, for it may image what is above, as well as what is below; not only the children of men, but also the children by the shore of the immortal sea that brought us hither, may throw their images on this magic mirror: so, too, of the secrets of dreamless sleep with its pure vision, in even greater degree.

  

39. Or meditative brooding on what is dearest to the heart.

Here is a thought which our own day is beginning to grasp: that love is a form of knowledge; that we truly know any thing or any person, by becoming one therewith, in love. Thus love has a wisdom that the mind cannot claim, and by this hearty love, this becoming one with what is beyond our personal borders, we may take a long step toward freedom. Two directions for this may be suggested: the pure love of the artist for his work, and the earnest, compassionate search into the hearts of others.

  

40. Thus he masters all, from the atom to the Infinite.

Newton was asked how he made his discoveries. By intending my mind on them, he replied. This steady pressure, this becoming one with what we seek to understand, whether it be atom or soul, is the one means to know. When we become a thing, we really know it, not otherwise. Therefore live the life, to know the doctrine; do the will of the Father, if you would know the Father.

  

41. When the perturbations of the psychic nature have all been stilled, then the consciousness, like a pure crystal, takes the colour of what it rests on, whether that be the perceiver, perceiving, or the thing perceived.

This is a fuller expression of the last Sutra, and is so lucid that comment can hardly add to it. Everything is either perceiver, perceiving, or the thing perceived; or, as we might say, consciousness, force, or matter. The sage tells us that the one key will unlock the secrets of all three, the secrets of consciousness, force and matter alike. The thought is, that the cordial sympathy of a gentle heart, intuitively understanding the hearts of others, is really a manifestation of the same power as that penetrating perception whereby one divines the secrets of planetary motions or atomic structure.

  

42. When the consciousness, poised in perceiving, blends together the name, the object dwelt on and the idea, this is perception with exterior consideration.

In the first stage of the consideration of an external object, the perceiving mind comes to it, preoccupied by the name and idea conventionally associated with that object. For example, in coming to the study of a book, we think of the author, his period, the school to which he belongs. The second stage, set forth in the next Sutra, goes directly to the spiritual meaning of the book, setting its traditional trappings aside and finding its application to our own experience and problems.

The commentator takes a very simple illustration: a cow, where one considers, in the first stage, the name of the cow, the animal itself and the idea of a cow in the mind. In the second stage, one pushes these trappings aside and, entering into the inmost being of the cow, shares its consciousness, as do some of the artists who paint cows. They get at the very life of what they study and paint.

  

43. When the object dwells in the mind, clear of memory-pictures, uncoloured by the mind, as a pure luminous idea, this is perception without exterior or consideration.

We are still considering external, visible objects. Such perception as is here described is of the nature of that penetrating vision whereby Newton, intending his mind on things, made his discoveries, or that whereby a really great portrait painter pierces to the soul of him whom he paints, and makes that soul live on canvas. These stages of perception are described in this way, to lead the mind up to an understanding of the piercing soul-vision of the spiritual man, the immortal.

  

44. The same two steps, when referring to things of finer substance, are said to be with, or without, judicial action of the mind.

We now come to mental or psychical objects: to images in the mind. It is precisely by comparing, arranging and superposing these mind-images that we get our general notions or concepts. This process of analysis and synthesis, whereby we select certain qualities in a group of mind-images, and then range together those of like quality, is the judicial action of the mind spoken of. But when we exercise swift divination upon the mind images, as does a poet or a man of genius., then we use a power higher than the judicial, and one nearer to the keen vision of the spiritual man.

  

45. Subtle substance rises in ascending degrees, to that pure nature which has no distinguishing mark.

As we ascend from outer material things which are permeated by separateness, and whose chief characteristic is to be separate, just as so many pebbles are separate from each other; as we ascend, first, to mind-images, which overlap and coalesce in both space and time, and then to ideas and principles, we finally come to purer essences, drawing ever nearer and nearer to unity.

Or we may illustrate this principle thus. Our bodily, external selves are quite distinct and separate, in form, name, place, substance; our mental selves, of finer substance, meet and part, meet and part again, in perpetual concussion and interchange; our spiritual selves attain true consciousness through unity, where the partition wall between us and the Highest, between us and others, is broken down and we are all made perfect in the One. The highest riches are possessed by all pure souls, only when united. Thus we rise from separation to true individuality in unity.

  

46. The above are the degrees of limited and conditioned spiritual consciousness, still containing the seed of separateness.

In the four stages of perception above described, the spiritual vision is still working through the mental and psychical, the inner genius is still expressed through the outer, personal man. The spiritual man has yet to come completely to consciousness as himself, in his own realm, the psychical veils laid aside.

  

47. When pure perception without judicial action of the mind is reached, there follows the gracious peace of the inner self.

We have instanced certain types of this pure perception: the poet's divination, whereby he sees the spirit within the symbol, likeness in things unlike, and beauty in all things; the pure insight of the true philosopher, whose vision rests not on the appearances of life, but on its realities; or the saint's firm perception of spiritual life and being. All these are far advanced on the way; they have drawn near to the secret dwelling of peace.

  

48. In that peace, perception is unfailingly true.

The poet, the wise philosopher and the saint not only reach a wide and luminous consciousness, but they gain certain knowledge of substantial reality. When we know, we know that we know. For we have come to the stage where we know things by being them, and nothing can be more true than being. We rest on the rock, and know it to be rock, rooted in the very heart of the world.

  

49. The object of this perception is other than what is learned from the sacred books, or by sound inference, since this perception is particular.

The distinction is a luminous and inspiring one. The Scriptures teach general truths, concerning universal spiritual life and broad laws, and inference from their teaching is not less general. But the spiritual perception of the awakened Seer brings particular truth concerning his own particular life and needs, whether these be for himself or others. He receives defined, precise knowledge, exactly applying to what he has at heart.

  

50. The impress on the consciousness springing from this perception supersedes all previous impressions.

Each state or field of the mind, each field of knowledge, so to speak, which is reached by mental and emotional energies, is a psychical state, just as the mind picture of a stage with the actors on it, is a psychical state or field. When the pure vision, as of the poet, the philosopher, the saint, fills the whole field, all lesser views and visions are crowded out. This high consciousness displaces all lesser consciousness. Yet, in a certain sense, that which is viewed as part, even by the vision of a sage, has still an element of illusion, a thin psychical veil, however pure and luminous that veil may be. It is the last and highest psychic state.

51. When this impression ceases, then, since all impressions have ceased, there arises pure spiritual consciousness, with no seed of separateness left.

The last psychic veil is drawn aside, and the spiritual man stands with unveiled vision, pure serene.

      
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTRODUCTION TO BOOK II

The first book of Patanjali's Yoga Sutras is called the Book of Spiritual Consciousness. The second book, which we now begin, is the Book of the Means of Soul Growth. And we must remember that soul growth here means the growth of the realization of the spiritual man, or, to put the matter more briefly, the growth of the spiritual man, and the disentangling of the spiritual man from the wrappings, the veils, the disguises laid upon him by the mind and the psychical nature, wherein he is enmeshed, like a bird caught in a net.

The question arises: By what means may the spiritual man be freed from these psychical meshes and disguises, so that he may stand forth above death, in his radiant eternalness and divine power? And the second book sets itself to answer this very question, and to detail the means in a way entirely practical and very lucid, so that he who runs may read, and he who reads may understand and practise.

The second part of the second book is concerned with practical spiritual training, that is, with the earlier practical training of the spiritual man.

The most striking thing in it is the emphasis laid on the Commandments, which are precisely those of the latter part of the Decalogue, together with obedience to the Master. Our day and generation is far too prone to fancy that there can be mystical life and growth on some other foundation, on the foundation, for example, of intellectual curiosity or psychical selfishness. In reality, on this latter foundation the life of the spiritual man can never be built; nor, indeed, anything but a psychic counterfeit, a dangerous delusion.

Therefore Patanjali, like every great spiritual teacher, meets the question: What must I do to be saved? with the age-old answer: Keep the Commandments. Only after the disciple can say, These have I kept, can there be the further and finer teaching of the spiritual Rules.

It is, therefore, vital for us to realize that the Yoga system, like every true system of spiritual teaching, rests on this broad and firm foundation of honesty, truth, cleanness, obedience. Without these, there is no salvation; and he who practices these, even though ignorant of spiritual things, is laying up treasure against the time to come.

      
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK II

  

1. The practices which make for union with the Soul are: fervent aspiration, spiritual reading, and complete obedience to the Master.

The word which I have rendered 'fervent aspiration' means primarily 'fire'; and, in the Eastern teaching, it means the fire which gives life and light, and at the same time the fire which purifies. We have, therefore, as our first practice, as the first of the means of spiritual growth, that fiery quality of the will which enkindles and illumines, and, at the same time, the steady practice of purification, the burning away of all known impurities. Spiritual reading is so universally accepted and understood, that it needs no comment. The very study of Patanjali's Sutras is an exercise in spiritual reading, and a very effective one. And so with all other books of the Soul. Obedience to the Master means, that we shall make the will of the Master our will, and shall confirm in all wave to the will of the Divine, setting aside the wills of self, which are but psychic distortions of the one Divine Will. The constant effort to obey in all the ways we know and understand, will reveal new ways and new tasks, the evidence of new growth of the Soul. Nothing will do more for the spiritual man in us than this, for there is no such regenerating power as the awakening spiritual will.

  

2. Their aim is, to bring soul-vision, and to wear away hindrances.

The aim of fervour, spiritual reading and obedience to the Master, is, to bring soul-vision, and to wear away hindrances. Or, to use the phrase we have already adopted, the aim of these practices is, to help the spiritual man to open his eyes; to help him also to throw aside the veils and disguises, the enmeshing psychic nets which surround him, tying his hands, as it were, and bandaging his eyes. And this, as all teachers testify, is a long and arduous task, a steady up-hill fight, demanding fine courage and persistent toil. Fervour, the fire of the spiritual will, is, as we said, two-fold: it illumines, and so helps the spiritual man to see; and it also burns up the nets and meshes which ensnare the spiritual man. So with the other means, spiritual reading and obedience. Each, in its action, is two-fold, wearing away the psychical, and upbuilding the spiritual man.

  

3. These are the hindrances: the darkness of unwisdom, self-assertion, lust hate, attachment.

Let us try to translate this into terms of the psychical and spiritual man. The darkness of unwisdom is, primarily, the self-absorption of the psychical man, his complete preoccupation with his own hopes and fears, plans and purposes, sensations and desires; so that he fails to see, or refuses to see, that there is a spiritual man; and so doggedly resists all efforts of the spiritual man to cast off his psychic tyrant and set himself free. This is the real darkness; and all those who deny the immortality of the soul, or deny the soul's existence, and so lay out their lives wholly for the psychical, mortal man and his ambitions, are under this power of darkness. Born of this darkness, this psychic self-absorption, is the dogged conviction that the psychic, personal man has separate, exclusive interests, which he can follow for himself alone; and this conviction, when put into practice in our life, leads to contest with other personalities, and so to hate. This hate, again, makes against the spiritual man, since it hinders the revelation of the high harmony between the spiritual man and his other selves, a harmony to be revealed only through the practice of love, that perfect love which casts out fear.

In like manner, lust is the psychic man's craving for the stimulus of sensation, the din of which smothers the voice of the spiritual man, as, in Shakespeare's phrase, the cackling geese would drown the song of the nightingale. And this craving for stimulus is the fruit of weakness, coming from the failure to find strength in the primal life of the spiritual man.

Attachment is but another name for psychic self-absorption; for we are absorbed, not in outward things, but rather in their images within our minds; our inner eyes are fixed on them; our inner desires brood over them; and so we blind ourselves to the presence of the prisoner, the enmeshed and fettered spiritual man.

  

4. The darkness of unwisdom is the field of the others. These hindrances may be dormant, or worn thin, or suspended, or expanded.

Here we have really two Sutras in one. The first has been explained already: in the darkness of unwisdom grow the parasites, hate, lust, attachment. They are all outgrowths of the self-absorption of the psychical self.

Next, we are told that these barriers may be either dormant, or suspended, or expanded, or worn thin. Faults which are dormant will be brought out through the pressure of life, or through the pressure of strong aspiration. Thus expanded, they must be fought and conquered, or, as Patanjali quaintly says, they must be worn thin,-as a veil might, or the links of manacles.

  

5 The darkness of ignorance is: holding that which is unenduring, impure, full of pain, not the Soul, to be eternal, pure, full of joy, the Soul.

This we have really considered already. The psychic man is unenduring, impure, full of pain, not the Soul, not the real Self. The spiritual man is enduring, pure, full of joy, the real Self. The darkness of unwisdom is, therefore, the self-absorption of the psychical, personal man, to the exclusion of the spiritual man. It is the belief, carried into action, that the personal man is the real man, the man for whom we should toil, for whom we should build, for whom we should live. This is that psychical man of whom it is said: he that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption.

  

6. Self-assertion comes from thinking of the Seer and the instrument of vision as forming one self.

This is the fundamental idea of the Sankhya philosophy, of which the Yoga is avowedly the practical side. To translate this into our terms, we may say that the Seer is the spiritual man; the instrument of vision is the psychical man, through which the spiritual man gains experience of the outer world. But we turn the servant into the master. We attribute to the psychical man, the personal self, a reality which really belongs to the spiritual man alone; and so, thinking of the quality of the spiritual man as belonging to the psychical, we merge the spiritual man in the psychical; or, as the text says, we think of the two as forming one self.

  

7. Lust is the resting in the sense of enjoyment.

This has been explained again and again. Sensation, as, for example, the sense of taste, is meant to be the guide to action; in this case, the choice of wholesome food, and the avoidance of poisonous and hurtful things. But if we rest in the sense of taste, as a pleasure in itself; rest, that is, in the psychical side of taste, we fall into gluttony, and live to eat, instead of eating to live. So with the other great organic power, the power of reproduction. This lust comes into being, through resting in the sensation, and looking for pleasure from that.

  

8. Hate is the resting in the sense of pain.

Pain comes, for the most part, from the strife of personalities, the jarring discords between psychic selves, each of which deems itself supreme. A dwelling on this pain breeds hate, which tears the warring selves yet further asunder, and puts new enmity between them, thus hindering the harmony of the Real, the reconciliation through the Soul.

  

9. Attachment is the desire toward life, even in the wise, carried forward by its own energy.

The life here desired is the psychic life, the intensely vibrating life of the psychical self. This prevails even in those who have attained much wisdom, so long as it falls short of the wisdom of complete renunciation, complete obedience to each least behest of the spiritual man, and of the Master who guards and aids the spiritual man.

The desire of sensation, the desire of psychic life, reproduces itself, carried on by its own energy and momentum; and hence comes the circle of death and rebirth, death and rebirth, instead of the liberation of the spiritual man.

  

10. These hindrances, when they have become subtle, are to be removed by a countercurrent

The darkness of unwisdom is to be removed by the light of wisdom, pursued through fervour, spiritual reading of holy teachings and of life itself, and by obedience to the Master.

Lust is to be removed by pure aspiration of spiritual life, which, bringing true strength and stability, takes away the void of weakness which we try to fill by the stimulus of sensations.

Hate is to be overcome by love. The fear that arises through the sense of separate, warring selves is to be stilled by the realization of the One Self, the one soul in all. This realization is the perfect love that casts out fear.

The hindrances are said to have become subtle when, by initial efforts, they have been located and recognized in the psychic nature.

  

11. Their active turnings are to be removed by meditation.

Here is, in truth, the whole secret of Yoga, the science of the soul. The active turnings, the strident vibrations, of selfishness, lust and hate are to be stilled by meditation, by letting heart and mind dwell in spiritual life, by lifting up the heart to the strong, silent life above, which rests in the stillness of eternal love, and needs no harsh vibration to convince it of true being.

  

12. The burden of bondage to sorrow has its root in these hindrances. It will be felt in this life, or in a life not yet manifested.

The burden of bondage to sorrow has its root in the darkness of unwisdom, in selfishness, in lust, in hate, in attachment to sensation. All these are, in the last analysis, absorption in the psychical self; and this means sorrow, because it means the sense of separateness, and this means jarring discord and inevitable death. But the psychical self will breed a new psychical self, in a new birth, and so new sorrows in a life not yet manifest.

  

13. From this root there grow and ripen the fruits of birth, of the life-span, of all that is tasted in life.

Fully to comment on this, would be to write a treatise on Karma and its practical working in detail, whereby the place and time of the next birth, its content and duration. are determined; and to do this the present commentator is in no wise fitted. But this much is clearly understood: that, through a kind of spiritual gravitation, the incarnating self is drawn to a home and life-circle which will give it scope and discipline; and its need of discipline is clearly conditioned by its character, its standing, its accomplishment.

  

14. These bear fruits of rejoicing, or of affliction, as they are sprung from holy or unholy works.

Since holiness is obedience to divine law, to the law of divine harmony, and obedience to harmony strengthens that harmony in the soul, which is the one true joy, therefore joy comes of holiness: comes, indeed, in no other way. And as unholiness is disobedience, and therefore discord, therefore unholiness makes for pain; and this two-fold law is true, whether the cause take effect in this, or in a yet unmanifested birth.

  

15. To him who possesses discernment, all personal life is misery, because it ever waxes and wanes, is ever afflicted with restlessness, makes ever new dynamic impresses in the mind; and because all its activities war with each other.

The whole life of the psychic self is misery, because it ever waxes and wanes; because birth brings inevitable death; because there is no expectation without its shadow, fear. The life of the psychic self is misery, because it is afflicted with restlessness; so that he who has much, finds not satisfaction, but rather the whetted hunger for more. The fire is not quenched by pouring oil on it; so desire is not quenched by the satisfaction of desire. Again, the life of the psychic self is misery, because it makes ever new dynamic impresses in the mind; because a desire satisfied is but the seed from which springs the desire to find like satisfaction again. The appetite comes in eating, as the proverb says, and grows by what it feeds on. And the psychic self, torn with conflicting desires, is ever the house divided against itself, which must surely fall.

  

16. This pain is to be warded off, before it has come.

In other words, we cannot cure the pains of life by laying on them any balm. We must cut the root, absorption in the psychical self. So it is said, there is no cure for the misery of longing, but to fix the heart upon the eternal.

  

17. The cause of what is to be warded off, is the absorption of the Seer in things seen.

Here again we have the fundamental idea of the Sankhya, which is the intellectual counterpart of the Yoga system. The cause of what is to be warded off, the root of misery, is the absorption of consciousness in the psychical man and the things which beguile the psychical man. The cure is liberation.

  

18. Things seen have as their property manifestation, action, inertia. They form the basis of the elements and the sense-powers. They make for experience and for liberation.

Here is a whole philosophy of life. Things seen, the total of the phenomenal, possess as their property, manifestation, action, inertia: the qualities of force and matter in combination. These, in their grosser form, make the material world; in their finer, more subjective form, they make the psychical world, the world of sense-impressions and mind-images. And through this totality of the phenomenal, the soul gains experience, and is prepared for liberation. In other words, the whole outer world exists for the purposes of the soul, and finds in this its true reason for being.

  

19. The grades or layers of the Three Potencies are the defined, the undefined, that with distinctive mark, that without distinctive mark.

Or, as we might say, there are two strata of the physical, and two strata of the psychical realms. In each, there is the side of form, and the side of force. The form side of the physical is here called the defined. The force side of the physical is the undefined, that which has no boundaries. So in the psychical; there is the form side; that with distinctive marks, such as the characteristic features of mind-images; and there is the force side, without distinctive marks, such as the forces of desire or fear, which may flow now to this mind-image, now to that.

  

20. The Seer is pure vision. Though pure, he looks out through the vesture of the mind.

The Seer, as always, is the spiritual man whose deepest consciousness is pure vision, the pure life of the eternal. But the spiritual man, as yet unseeing in his proper person, looks out on the world through the eyes of the psychical man, by whom he is enfolded and enmeshed. The task is, to set this prisoner free, to clear the dust of ages from this buried temple.

  

21. The very essence of things seen is, that they exist for the Seer.

The things of outer life, not only material things, but the psychic man also, exist in very deed for the purposes of the Seer, the Soul, the spiritual man Disaster comes, when the psychical man sets up, so to speak, on his own account, trying to live for himself alone, and taking material things to solace his loneliness.

  

22. Though fallen away from him who has reached the goal, things seen have not altogether fallen away, since they still exist for others.

When one of us conquers hate, hate does not thereby cease out of the world, since others still hate and suffer hatred. So with other delusions, which hold us in bondage to material things, and through which we look at all material things. When the coloured veil of illusion is gone, the world which we saw through it is also gone, for now we see life as it is, in the white radiance of eternity. But for others the coloured veil remains, and therefore the world thus coloured by it remains for them, and will remain till they, too, conquer delusion.

  

23. The association of the Seer with things seen is the cause of the realizing of the nature of things seen, and also of the realizing of the nature of the Seer.

Life is educative. All life's infinite variety is for discipline, for the development of the soul. So passing through many lives, the Soul learns the secrets of the world, the august laws that are written in the form of the snow-crystal or the majestic order of the stars. Yet all these laws are but reflections, but projections outward, of the laws of the soul; therefore in learning these, the soul learns to know itself. All life is but the mirror wherein the Soul learns to know its own face.

  

24. The cause of this association is the darkness of unwisdom.

The darkness of unwisdom is the absorption of consciousness in the personal life, and in the things seen by the personal life. This is the fall, through which comes experience, the learning of the lessons of life. When they are learned, the day of redemption is at hand.

  

25. The bringing of this association to an end, by bringing the darkness of unwisdom to an end, is the great liberation; this is the Seer's attainment of his own pure being.

When the spiritual man has, through the psychical, learned all life's lessons, the time has come for him to put off the veil and disguise of the psychical and to stand revealed a King, in the house of the Father. So shall he enter into his kingdom, and go no more out.

  

26. A discerning which is carried on without wavering is the means of liberation.

Here we come close to the pure Vedanta, with its discernment between the eternal and the temporal. St. Paul, following after Philo and Plato, lays down the same fundamental principle: the things seen are temporal, the things unseen are eternal.

Patanjali means something more than an intellectual assent, though this too is vital. He has in view a constant discriminating in act as well as thought; of the two ways which present themselves for every deed or choice, always to choose the higher way, that which makes for the things eternal: honesty rather than roguery, courage and not cowardice, the things of another rather than one's own, sacrifice and not indulgence. This true discernment, carried out constantly, makes for liberation.

  

27. His illuminations is sevenfold, rising in successive stages.

Patanjali's text does not tell us what the seven stages of this illumination are. The commentator thus describes them;

First, the danger to be escaped is recognized; it need not be recognized a second time. Second, the causes of the danger to be escaped are worn away; they need not be worn away a second time. Third, the way of escape is clearly perceived, by the contemplation which checks psychic perturbation. Fourth, the means of escape, clear discernment, has been developed. This is the fourfold release belonging to insight. The final release from the psychic is three-fold: As fifth of the seven degrees, the dominance of its thinking is ended; as sixth, its potencies, like rocks from a precipice, fall of themselves; once dissolved, they do not grow again. Then, as seventh, freed from these potencies, the spiritual man stands forth in his own nature as purity and light. Happy is the spiritual man who beholds this seven-fold illumination in its ascending stages.

  

28. From steadfastly following after the means of Yoga, until impurity is worn away, there comes the illumination of thought up to full discernment.

Here, we enter on the more detailed practical teaching of Patanjali, with its sound and luminous good sense. And when we come to detail the means of Yoga, we may well be astonished at their simplicity. There is little in them that is mysterious. They are very familiar. The essence of the matter lies in carrying them out.

  

29. The eight means of Yoga are: the Commandments, the Rules, right Poise, right Control of the life-force, Withdrawal, Attention, Meditation, Contemplation.

These eight means are to be followed in their order, in the sense which will immediately be made clear. We can get a ready understanding of the first two by comparing them with the Commandments which must be obeyed by all good citizens, and the Rules which are laid on the members of religious orders. Until one has fulfilled the first, it is futile to concern oneself with the second. And so with all the means of Yoga. They must be taken in their order.

  

30. The Commandments are these: nom injury, truthfulness, abstaining from stealing, from impurity, from covetousness.

These five precepts are almost exactly the same as the Buddhist Commandments: not to kill, not to steal, not to be guilty of incontinence, not to drink intoxicants, to speak the truth. Almost identical is St. Paul's list: Thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not covet. And in the same spirit is the answer made to the young map having great possessions, who asked, What shall I do to be saved? and received the reply: Keep the Commandments.

This broad, general training, which forms and develops human character, must be accomplished to a very considerable degree, before there can be much hope of success in the further stages of spiritual life. First the psychical, and then the spiritual. First the man, then the angel. On this broad, humane and wise foundation does the system of Patanjali rest.

  

31. The Commandments, not limited to any race, place, time or occasion, universal, are the great obligation.

The Commandments form the broad general training of humanity. Each one of them rests on a universal, spiritual law. Each one of them expresses an attribute or aspect of the Self, the Eternal; when we violate one of the Commandments, we set ourselves against the law and being of the Eternal, thereby bringing ourselves to inevitable con fusion. So the first steps in spiritual life must be taken by bringing ourselves into voluntary obedience to these spiritual laws and thus making ourselves partakers of the spiritual powers, the being of the Eternal Like the law of gravity, the need of air to breathe, these great laws know no exceptions They are in force in all lands, throughout al times, for all mankind.

  

32. The Rules are these: purity, serenity fervent aspiration, spiritual reading, and per feet obedience to the Master.

Here we have a finer law, one which humanity as a whole is less ready for, less fit to obey. Yet we can see that these Rules are the same in essence as the Commandments, but on a higher, more spiritual plane. The Commandments may be obeyed in outer acts and abstinences; the Rules demand obedience of the heart and spirit, a far more awakened and more positive consciousness. The Rules are the spiritual counterpart of the Commandments, and they have finer degrees, for more advanced spiritual growth.

  

33. When transgressions hinder, the weight of the imagination should be thrown on the opposite side.

Let us take a simple case, that of a thief, a habitual criminal, who has drifted into stealing in childhood, before the moral consciousness has awakened. We may imprison such a thief, and deprive him of all possibility of further theft, or of using the divine gift of will. Or we may recognize his disadvantages, and help him gradually to build up possessions which express his will, and draw forth his self-respect. If we imagine that, after he has built well, and his possessions have become dear to him, he himself is robbed, then we can see how he would come vividly to realize the essence of theft and of honesty, and would cleave to honest dealings with firm conviction. In some such way does the great Law teach us. Our sorrows and losses teach us the pain of the sorrow and loss we inflict on others, and so we cease to inflict them.

Now as to the more direct application. To conquer a sin. let heart and mind rest, not on the sin, but on the contrary virtue. Let the sin be forced out by positive growth in the true direction, not by direct opposition. Turn away from the sin and go forward courageously, constructively, creatively, in well-doing. In this way the whole nature will gradually be drawn up to the higher level, on which the sin does not even exist. The conquest of a sin is a matter of growth and evolution, rather than of opposition.

  

34. Transgressions are injury, falsehood, theft, incontinence, envy; whether committed, or caused, or assented to, through greed, wrath, or infatuation; whether faint, or middling, or excessive; bearing endless, fruit of ignorance and pain. Therefore must the weight be cast on the other side.

Here are the causes of sin: greed, wrath, infatuation, with their effects, ignorance and pain. The causes are to be cured by better wisdom, by a truer understanding of the Self, of Life. For greed cannot endure before the realization that the whole world belongs to the Self, which Self we are; nor can we hold wrath against one who is one with the Self, and therefore with ourselves; nor can infatuation, which is the seeking for the happiness of the All in some limited part of it, survive the knowledge that we are heirs of the All. Therefore let thought and imagination, mind and heart, throw their weight on the other side; the side, not of the world,.but of the Self.

  

35. Where non-injury is perfected, all enmity ceases in the presence of him who possesses it.

We come now to the spiritual powers which result from keeping the Commandments; from the obedience to spiritual law which is the keeping of the Commandments. Where the heart is full of kindness which seeks no injury to another, either in act or thought or wish, this full love creates an atmosphere of harmony, whose benign power touches with healing all who come within its influence. Peace in the heart radiates peace to other hearts, even more surely than contention breeds contention.

  

36. When he is perfected in truth, all acts and their fruits depend on him.

The commentator thus explains: If he who has attained should say to a man, Become righteous! the man becomes righteous. If he should say, Gain heaven! the man gains heaven. His word is not in vain.

Exactly the same doctrine was taught by the Master who said to his disciples: Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.

  

37. Where cessation from theft is perfected, all treasures present themselves to him who possesses it.

Here is a sentence which may warn us that, beside the outer and apparent meaning, there is in many of these sentences a second and finer significance. The obvious meaning is, that he who has wholly ceased from theft, in act, thought and wish, finds buried treasures in his path, treasures of jewels and gold and pearls. The deeper truth is, that he who in every least thing is wholly honest with the spirit of Life, finds Life supporting him in all things, and gains admittance to the treasure house of Life, the spiritual universe.

  

38. For him who is perfect in continence, the reward is valour and virility.

The creative power, strong and full of vigour, is no longer dissipated, but turned to spiritual uses. It upholds and endows the spiritual man, conferring on him the creative will, the power to engender spiritual children instead of bodily progeny. An epoch of life, that of man the animal, has come to an end; a new epoch, that of the spiritual man, is opened. The old creative power is superseded and transcended; a new creative power, that of the spiritual man, takes its place, carrying with it the power to work creatively in others for righteousness and eternal life.

One of the commentaries says that he who has attained is able to transfer to the minds of his disciples what he knows concerning divine union, and the means of gaining it. This is one of the powers of purity.

  

39. Where there is firm conquest of covetousness, he who has conquered it awakes to the how and why of life.

So it is said that, before we can understand the laws of Karma, we must free ourselves from Karma. The conquest of covetousness brings this rich fruit, because the root of covetousness is the desire of the individual soul, the will toward manifested life. And where the desire of the individual soul is overcome by the superb, still life of the universal Soul welling up in the heart within, the great secret is discerned, the secret that the individual soul is not an isolated reality, but the ray, the manifest instrument of the Life, which turns it this way and that until the great work is accomplished, the age-long lesson learned. Thus is the how and why of life disclosed by ceasing from covetousness. The Commentator says that this includes a knowledge of one's former births.

  

40. Through purity a withdrawal from one's own bodily life, a ceasing from infatuation with the bodily life of others.

As the spiritual light grows in the heart within, as the taste for pure Life grows stronger, the consciousness opens toward the great, secret places within, where all life is one, where all lives are one. Thereafter, this outer, manifested, fugitive life, whether of ourselves or of others, loses something of its charm and glamour, and we seek rather the deep infinitudes. Instead of the outer form and surroundings of our lives, we long for their inner and everlasting essence. We desire not so much outer converse and closeness to our friends, but rather that quiet communion with them in the inner chamber of the soul, where spirit speaks to spirit, and spirit answers; where alienation and separation never enter; where sickness and sorrow and death cannot come.

  

41. To the pure of heart come also a quiet spirit, one-pointed thought, the victory over sensuality, and fitness to behold the Soul.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, who is the supreme Soul; the ultimate Self of all beings. In the deepest sense, purity means fitness for this vision, and also a heart cleansed from all disquiet, from all wandering and unbridled thought, from the torment of sensuous imaginings; and when the spirit is thus cleansed and pure, it becomes at one in essence with its source, the great Spirit, the primal Life. One consciousness now thrills through both, for the psychic partition wall is broken down. Then shall the pure in heart see God, because they become God.

  

42. From acceptance, the disciple gains happiness supreme.

One of the wise has said: accept conditions, accept others, accept yourself. This is the true acceptance, for all these things are what they are through the will of the higher Self, except their deficiencies, which come through thwarting the will of the higher Self, and can be conquered only through compliance with that will. By the true acceptance, the disciple comes into oneness of spirit with the overruling Soul; and, since the own nature of the Soul is being, happiness, bliss, he comes thereby into happiness supreme.

  

43. The perfection of the powers of the bodily vesture comes through the wearing away of impurities, and through fervent aspiration.

This is true of the physical powers, and of those which dwell in the higher vestures. There must be, first, purity; as the blood must be pure, before one can attain to physical health. But absence of impurity is not in itself enough, else would many nerveless ascetics of the cloisters rank as high saints. There is needed, further, a positive fire of the will; a keen vital vigour for the physical powers, and something finer, purer, stronger, but of kindred essence, for the higher powers. The fire of genius is something more than a phrase, for there can be no genius without the celestial fire of the awakened spiritual will.

  

44. Through spiritual reading, the disciple gains communion with the divine Power on which his heart is set.

Spiritual reading meant, for ancient India, something more than it does with us. It meant, first, the recital of sacred texts, which, in their very sounds, had mystical potencies; and it meant a recital of texts which were divinely emanated, and held in themselves the living, potent essence of the divine.

For us, spiritual reading means a communing with the recorded teachings of the Masters of wisdom, whereby we read ourselves into the Master's mind, just as through his music one can enter into the mind and soul of the master musician. It has been well said that all true art is contagion of feeling; so that through the true reading of true books we do indeed read ourselves into the spirit of the Masters, share in the atmosphere of their wisdom and power, and come at last into their very presence.

  

45. Soul-vision is perfected through perfect obedience to the Master.

The sorrow and darkness of life come of the erring personal will which sets itself against the will of the Soul, the one great Life. The error of the personal will is inevitable, since each will must be free to choose, to try and fail, and so to find the path. And sorrow and darkness are inevitable, until the path be found, and the personal will made once more one with the greater Will, wherein it finds rest and power, without losing freedom. In His will is our peace. And with that peace comes light. Soul-vision is perfected through obedience.

  

46. Right poise must be firm and without strain.

Here we approach a section of the teaching which has manifestly a two-fold meaning. The first is physical, and concerns the bodily position of the student, and the regulation of breathing. These things have their direct influence upon soul-life, the life of the spiritual man, since it is always and everywhere true that our study demands a sound mind in a sound body. The present sentence declares that, for work and for meditation, the position of the body must be steady and without strain, in order that the finer currents of life may run their course.

It applies further to the poise of the soul, that fine balance and stability which nothing can shake, where the consciousness rests on the firm foundation of spiritual being. This is indeed the house set upon a rock, which the winds and waves beat upon in vain.

  

47. Right poise is to be gained by steady and temperate effort, and by setting the heart upon the everlasting.

Here again, there is the two-fold meaning, for physical poise is to be gained by steady effort of the muscles, by gradual and wise training, linked with a right understanding of, and relation with, the universal force of gravity. Uprightness of body demands that both these conditions shall be fulfilled.

In like manner the firm and upright poise of the spiritual man is to be gained by steady and continued effort, always guided by wisdom, and by setting the heart on the Eternal, filling the soul with the atmosphere of the spiritual world. Neither is effective without the other. Aspiration without effort brings weakness; effort without aspiration brings a false strength, not resting on enduring things. The two together make for the right poise which sets the spiritual man firmly and steadfastly on his feet.

  

48 The fruit of right poise is the strength to resist the shocks of infatuation or sorrow.

In the simpler physical sense, which is also coveted by the wording of the original, this sentence means that wise effort establishes such bodily poise that the accidents of life cannot disturb it, as the captain remains steady, though disaster overtake his ship.

But the deeper sense is far more important. The spiritual man, too, must learn to withstand all shocks, to remain steadfast through the perturbations of external things and the storms and whirlwinds of the psychical world. This is the power which is gained by wise, continuous effort, and by filling the spirit with the atmosphere of the Eternal.

  

49. When this is gained, there follows the right guidance of the life-currents, the control of the incoming and outgoing breath.

It is well understood to-day that most of our maladies come from impure conditions of the blood. It is coming to be understood that right breathing, right oxygenation, will do very much to keep the blood clean and pure. Therefore a right knowledge of breathing is a part of the science of life.

But the deeper meaning is, that the spiritual man, when he has gained poise through right effort and aspiration, can stand firm, and guide the currents of his life, both the incoming current of events, and the outgoing current of his acts.

Exactly the same symbolism is used in the saying: Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man. . . . Those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart . . . out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, uncleanness, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. Therefore the first step in purification is to keep the Commandments.

  

50. The life-current is either outward, or inward, or balanced; it is regulated according to place, time, number; it is prolonged and subtle.

The technical, physical side of this has its value. In the breath, there should be right inbreathing, followed by the period of pause, when the air comes into contact with the blood, and this again followed by right outbreathing, even, steady, silent. Further, the lungs should be evenly filled; many maladies may arise from the neglect and consequent weakening of some region of the lungs. And the number of breaths is so important, so closely related to health, that every nurse's chart records it.

But the deeper meaning is concerned with the currents of life; with that which goeth into and cometh out of the heart.

  

51. The fourth degree transcends external and internal objects.

The inner meaning seems to be that, in addition to the three degrees of control already described, control, that is, over the incoming current of life, over the outgoing current, and over the condition of pause or quiescence, there is a fourth degree of control, which holds in complete mastery both the outer passage of events and the inner currents of thoughts and emotions; a condition of perfect poise and stability in the midst of the flux of things outward and inward.

  

52. Thereby is worn away the veil which covers up the light.

The veil is the psychic nature, the web of emotions, desires, argumentative trains of thought, which cover up and obscure the truth by absorbing the entire attention and keeping the consciousness in the psychic realm. When hopes and fears are reckoned at their true worth, in comparison with lasting possessions of the Soul; when the outer reflections of things have ceased to distract us from inner realities; when argumentative thought no longer entangles us, but yields its place to flashing intuition, the certainty which springs from within; then is the veil worn away, the consciousness is drawn from the psychical to the spiritual, from the temporal to the Eternal. Then is the light unveiled.

  

53. Thence comes the mind's power to hold itself in the light.

It has been well said, that what we most need is the faculty of spiritual attention; and in the same direction of thought it has been eloquently declared that prayer does not consist in our catching God's attention, but rather in our allowing God to hold our attention.

The vital matter is, that we need to disentangle our consciousness from the noisy and perturbed thraldom of the psychical, and to come to consciousness as the spiritual man. This we must do, first, by purification, through the Commandments and the Rules; and, second, through the faculty of spiritual attention, by steadily heeding endless fine intimations of the spiritual power within us, and by intending our consciousness thereto; thus by degrees transferring the centre of consciousness from the psychical to the spiritual. It is a question, first, of love, and then of attention.

  

54. The right Withdrawal is the disengaging of the powers from entanglement in outer things, as the psychic nature has been withdrawn and stilled.

To understand this, let us reverse the process, and think of the one consciousness, centred in the Soul, gradually expanding and taking on the form of the different perceptive powers; the one will, at the same time, differentiating itself into the varied powers of action.

Now let us imagine this to be reversed, so that the spiritual force, which has gone into the differentiated powers, is once more gathered together into the inner power of intuition and spiritual will, taking on that unity which is the hallmark of spiritual things, as diversity is the seal of material things.

It is all a matter of love for the quality of spiritual consciousness, as against psychical consciousness, of love and attention. For where the heart is, there will the treasure be also; where the consciousness is, there will the vesture with its powers be developed.

  

55. Thereupon follows perfect mastery over the powers.

When the spiritual condition which we have described is reached, with its purity, poise, and illuminated vision, the spiritual man is coming into his inheritance, and gaining complete mastery of his powers.

Indeed, much of the struggle to keep the Commandments and the Rules has been paving the way for this mastery; through this very struggle and sacrifice the mastery has become possible; just as, to use St. Paul's simile, the athlete gains the mastery in the contest and the race through the sacrifice of his long and arduous training. Thus he gains the crown.

      
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTRODUCTION TO BOOK III

The third book of the Sutras is the Book of Spiritual Powers. In considering these spiritual powers, two things must be understood and kept in memory. The first of these is this: These spiritual powers can only be gained when the development described in the first and second books has been measurably attained; when the Commandments have been kept, the Rules faithfully followed, and the experiences which are described have been passed through. For only after this is the spiritual man so far grown, so far disentangled from the psychical bandages and veils which have confined and blinded him, that he can use his proper powers and faculties. For this is the secret of all spiritual powers: they are in no sense an abnormal or supernatural overgrowth upon the material man, but are rather the powers and faculties inherent in the spiritual man, entirely natural to him, and coming naturally into activity, as the spiritual man is disentangled and liberated from psychical bondage, through keeping the Commandments and Rules already set forth.

As the personal man is the limitation and inversion of the spiritual man, all his faculties and powers are inversions of the powers of the spiritual man. In a single phrase, his self seeking is the inversion of the Self-seeking which is the very being of the spiritual man: the ceaseless search after the divine and august Self of all beings. This inversion is corrected by keeping the Commandments and Rules, and gradually, as the inversion is overcome, the spiritual man is extricated, and comes into possession and free exercise of his powers. The spiritual powers, therefore, are the powers of the grown and liberated spiritual man. They can only be developed and used as the spiritual man grows and attains liberation through obedience. This is the first thing to be kept in mind, in all that is said of spiritual powers in the third and fourth books of the Sutras. The second thing to be understood and kept in mind is this:

Just as our modern sages have discerned and taught that all matter is ultimately one and eternal, definitely related throughout the whole wide universe; just as they have discerned and taught that all force is one and eternal, so coordinated throughout the whole universe that whatever affects any atom measurably affects the whole boundless realm of matter and force, to the most distant star or nebula on the dim confines of space; so the ancient sages had discerned and taught that all consciousness is one, immortal, indivisible, infinite; so finely correlated and continuous that whatever is perceived by any consciousness is, whether actually or potentially, within the reach of all consciousness, and therefore within the reach of any consciousness. This has been well expressed by saying that all souls are fundamentally one with the Oversoul; that the Son of God, and all Sons of God, are fundamentally one with the Father. When the consciousness is cleared of psychic bonds and veils, when the spiritual man is able to stand, to see, then this superb law comes into effect: whatever is within the knowledge of any consciousness, and this includes the whole infinite universe, is within his reach, and may, if he wills, be made a part of his consciousness. This he may attain through his fundamental unity with the Oversoul, by raising himself toward the consciousness above him, and drawing on its resources. The Son, if he would work miracles, whether of perception or of action, must come often into the presence of the Father. This is the birthright of the spiritual man; through it he comes into possession of his splendid and immortal powers. Let it be clearly kept in mind that what is here to be related of the spiritual man, and his exalted powers, must in no wise be detached from what has gone before. The being, the very inception, of the spiritual man depends on the purification and moral attainment already detailed, and can in no wise dispense with these or curtail them.

Let no one imagine that the true life, the true powers of the spiritual man, can be attained by any way except the hard way of sacrifice, of trial, of renunciation, of selfless self-conquest and genuine devotion to the weal of all others. Only thus can the golden gates be reached and entered. Only thus can we attain to that pure world wherein the spiritual man lives, and moves, and has his being. Nothing impure, nothing unholy can ever cross that threshold, least of all impure motives or self seeking desires. These must be burnt away before an entrance to that world can be gained.

But where there is light, there is shadow; and the lofty light of the soul casts upon the clouds of the mid-world the shadow of the spiritual man and of his powers; the bastard vesture and the bastard powers of psychism are easily attained; yet, even when attained, they are a delusion, the very essence of unreality.

Therefore ponder well the earlier rules, and lay a firm foundation of courage, sacrifice, selflessness, holiness.

      
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK III

  

1. The binding of the perceiving consciousness to a certain region is attention (dharana).

Emerson quotes Sir Isaac Newton as saying that he made his great discoveries by intending his mind on them. That is what is meant here. I read the page of a book while inking of something else. At the end of he page, I have no idea of what it is about, and read it again, still thinking of something else, with the same result. Then I wake up, so to speak, make an effort of attention, fix my thought on what I am reading, and easily take in its meaning. The act of will, the effort of attention, the intending of the mind on each word and line of the page, just as the eyes are focussed on each word and line, is the power here contemplated. It is the power to focus the consciousness on a given spot, and hold it there Attention is the first and indispensable step in all knowledge. Attention to spiritual things is the first step to spiritual knowledge.

  

2. A prolonged holding of the perceiving consciousness in that region is meditation (dhyana).

This will apply equally to outer and inner things. I may for a moment fix my attention on some visible object, in a single penetrating glance, or I may hold the attention fixedly on it until it reveals far more of its nature than a single glance could perceive. The first is the focussing of the searchlight of consciousness upon the object. The other is the holding of the white beam of light steadily and persistently on the object, until it yields up the secret of its details. So for things within; one may fix the inner glance for a moment on spiritual things, or one may hold the consciousness steadily upon them, until what was in the dark slowly comes forth into the light, and yields up its immortal secret. But this is possible only for the spiritual man, after the Commandments and the Rules have been kept; for until this is done, the thronging storms of psychical thoughts dissipate and distract the attention, so that it will not remain fixed on spiritual things. The cares of this world, the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word of the spiritual message.

  

3. When the perceiving consciousness in this meditative is wholly given to illuminating the essential meaning of the object contemplated, and is freed from the sense of separateness and personality, this is contemplation (samadhi).

Let us review the steps so far taken. First, the beam of perceiving consciousness is focussed on a certain region or subject, through the effort of attention. Then this attending consciousness is held on its object. Third, there is the ardent will to know its meaning, to illumine it with comprehending thought. Fourth, all personal bias, all desire merely to indorse a previous opinion and so prove oneself right, and all desire for personal profit or gratification must be quite put away. There must be a purely disinterested love of truth for its own sake. Thus is the perceiving consciousness made void, as it were, of all personality or sense of separateness. The personal limitation stands aside and lets the All-consciousness come to bear upon the problem. The Oversoul bends its ray upon the object, and illumines it with pure light.

  

4. When these three, Attention, Meditation Contemplation, are exercised at once, this is perfectly concentrated Meditation (sanyama).

When the personal limitation of the perceiving consciousness stands aside, and allows the All-conscious to come to bear upon the problem, then arises that real knowledge which is called a flash of genius; that real knowledge which makes discoveries, and without which no discovery can be made, however painstaking the effort. For genius is the vision of the spiritual man, and that vision is a question of growth rather than present effort; though right effort, rightly continued, will in time infallibly lead to growth and vision. Through the power thus to set aside personal limitation, to push aside petty concerns and cares, and steady the whole nature and will in an ardent love of truth and desire to know it; through the power thus to make way for the All-consciousness, all great men make their discoveries. Newton, watching the apple fall to the earth, was able to look beyond, to see the subtle waves of force pulsating through apples and worlds and suns and galaxies. and thus to perceive universal gravitation. The Oversoul, looking through his eyes, recognized the universal force, one of its own children. Darwin, watching the forms and motions of plants and animals, let the same august consciousness come to bear on them, and saw infinite growth perfected through ceaseless struggle. He perceived the superb process of evolution, the Oversoul once more recognizing its own. Fraunhofer, noting the dark lines in the band of sunlight in his spectroscope, divined their identity with the bright lines in the spectra of incandescent iron, sodium and the rest, and so saw the oneness of substance in the worlds and suns, the unity of the materials of the universe. Once again the Oversoul, looking with his eyes, recognized its own. So it is with all true knowledge. But the mind must transcend its limitations, its idiosyncrasies; there must be purity, for to the pure in heart is the promise, that they shall see God.

  

5. By mastering this perfectly concentrated Meditation, there comes the illumination of perception.

The meaning of this is illustrated by what has been said before. When the spiritual man is able to throw aside the trammels of emotional and mental limitation, and to open his eyes, he sees clearly, he attains to illuminated perception. A poet once said that Occultism is the conscious cultivation of genius; and it is certain that the awakened spiritual man attains to the perceptions of genius. Genius is the vision, the power, of the spiritual man, whether its possessor recognizes this or not. All true knowledge is of the spiritual man. The greatest in all ages have recognized this and put their testimony on record. The great in wisdom who have not consciously recognized it, have ever been full of the spirit of reverence, of selfless devotion to truth, of humility, as was Darwin; and reverence and humility are the unconscious recognition of the nearness of the Spirit, that Divinity which broods over us, a Master o'er a slave.

  

6. This power is distributed in ascending degrees.

It is to be attained step by step. It is a question, not of miracle, but of evolution, of growth. Newton had to master the multiplication table, then the four rules of arithmetic, then the rudiments of algebra, before he came to the binomial theorem. At each point, there was attention, concentration, insight; until these were attained, no progress to the next point was possible. So with Darwin. He had to learn the form and use of leaf and flower, of bone and muscle; the characteristics of genera and species; the distribution of plants and animals, before he had in mind that nexus of knowledge on which the light of his great idea was at last able to shine. So is it with all knowledge. So is it with spiritual knowledge. Take the matter this way: The first subject for the exercise of my spiritual insight is my day, with its circumstances, its hindrances, its opportunities, its duties. I do what I can to solve it, to fulfil its duties, to learn its lessons. I try to live my day with aspiration and faith. That is the first step. By doing this, I gather a harvest for the evening, I gain a deeper insight into life, in virtue of which I begin the next day with a certain advantage, a certain spiritual advance and attainment. So with all successive days. In faith and aspiration, we pass from day to day, in growing knowledge and power, with never more than one day to solve at a time, until all life becomes radiant and transparent.

  

7. This threefold power, of Attention, Meditation, Contemplation, is more interior than the means of growth previously described.

Very naturally so; because the means of growth previously described were concerned with the extrication of the spiritual man from psychic bondages and veils; while this threefold power is to be exercised by the spiritual man thus extricated and standing on his feet, viewing life with open eyes.

  

8. But this triad is still exterior to the soul vision which is unconditioned, free from the seed of mental analyses.

The reason is this: The threefold power we have been considering, the triad of Attention, Contemplation, Meditation is, so far as we have yet considered it, the focussing of the beam of perceiving consciousness upon some form of manifesting being, with a view of understanding it completely. There is a higher stage, where the beam of consciousness is turned back upon itself, and the individual consciousness enters into, and knows, the All consciousness. This is a being, a being in immortality, rather than a knowing; it is free from mental analysis or mental forms. It is not an activity of the higher mind, even the mind of the spiritual man. It is an activity of the soul. Had Newton risen to this higher stage, he would have known, not the laws of motion, but that high Being, from whose Life comes eternal motion. Had Darwin risen to this, he would have seen the Soul, whose graduated thought and being all evolution expresses. There are, therefore, these two perceptions: that of living things, and that of the Life; that of the Soul's works, and that of the Soul itself.

  

9. One of the ascending degrees is the development of Control. First there is the overcoming of the mind-impress of excitation. Then comes the manifestation of the mind-impress of Control. Then the perceiving consciousness follows after the moment of Control.

This is the development of Control. The meaning seems to be this: Some object enters the field of observation, and at first violently excites the mind, stirring up curiosity, fear, wonder; then the consciousness returns upon itself, as it were, and takes the perception firmly in hand, steadying itself, and viewing the matter calmly from above. This steadying effort of the will upon the perceiving consciousness is Control, and immediately upon it follows perception, understanding, insight.

Take a trite example. Supposing one is walking in an Indian forest. A charging elephant suddenly appears. The man is excited by astonishment, and, perhaps, terror. But he exercises an effort of will, perceives the situation in its true bearings, and recognizes that a certain thing must be done; in this case, probably, that he must get out of the way as quickly as possible.

Or a comet, unheralded, appears in the sky like a flaming sword. The beholder is at first astonished, perhaps terror-stricken; but he takes himself in hand, controls his thoughts, views the apparition calmly, and finally calculates its orbit and its relation to meteor showers.

These are extreme illustrations; but with all knowledge the order of perception is the same: first, the excitation of the mind by the new object impressed on it; then the control of the mind from within; upon which follows the perception of the nature of the object. Where the eyes of the spiritual man are open, this will be a true and penetrating spiritual perception. In some such way do our living experiences come to us; first, with a shock of pain; then the Soul steadies itself and controls the pain; then the spirit perceives the lesson of the event, and its bearing upon the progressive revelation of life.

  

10. Through frequent repetition of this process, the mind becomes habituated to it, and there arises an equable flow of perceiving consciousness.

Control of the mind by the Soul, like control of the muscles by the mind, comes by practice, and constant voluntary repetition.

As an example of control of the muscles by the mind, take the ceaseless practice by which a musician gains mastery over his instrument, or a fencer gains skill with a rapier. Innumerable small efforts of attention will make a result which seems well-nigh miraculous; which, for the novice, is really miraculous. Then consider that far more wonderful instrument, the perceiving mind, played on by that fine musician, the Soul. Here again, innumerable small efforts of attention will accumulate into mastery, and a mastery worth winning. For a concrete example, take the gradual conquest of each day, the effort to live that day for the Soul. To him that is faithful unto death, the Master gives the crown of life.

  

11. The gradual conquest of the mind's tendency to flit from one object to another, and the power of one-pointedness, make the development of Contemplation.

As an illustration of the mind's tendency to flit from one object to another, take a small boy, learning arithmetic. He begins: two ones are two; three ones are three-and then he thinks of three coins in his pocket, which will purchase so much candy, in the store down the street, next to the toy-shop, where are base-balls, marbles and so on,--and then he comes back with a jerk, to four ones are four. So with us also. We are seeking the meaning of our task, but the mind takes advantage of a moment of slackened attention, and flits off from one frivolous detail to another, till we suddenly come back to consciousness after traversing leagues of space. We must learn to conquer this, and to go back within ourselves into the beam of perceiving consciousness itself, which is a beam of the Oversoul. This is the true one-pointedness, the bringing of our consciousness to a focus in the Soul.

  

12. When, following this, the controlled manifold tendency and the aroused one-pointedness are equally balanced parts of the perceiving consciousness, his the development of one-pointedness.

This would seem to mean that the insight which is called one-pointedness has two sides, equally balanced. There is, first, the manifold aspect of any object, the sum of all its characteristics and properties. This is to be held firmly in the mind. Then there is the perception of the object as a unity, as a whole, the perception of its essence. First, the details must be clearly perceived; then the essence must be comprehended. When the two processes are equally balanced, the true one-pointedness is attained. Everything has these two sides, the side of difference and the side of unity; there is the individual and there is the genus; the pole of matter and diversity, and the pole of oneness and spirit. To see the object truly, we must see both.

  

13. Through this, the inherent character, distinctive marks and conditions of being and powers, according to their development, are made clear.

By the power defined in the preceding sutra, the inherent character, distinctive marks and conditions of beings and powers are made clear. For through this power, as defined, we get a twofold view of each object, seeing at once all its individual characteristics and its essential character, species and genus; we see it in relation to itself, and in relation to the Eternal. Thus we see a rose as that particular flower, with its colour and scent, its peculiar fold of each petal; but we also see in it the species, the family to which it belongs, with its relation to all plants, to all life, to Life itself. So in any day, we see events and circumstances; we also see in it the lesson set for the soul by the Eternal.

  

14. Every object has its characteristics which are already quiescent, those which are active, and those which are not yet definable.

Every object has characteristics belonging to its past, its present and its future. In a fir tree, for example, there are the stumps or scars of dead branches, which once represented its foremost growth; there are the branches with their needles spread out to the air; there are the buds at the end of each branch and twig, which carry the still closely packed needles which are the promise of the future. In like manner, the chrysalis has, as its past, the caterpillar; as its future, the butterfly. The man has, in his past, the animal; in his future, the angel. Both are visible even now in his face. So with all things, for all things change and grow.

  

15. Difference in stage is the cause of difference in development.

This but amplifies what has just been said. The first stage is the sapling, the caterpillar, the animal. The second stage is the growing tree, the chrysalis, the man. The third is the splendid pine, the butterfly, the angel. Difference of stage is the cause of difference of development. So it is among men, and among the races of men.

  

16. Through perfectly concentrated Meditation on the three stages of development comes a knowledge of past and future.

We have taken our illustrations from natural science, because, since every true discovery in natural science is a divination of a law in nature, attained through a flash of genius, such discoveries really represent acts of spiritual perception, acts of perception by the spiritual man, even though they are generally not so recognized. So we may once more use the same illustration. Perfectly concentrated Meditation, perfect insight into the chrysalis, reveals the caterpillar that it has been, the butterfly that it is destined to be. He who knows the seed, knows the seed-pod or ear it has come from, and the plant that is to come from it. So in like manner he who really knows today, and the heart of to-day, knows its parent yesterday and its child tomorrow. Past, present and future are all in the Eternal. He who dwells in the Eternal knows all three.

  

17. The sound and the object and the thought called up by a word are confounded because they are all blurred together in the mind. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the distinction between them, there comes an understanding of the sounds uttered by all beings.

It must be remembered that we are speaking of perception by the spiritual man.

Sound, like every force, is the expression of a power of the Eternal. Infinite shades of this power are expressed in the infinitely varied tones of sound. He who, having entry to the consciousness of the Eternal knows the essence of this power, can divine the meanings of all sounds, from the voice of the insect to the music of the spheres.

In like manner, he who has attained to spiritual vision can perceive the mind-images in the thoughts of others, with the shade of feeling which goes with them, thus reading their thoughts as easily as he hears their words. Every one has the germ of this power, since difference of tone will give widely differing meanings to the same words, meanings which are intuitively perceived by everyone.

  

18. When the mind-impressions become visible, there comes an understanding of previous births.

This is simple enough if we grasp the truth of rebirth. The fine harvest of past experi ences is drawn into the spiritual nature, forming, indeed, the basis of its development. When the consciousness has been raised to a point above these fine subjective impressions, and can look down upon them from above, this will in itself be a remembering of past births.

  

19. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on mind-images is gained the understanding of the thoughts of others.

Here, for those who can profit by it, is the secret of thought-reading. Take the simplest case of intentional thought transference. It is the testimony of those who have done this, that the perceiving mind must be stilled, before the mind-image projected by the other mind can be seen. With it comes a sense of the feeling and temper of the other mind and so on, in higher degrees.

  

20. But since that on which the thought in the mind of another rests is not objective to the thought-reader's consciousness, he perceives the thought only, and not also that on which the thought rests.

The meaning appears to be simple: One may be able to perceive the thoughts of some one at a distance; one cannot, by that means alone, also perceive the external surroundings of that person, which arouse these thoughts.

  

21. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the form of the body, by arresting the body's perceptibility, and by inhibiting the eye's power of sight, there comes the power to make the body invisible.

There are many instances of the exercise of this power, by mesmerists, hypnotists and the like; and we may simply call it an instance of the power of suggestion. Shankara tells us that by this power the popular magicians of the East perform their wonders, working on the mind-images of others, while remaining invisible themselves. It is all a question of being able to see and control the mind-images.

  

22. The works which fill out the life-span may be either immediately or gradually operative. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on these comes a knowledge of the time of the end, as also through signs.

A garment which is wet, says the commentator, may be hung up to dry, and so dry rapidly, or it may be rolled in a ball and dry slowly; so a fire may blaze or smoulder. Thus it is with Karma, the works that fill out the life-span. By an insight into the mental forms and forces which make up Karma, there comes a knowledge of the rapidity or slowness of their development, and of the time when the debt will be paid.

  

23. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on sympathy, compassion and kindness, is gained the power of interior union with others.

Unity is the reality; separateness the illusion. The nearer we come to reality, the nearer we come to unity of heart. Sympathy, compassion, kindness are modes of this unity of heart, whereby we rejoice with those who rejoice, and weep with those who weep. These things are learned by desiring to learn them.

  

24. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on power, even such power as that of the elephant may be gained.

This is a pretty image. Elephants possess not only force, but poise and fineness of control. They can lift a straw, a child, a tree with perfectly judged control and effort. So the simile is a good one. By detachment, by withdrawing into the soul's reservoir of power, we can gain all these, force and fineness and poise; the ability to handle with equal mastery things small and great, concrete and abstract alike.

  

25. By bending upon them the awakened inner light, there comes a knowledge of things subtle, or concealed, or obscure.

As was said at the outset, each consciousness is related to all consciousness; and, through it, has a potential consciousness of all things; whether subtle or concealed or obscure. An understanding of this great truth will come with practice. As one of the wise has said, we have no conception of the power of Meditation.

  

26. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the sun comes a knowledge of the worlds.

This has several meanings: First, by a knowledge of the constitution of the sun, astronomers can understand the kindred nature of the stars. And it is said that there is a finer astronomy, where the spiritual man is the astronomer. But the sun also means the Soul, and through knowledge of the Soul comes a knowledge of the realms of life.

  

27. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the moon comes a knowledge of the lunar mansions.

Here again are different meanings. The moon is, first, the companion planet, which, each day, passes backward through one mansion of the stars. By watching the moon, the boundaries of the mansion are learned, with their succession in the great time-dial of the sky. But the moon also symbolizes the analytic mind, with its divided realms; and these, too, may be understood through perfectly concentrated Meditation.

  

28. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the fixed pole-star comes a knowledge of the motions of the stars.

Addressing Duty, stern daughter of the Voice of God, Wordsworth finely said:

Thou cost preserve the stars from wrong,
 And the most ancient heavens through thee are fresh and strong--

thus suggesting a profound relation between the moral powers and the powers that rule the worlds. So in this Sutra the fixed polestar is the eternal spirit about which all things move, as well as the star toward which points the axis of the earth. Deep mysteries attend both, and the veil of mystery is only to be raised by Meditation, by open-eyed vision of the awakened spiritual man.

  

29. Perfectly concentrated Meditation on the centre of force in the lower trunk brings an understanding of the order of the bodily powers.

We are coming to a vitally important part of the teaching of Yoga: namely, the spiritual man's attainment of full self-consciousness, the awakening of the spiritual man as a self-conscious individual, behind and above the natural man. In this awakening, and in the process of gestation which precedes it, there is a close relation with the powers of the natural man, which are, in a certain sense, the projection, outward and downward, of the powers of the spiritual man. This is notably true of that creative power of the spiritual man which, when embodied in the natural man, becomes the power of generation. Not only is this power the cause of the continuance of the bodily race of mankind, but further, in the individual, it is the key to the dominance of the personal life. Rising, as it were, through the life-channels of the body, it flushes the personality with physical force, and maintains and colours the illusion that the physical life is the dominant and all-important expression of life. In due time, when the spiritual man has begun to take form, the creative force will be drawn off, and become operative in building the body of the spiritual man, just as it has been operative in the building of physical bodies, through generation in the natural world.

Perfectly concentrated Meditation on the nature of this force means, first, that rising of the consciousness into the spiritual world, already described, which gives the one sure foothold for Meditation; and then, from that spiritual point of vantage, not only an insight into the creative force, in its spiritual and physical aspects, but also a gradually attained control of this wonderful force, which will mean its direction to the body of the spiritual man, and its gradual withdrawal from the body of the natural man, until the over-pressure, so general and such a fruitful source of misery in our day, is abated, and purity takes the place of passion. This over pressure, which is the cause of so many evils and so much of human shame, is an abnormal, not a natural, condition. It is primarily due to spiritual blindness, to blindness regarding the spiritual man, and ignorance even of his existence; for by this blind ignorance are closed the channels through which, were they open, the creative force could flow into the body of the spiritual man, there building up an immortal vesture. There is no cure for blindness, with its consequent over-pressure and attendant misery and shame, but spiritual vision, spiritual aspiration, sacrifice, the new birth from above. There is no other way to lighten the burden, to lift the misery and shame from human life. Therefore, let us follow after sacrifice and aspiration, let us seek the light. In this way only shall we gain that insight into the order of the bodily powers, and that mastery of them, which this Sutra implies.

  

30. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the centre of force in the well of the throat, there comes the cessation of hunger and thirst.

We are continuing the study of the bodily powers and centres of force in their relation to the powers and forces of the spiritual man. We have already considered the dominant power of physical life, the creative power which secures the continuance of physical life; and, further, the manner in which, through aspiration and sacrifice, it is gradually raised and set to the work of upbuilding the body of the spiritual man. We come now to the dominant psychic force, the power which manifests itself in speech, and in virtue of which the voice may carry so much of the personal magnetism, endowing the orator with a tongue of fire, magical in its power to arouse and rule the emotions of his hearers. This emotional power, this distinctively psychical force, is the cause of 'hunger and thirst,' the psychical hunger and thirst for sensations, which is the source of our two-sided life of emotionalism, with its hopes and fears, its expectations and memories, its desires and hates. The source of this psychical power, or, perhaps we should say, its centre of activity in the physical body is said to be in the cavity of the throat. Thus, in the Taittiriya Upanishad it is written: 'There is this shining ether in the inner being. Therein is the spiritual man, formed through thought, immortal, golden. Inward, in the palate, the organ that hangs down like a nipple,--this is the womb of Indra. And there, where the dividing of the hair turns, extending upward to the crown of the head.'

Indra is the name given to the creative power of which we have spoken, and which, we are told, resides in 'the organ which hangs down like a nipple, inward, in the palate.'

  

31. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the centre of force in the channel called the 'tortoise-formed,' comes steadfastness.

We are concerned now with the centre of nervous or psychical force below the cavity of the throat, in the chest, in which is felt the sensation of fear; the centre, the disturbance of which sets the heart beating miserably with dread, or which produces that sense of terror through which the heart is said to stand still.

When the truth concerning fear is thoroughly mastered, through spiritual insight into the immortal, fearless life, then this force is perfectly controlled; there is no more fear, just as, through the control of the psychic power which works through the nerve-centre in the throat, there comes a cessation of 'hunger and thirst.' Thereafter, these forces, or their spiritual prototypes, are turned to the building of the spiritual man.

Always, it must be remembered, the victory is first a spiritual one; only later does it bring control of the bodily powers.

  

32. Through perfectly concentrated Meditation on the light in the head comes the vision of the Masters who have attained.

The tradition is, that there is a certain centre of force in the head, perhaps the 'pineal gland,' which some of our Western philosophers have supposed to be the dwelling of the soul,-a centre which is, as it were, the door way between the natural and the spiritual man. It is the seat of that better and wiser consciousness behind the outward looking consciousness in the forward part of the head; that better and wiser consciousness of 'the back of the mind,' which views spiritual things, and seeks to impress the spiritual view on the outward looking consciousness in the forward part of the head. It is the spiritual man seeking to guide the natural man, seeking to bring the natural man to concern himself with the things of his immortality. This is suggested in the words of the Upanishad already quoted: 'There, where the dividing of the hair turns, extending upward to the crown of the head'; all of which may sound very fantastical, until one comes to understand it.

It is said that when this power is fully awakened, it brings a vision of the great Companions of the spiritual man, those who have already attained, crossing over to the further shore of the sea of death and rebirth. Perhaps it is to this divine sight that the Master alluded, who is reported to have said: 'I counsel you to buy of me eye-salve, that you may see.' It is of this same vision of the great Companions, the children of light, that a seer wrote:

Though inland far we be,
 Our souls have sight of that immortal sea
 Which brought us hither,
 Can in a moment travel thither,
 And see the Children sport upon the shore
 And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.

  

33. Or through the divining power of tuition he knows all things.

This is really the supplement, the spiritual side, of the Sutra just translated. Step by step, as the better consciousness, the spiritual view, gains force in the back of the mind, so, in the same measure, the spiritual man is gaining the power to see: learning to open the spiritual eyes. When the eyes are fully opened, the spiritual man beholds the great Companions standing about him; he has begun to 'know all things.'

This divining power of intuition is the power which lies above and behind the so-called rational mind; the rational mind formulates a question and lays it before the intuition, which gives a real answer, often immediately distorted by the rational mind, yet always embodying a kernel of truth. It is by this process, through which the rational mind brings questions to the intuition for solution, that the truths of science are reached, the flashes of discovery and genius. But this higher power need not work in subordination to the so-called rational mind, it may act directly, as full illumination, 'the vision and the faculty divine.'

  

34 By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the heart, the interior being, comes the knowledge of consciousness.

The heart here seems to mean, as it so often. does in the Upanishads, the interior, spiritual nature, the consciousness of the spiritual man, which is related to the heart, and to the wisdom of the heart. By steadily seeking after, and finding, the consciousness of the spiritual man, by coming to consciousness as the spiritual man, a perfect knowledge of consciousness will be attained. For the consciousness of the spiritual man has this divine quality: while being and remaining a truly individual consciousness, it at the same time flows over, as it were, and blends with the Divine Consciousness above and about it, the consciousness of the great Companions; and by showing itself to be one with the Divine Consciousness, it reveals the nature of all consciousness, the secret that all consciousness is One and Divine.

  

35. The personal self seeks to feast on life, through a failure to perceive the distinction between the personal self and the spiritual man. All personal experience really exists for the sake of another: namely, the spiritual man.

  

By perfectly concentrated Meditation on experience for the sake of the Self, comes a knowledge of the spiritual man.

The divine ray of the Higher Self, which is eternal, impersonal and abstract, descends into life, and forms a personality, which, through the stress and storm of life, is hammered into a definite and concrete self-conscious individuality. The problem is, to blend these two powers, taking the eternal and spiritual being of the first, and blending with it, transferring into it, the self-conscious individuality of the second; and thus bringing to life a third being, the spiritual man, who is heir to the immortality of his father, the Higher Self, and yet has the self-conscious, concrete individuality of his other parent, the personal self. This is the true immaculate conception, the new birth from above, 'conceived of the Holy Spirit.' Of this new birth it is said: 'that which is born of the Spirit is spirit; ye must be born again.'

Rightly understood, therefore, the whole life of the personal man is for another, not for himself. He exists only to render his very life and all his experience for the building up of the spiritual man. Only through failure to see this, does he seek enjoyment for himself, seek to secure the feasts of life for himself; not understanding that he must live for the other, live sacrificially, offering both feasts and his very being on the altar; giving himself as a contribution for the building of the spiritual man. When he does understand this, and lives for the Higher Self, setting his heart and thought on the Higher Self, then his sacrifice bears divine fruit, the spiritual man is built up, consciousness awakes in him, and he comes fully into being as a divine and immortal individuality.

  

36. Thereupon are born the divine power of intuition, and the hearing, the touch, the vision, the taste and the power of smell of the spiritual man.

When, in virtue of the perpetual sacrifice of the personal man, daily and hourly giving his life for his divine brother the spiritual man, and through the radiance ever pouring down from the Higher Self, eternal in the Heavens, the spiritual man comes to birth,--there awake in him those powers whose physical counterparts we know in the personal man. The spiritual man begins to see, to hear, to touch, to taste. And, besides the senses of the spiritual man, there awakes his mind, that divine counterpart of the mind of the physical man, the power of direct and immediate knowledge, the power of spiritual intuition, of divination. This power, as we have seen, owes its virtue to the unity, the continuity, of consciousness, whereby whatever is known to any consciousness, is knowable by any other consciousness. Thus the consciousness of the spiritual man, who lives above our narrow barriers of separateness, is in intimate touch with the consciousness of the great Companions, and can draw on that vast reservoir for all real needs. Thus arises within the spiritual man that certain knowledge which is called intuition, divination, illumination.

  

37. These powers stand in contradistinction to the highest spiritual vision. In manifestation they are called magical powers.

The divine man is destined to supersede the spiritual man, as the spiritual man supersedes the natural man. Then the disciple becomes a Master. The opened powers of tile spiritual man, spiritual vision, hearing, and touch, stand, therefore, in contradistinction to the higher divine power above them, and must in no wise be regarded as the end of the way, for the path has no end, but rises ever to higher and higher glories; the soul's growth and splendour have no limit. So that, if the spiritual powers we have been considering are regarded as in any sense final, they are a hindrance, a barrier to the far higher powers of the divine man. But viewed from below, from the standpoint of normal physical experience, they are powers truly magical; as the powers natural to a four-dimensional being will appear magical to a three-dimensional being.

  

38. Through the weakening of the causes of bondage, and by learning the method of sassing, the consciousness is transferred to the other body.

In due time, after the spiritual man has been formed and grown stable through the forces and virtues already enumerated, and after the senses of the spiritual man have awaked, there comes the transfer of the dominant consciousness, the sense of individuality, from the physical to the spiritual man. Thereafter the physical man is felt to be a secondary, a subordinate, an instrument through whom the spiritual man works; and the spiritual man is felt to be the real individuality. This is, in a sense, the attainment to full salvation and immortal life; yet it is not the final goal or resting place, but only the beginning of the greater way.

The means for this transfer are described as the weakening of the causes of bondage, and an understanding of the method of passing from the one consciousness to the other. The first may also be described as detach meet, and comes from the conquest of the delusion that the personal self is the real man. When that delusion abates and is held in check, the finer consciousness of the spiritual man begins to shine in the background of the mind. The transfer of the sense of individuality to this finer consciousness, and thus to the spiritual man, then becomes a matter of recollection, of attention; primarily, a matter of taking a deeper interest in the life and doings of the spiritual man, than in the pleasures or occupations of the personality. Therefore it is said: 'Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust cloth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust cloth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.'

  

39. Through mastery of the upward-life comes freedom from the dangers of water, morass, and thorny places, and the power of ascension is gained.

Here is one of the sentences, so characteristic of this author, and, indeed, of the Eastern spirit, in which there is an obvious exterior meaning, and, within this, a clear interior meaning, not quite so obvious, but far more vital.

The surface meaning is, that by mastery of a certain power, called here the upward-life, and akin to levitation, there comes the ability to walk on water, or to pass over thorny places without wounding the feet.

But there is a deeper meaning. When we speak of the disciple's path as a path of thorns, we use a symbol; and the same symbol is used here. The upward-life means something more than the power, often manifested in abnormal psychical experiences, of levitating the physical body, or near-by physical objects. It means the strong power of aspiration, of upward will, which first builds, and then awakes the spiritual man, and finally transfers the conscious individuality to him; for it is he who passes safely over the waters of death and rebirth, and is not pierced by the thorns in the path. Therefore it is said that he who would tread the path of power must look for a home in the air, and afterwards in the ether.

Of the upward-life, this is written in the Katha Upanishad: 'A hundred and one are the heart's channels; of these one passes to the crown. Going up this, he comes to the immortal.' This is the power of ascension spoken of in the Sutra.

  

40. By mastery of the binding-life comes radiance.

In the Upanishads, it is said that this binding-life unites the upward-life to the downward-life, and these lives have their analogies in the 'vital breaths' in the body. The thought in the text seems to be, that, when the personality is brought thoroughly under control of the spiritual man, through the life-currents which bind them together, the personality is endowed with a new force, a strong personal magnetism, one might call it, such as is often an appanage of genius.

But the text seems to mean more than this and to have in view the 'vesture of the colour of the sun' attributed by the Upanishads to the spiritual man; that vesture which a disciple has thus described: 'The Lord shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body'; perhaps 'body of radiance' would better translate the Greek.

In both these passages, the teaching seems to be, that the body of the full-grown spiritual man is radiant or luminous,--for those at least, who have anointed their eyes with eye-salve, so that they see.

  

41. From perfectly concentrated Meditation on the correlation of hearing and the ether, comes the power of spiritual hearing.

Physical sound, we are told, is carried by the air, or by water, iron, or some medium on the same plane of substance. But then is a finer hearing, whose medium of transmission would seem to be the ether; perhaps no that ether which carries light, heat and magnetic waves, but, it may be, the far finer ether through which the power of gravity works. For, while light or heat or magnetic waves, travelling from the sun to the earth, take eight minutes for the journey, it is mathematically certain that the pull of gravitation does not take as much as eight seconds, or even the eighth of a second. The pull of gravitation travels, it would seem 'as quick as thought'; so it may well be that, in thought transference or telepathy, the thoughts travel by the same way, carried by the same 'thought-swift' medium.

The transfer of a word by telepathy is the simplest and earliest form of the 'divine hearing' of the spiritual man; as that power grows, and as, through perfectly concentrated Meditation, the spiritual man comes into more complete mastery of it, he grows able to hear and clearly distinguish the speech of the great Companions, who counsel and comfort him on his way. They may speak to him either in wordless thoughts, or in perfectly definite words and sentences.

  

42. By perfectly concentrated Meditation on the correlation of the body with the ether, and by thinking of it as light as thistle-down, will come the power to traverse the ether.

It has been said that he who would tread the path of power must look for a home in the air, and afterwards in the ether. This would seem to mean, besides the constant injunction to detachment, that he must be prepared to inhabit first a psychic, and then an etheric body; the former being the body of dreams; the latter, the body of the spiritual man, when he wakes up on the other side of dreamland. The gradual accustoming of the consciousness to its new etheric vesture, its gradual acclimatization, so to speak, in the etheric body of the spiritual man, is what our text seems to contemplate.

  

43. When that condition of consciousness s reached, which is far-reaching and not confined to the body, which is outside the body and not conditioned by it, then the veil which conceals the light is worn away.

Perhaps the best comment on this is afforded by the words of Paul: 'I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such a one caught up to the third heaven. And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) how that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable [or, unspoken] words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.'

The condition is, briefly, that of the awakened spiritual man, who sees and hears beyond the veil.

  

44. Mastery of the elements comes from perfectly concentrated Meditation on their five forms: the gross, the elemental, the subtle, the inherent, the purposive.

These five forms are analogous to those recognized by modern physics: solid, liquid, gaseous, radiant and ionic. When the piercing vision of the awakened spiritual man is directed to the forms of matter, from within, as it were, from behind the scenes, then perfect mastery over the 'beggarly elements' is attained. This is, perhaps, equivalent to the injunction: 'Inquire of the earth, the air, and the water, of the secrets they hold for you. The development of your inner senses will enable you to do this.'

  

45. Thereupon will come the manifestation of the atomic and other powers, which are the endowment of the body, together with its unassailable force.

The body in question is, of course, the etheric body of the spiritual man. He is said to possess eight powers: the atomic, the power of assimilating himself with the nature of the atom, which will, perhaps, involve the power to disintegrate material forms; the power of levitation; the power of limitless extension; the power of boundless reach, so that, as the commentator says, 'he can touch the moon with the tip of his finger'; the power to accomplish his will; the power of gravitation, the correlative of levitation; the power of command; the power of creative will. These are the endowments of the spiritual man. Further, the spiritual body is unassailable. Fire burns it not, water wets it not, the sword cleaves it not, dry winds parch it not. And, it is said, the spiritual man can impart something of this quality and temper to his bodily vesture.

  

46. Shapeliness, beauty, force, the temper of the diamond: these are the endowments of that body.

The spiritual man is shapely, beautiful strong, firm as the diamond. Therefore it is written: 'These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass: He that overcometh and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and I will give him the morning star.'

  

47. Mastery over the powers of perception and action comes through perfectly concentrated Meditation on their fivefold forms; namely, their power to grasp their distinctive nature, the element of self-consciousness in them, their inherence, and their purposiveness.

Take, for example, sight. This possesses, first, the power to grasp, apprehend, perceive; second, it has its distinctive form of perception; that is, visual perception; third, it always carries with its operations self-consciousness, the thought: 'I perceive'; fourth sight has the power of extension through the whole field of vision, even to the utmost star; fifth, it is used for the purposes of the Seer. So with the other senses. Perfectly concentrated Meditation on each sense, a viewing it from behind and within, as is possible for the spiritual man, brings a mastery of the scope and true character of each sense, and of the world on which they report collectively.

  

48. Thence comes the power swift as thought, independent of instruments, and the mastery over matter.

We are further enumerating the endowments of the spiritual man. Among these is the power to traverse space with the swiftness of thought, so that whatever place the spiritual man thinks of, to that he goes, in that place he already is. Thought has now become his means of locomotion. He is, therefore, independent of instruments, and can bring his force to bear directly, wherever he wills.

  

49. When the spiritual man is perfectly disentangled from the psychic body, he attains to mastery over all things and to a knowledge of all.

The spiritual man is enmeshed in the web of the emotions; desire, fear, ambition, passion; and impeded by the mental forms of separateness and materialism. When these meshes are sundered, these obstacles completely overcome, then the spiritual man stands forth in his own wide world, strong, mighty, wise. He uses divine powers, with a divine scope and energy, working together with divine Companions. To such a one it is said: 'Thou art now a disciple, able to stand, able to hear, able to see, able to speak, thou hast conquered desire and attained to self-knowledge, thou hast seen thy soul in its bloom and recognized it, and heard the voice of the silence.'

  

50. By absence of all self-indulgence at this point, when the seeds of bondage to sorrow are destroyed, pure spiritual being is attained.

The seeking of indulgence for the personal self, whether through passion or ambition, sows the seed of future sorrow. For this self indulgence of the personality is a double sin against the real; a sin against the cleanness of life, and a sin against the universal being, which permits no exclusive particular good, since, in the real, all spiritual possessions are held in common. This twofold sin brings its reacting punishment, its confining bondage to sorrow. But ceasing from self-indulgence brings purity, liberation, spiritual life.

  

51. There should be complete overcoming of allurement or pride in the invitations of the different realms of life, lest attachment to things evil arise once more.

The commentator tells us that disciples, seekers for union, are of four degrees: first, those who are entering the path; second, those who are in the realm of allurements; third, those who have won the victory over matter and the senses; fourth, those who stand firm in pure spiritual life. To the second, especially, the caution in the text is addressed. More modern teachers would express the same truth by a warning against the delusions and fascinations of the psychic realm, which open around the disciple, as he breaks through into the unseen worlds. These are the dangers of the anteroom. Safety lies in passing on swiftly into the inner chamber. 'Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out.'

  

52. From perfectly concentrated Meditation on the divisions of time and their succession comes that wisdom which is born of discernment.

The Upanishads say of the liberated that 'he has passed beyond the triad of time'; he no longer sees life as projected into past, present and future, since these are forms of the mind; but beholds all things spread out in the quiet light of the Eternal. This would seem to be the same thought, and to point to that clear-eyed spiritual perception which is above time; that wisdom born of the unveiling of Time's delusion. Then shall the disciple live neither in the present nor the future, but in the Eternal.

  

53. Hence comes discernment between things which are of like nature, not distinguished by difference of kind, character or position.

Here, as also in the preceding Sutra, we are close to the doctrine that distinctions of order, time and space are creations of the mind; the threefold prism through which the real object appears to us distorted and refracted. When the prism is withdrawn, the object returns to its primal unity, no longer distinguishable by the mind, yet clearly knowable by that high power of spiritual discernment, of illumination, which is above the mind.

  

54. The wisdom which is born of discernment is starlike; it discerns all things, and all conditions of things, it discerns without succession: simultaneously.

That wisdom, that intuitive, divining power is starlike, says the commentator, because it shines with its own light, because it rises on high, and illumines all things. Nought is hid from it, whether things past, things present, or things to come; for it is beyond the threefold form of time, so that all things are spread before it together, in the single light of the divine. This power has been beautifully described by Columba: 'Some there are, though very few, to whom Divine grace has granted this: that they can clearly and most distinctly see, at one and the same moment, as though under one ray of the sun, even the entire circuit of the whole world with its surroundings of ocean and sky, the inmost part of their mind being marvellously enlarged.'

  

55. When the vesture and the spiritual man are alike pure, then perfect spiritual life is attained.

The vesture, says the commentator, must first be washed pure of all stains of passion and darkness, and the seeds of future sorrow must be burned up utterly. Then, both the vesture and the wearer of the vesture being alike pure, the spiritual man enters into perfect spiritual life.

      
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTRODUCTION TO BOOK IV

The third book of the Sutras has fairly completed the history of the birth and growth of the spiritual man, and the enumeration of his powers; at least so far as concerns that first epoch in his immortal life, which immediately succeeds, and supersedes, the life of the natural man.

In the fourth book, we are to consider what one might call the mechanism of salvation, the ideally simple working of cosmic law which brings the spiritual man to birth, growth, and fulness of power, and prepares him for the splendid, toilsome further stages of his great journey home.

The Sutras are here brief to obscurity; only a few words, for example, are given to the great triune mystery and illusion of Time; a phrase or two indicates the sweep of some universal law. Yet it is hoped that, by keeping our eyes fixed on the spiritual man, remembering that he is the hero of the story, and that all that is written concerns him and his adventures, we may be able to find our way through this thicket of tangled words, and keep in our hands the clue to the mystery.

The last part of the last book needs little introduction. In a sense, it is the most important part of the whole treatise, since it unmasks the nature of the personality, that psychical 'mind,' which is the wakeful enemy of all who seek to tread the path. Even now, we can hear it whispering the doubt whether that can be a good path, which thus sets 'mind' at defiance.

If this, then, be the most vital and fundamental part of the teaching, should it not stand at the very beginning? It may seem so at first; but had it stood there, we should not have comprehended it. For he who would know the doctrine must lead the life, doing the will of his Father which is in Heaven.

     
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, by Charles Johnston, [1912], at sacred-texts.com

  

BOOK IV

  

1. Psychic and spiritual powers may be inborn, or they may be gained by the use of drugs, or by incantations, or by fervour, or by Meditation.

Spiritual powers have been enumerated and described in the preceding sections. They are the normal powers of the spiritual man, the antetype, the divine edition, of the powers of the natural man. Through these powers, the spiritual man stands, sees, hears, speaks, in the spiritual world, as the physical man stands, sees, hears, speaks in the natural world.

There is a counterfeit presentment of the spiritual man, in the world of dreams, a shadow lord of shadows, who has his own dreamy powers of vision, of hearing, of movement; he has left the natural without reaching the spiritual. He has set forth from the shore, but has not gained the further verge of the river. He is borne along by the stream, with no foothold on either shore. Leaving the actual, he has fallen short of the real, caught in the limbo of vanities and delusions. The cause of this aberrant phantasm is always the worship of a false, vain self, the lord of dreams, within one's own breast. This is the psychic man, lord of delusive and bewildering psychic powers.

Spiritual powers, like intellectual or artistic gifts, may be inborn: the fruit, that is, of seeds planted and reared with toil in a former birth. So also the powers of the psychic man may be inborn, a delusive harvest from seeds of delusion.

Psychical powers may be gained by drugs, as poverty, shame, debasement may be gained by the self-same drugs. In their action, they are baneful, cutting the man off from consciousness of the restraining power of his divine nature, so that his forces break forth exuberant, like the laughter of drunkards, and he sees and hears things delusive. While sinking, he believes that he has risen; growing weaker, he thinks himself full of strength; beholding illusions, he takes them to be true. Such are the powers gained by drugs; they are wholly psychic, since the real powers, the spiritual, can never be so gained.

Incantations are affirmations of half-truths concerning spirit and matter, what is and what is not, which work upon the mind and slowly build up a wraith of powers and a delusive well-being. These, too, are of the psychic realm of dreams.

Lastly, there are the true powers of the spiritual man, built up and realized in Meditation, through reverent obedience to spiritual law, to the pure conditions of being, in the divine realm.

  

2. The transfer of powers from one venture to another comes through the flow of the natural creative forces.

Here, if we can perceive it, is the whole secret of spiritual birth, growth and life Spiritual being, like all being, is but an expression of the Self, of the inherent power and being of Atma. Inherent in the Self are consciousness and will, which have, as their lordly heritage, the wide sweep of the universe throughout eternity, for the Self is one with the Eternal. And the consciousness of the Self may make itself manifest as seeing, hearing, tasting, feeling, or whatsoever perceptive powers there may be, just as the white sunlight may divide into many-coloured rays. So may the will of the Self manifest itself in the uttering of words, or in handling, or in moving, and whatever powers of action there are throughout the seven worlds. Where the Self is, there will its powers be. It is but a question of the vesture through which these powers shall shine forth. And wherever the consciousness and desire of the ever-creative Self are fixed, there will a vesture be built up; where the heart is, there will the treasure be also.

Since through ages the desire of the Self has been toward the natural world, wherein the Self sought to mirror himself that he might know himself, therefore a vesture of natural elements came into being, through which blossomed forth the Self's powers of perceiving and of will: the power to see, to hear, to speak, to walk, to handle; and when the Self, thus come to self-consciousness, and, with it, to a knowledge of his imprisonment, shall set his desire on the divine and real world, and raise his consciousness thereto, the spiritual vesture shall be built up for him there, with its expression of his inherent powers. Nor will migration thither be difficult for the Self, since the divine is no strange or foreign land for him, but the house of his home, where he dwells from everlasting.

  

3. The apparent, immediate cause is not the true cause of the creative nature-powers; but, like the husbandman in his field, it takes obstacles away.

The husbandman tills his field, breaking up the clods of earth into fine mould, penetrable to air and rain; he sows his seed, carefully covering it, for fear of birds and the wind; he waters the seed-laden earth, turning the little rills from the irrigation tank now this way and that, removing obstacles from the channels, until the even How of water vitalizes the whole field. And so the plants germinate and grow, first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. But it is not the husbandman who makes them grow. It is, first, the miraculous plasmic power in the grain of seed, which brings forth after its kind; then the alchemy of sunlight which, in presence of the green colouring matter of the leaves, gathers hydrogen from the water and carbon from the gases in the air, and mingles them in the hydro-carbons of plant growth; and, finally, the wholly occult vital powers of the plant itself, stored up through ages, and flowing down from the primal sources of life. The husbandman but removes the obstacles. He plants and waters, but God gives the increase.

So with the finer husbandman of diviner fields. He tills and sows, but the growth of the spiritual man comes through the surge and flow of divine, creative forces and powers. Here, again, God gives the increase. The divine Self puts forth, for the manifestation of its powers, a new and finer vesture, the body of the spiritual man.

  

4. Vestures of consciousness are built up in conformity with the Boston of the feeling of selfhood.

The Self, says a great Teacher, in turn attributes itself to three vestures: first, to the physical body, then to the finer body, and thirdly to the causal body. Finally it stands forth radiant, luminous, joyous, as the Self.

When the Self attributes itself to the physical body, there arise the states of bodily consciousness, built up about the physical self.

When the Self, breaking through this first illusion, begins to see and feel itself in the finer body, to find selfhood there, then the states of consciousness of the finer body come into being; or, to speak exactly, the finer body and its states of consciousness arise and grow together.

But the Self must not dwell permanently there. It must learn to find itself in the causal body, to build up the wide and luminous fields of consciousness that belong to that.

Nor must it dwell forever there, for there remains the fourth state, the divine, with its own splendour and everlastingness.

It is all a question of the states of consciousness; all a question of raising the sense of selfhood, until it dwells forever in the Eternal.

  

5. In the different fields of manifestation, the Consciousness, though one, is the elective cause of many states of consciousness.

Here is the splendid teaching of oneness that lies at the heart of the Eastern wisdom. Consciousness is ultimately One, everywhere and forever. The Eternal, the Father, is the One Self of All Beings. And so, in each individual who is but a facet of that Self, Consciousness is One. Whether it breaks through as the dull fire of physical life, or the murky flame of the psychic and passional, or the radiance of the spiritual man, or the full glory of the Divine, it is ever the Light, naught but the Light. The one Consciousness is the effective cause of all states of consciousness, on every plane.

  

6. Among states of consciousness, that which is born of Contemplation is free from the seed of future sorrow.

Where the consciousness breaks forth in the physical body, and the full play of bodily life begins, its progression carries with it inevitable limitations. Birth involves death. Meetings have their partings. Hunger alternates with satiety. Age follows on the heels of youth. So do the states of consciousness run along the circle of birth and death.

With the psychic, the alternation between prize and penalty is swifter. Hope has its shadow of fear, or it is no hope. Exclusive love is tortured by jealousy. Pleasure passes through deadness into pain. Pain's surcease brings pleasure back again. So here, too, the states of consciousness run their circle. In all psychic states there is egotism, which, indeed, is the very essence of the psychic; and where there is egotism there is ever the seed of future sorrow. Desire carries bondage in its womb.

But where the pure spiritual consciousness begins, free from self and stain, the ancient law of retaliation ceases; the penalty of sorrow lapses and is no more imposed. The soul now passes, no longer from sorrow to sorrow, but from glory to glory. Its growth and splendour have no limit. The good passes to better, best.

  

7. The works of followers after Union make neither for bright pleasure nor for dark pain The works of others make for pleasure or pain, or a mingling of these.

The man of desire wins from his works the reward of pleasure, or incurs the penalty of pain; or, as so often happens in life, his guerdon, like the passionate mood of the lover, is part pleasure and part pain. Works done with self-seeking bear within them the seeds of future sorrow; conversely, according to the proverb, present pain is future gain.

But, for him who has gone beyond desire, whose desire is set on the Eternal, neither pain to be avoided nor pleasure to be gained inspires his work. He fears no hell and desires no heaven. His one desire is, to know the will of the Father and finish His work. He comes directly in line with the divine Will, and works cleanly and immediately, without longing or fear. His heart dwells in the Eternal; all his desires are set on the Eternal.

  

8. From the force inherent in works comes the manifestation of those dynamic mind images which are conformable to the ripening out of each of these works.

We are now to consider the general mechanism of Karma, in order that we may pass on to the consideration of him who is free from Karma. Karma, indeed, is the concern of the personal man, of his bondage or freedom. It is the succession of the forces which built up the personal man, reproducing themselves in one personality after another.

Now let us take an imaginary case, to see how these forces may work out. Let us think of a man, with murderous intent in his heart, striking with a dagger at his enemy. He makes a red wound in his victim's breast; at the same instant he paints, in his own mind, a picture of that wound: a picture dynamic with all the fierce will-power he has put into his murderous blow. In other words he has made a deep wound in his own psychic body; and, when he comes to be born again, that body will become his outermost vesture, upon which, with its wound still there, bodily tissue will be built up. So the man will be born maimed, or with the predisposition to some mortal injury; he is unguarded at that point, and any trifling accidental blow will pierce the broken Joints of his psychic armour. Thus do the dynamic mind-images manifest themselves, coming to the surface, so that works done in the past may ripen and come to fruition.

  

9. Works separated by different nature, or place, or time, are brought together by the correspondence between memory and dynamic impression.

Just as, in the ripening out of mind-images into bodily conditions, the effect is brought about by the ray of creative force sent down by the Self, somewhat as the light of the magic lantern projects the details of a picture on the screen, revealing the hidden, and making secret things palpable and visible, so does this divine ray exercise a selective power on the dynamic mind-images, bringing together into one day of life the seeds gathered from many days. The memory constantly exemplifies this power; a passage of poetry will call up in the mind like passages of many poets, read at different times. So a prayer may call up many prayers.

In like manner, the same over-ruling selective power, which is a ray of the Higher Self, gathers together from different births and times and places those mind-images which are conformable, and may be grouped in the frame of a single life or a single event. Through this grouping, visible bodily conditions or outward circumstances are brought about, and by these the soul is taught and trained.

Just as the dynamic mind-images of desire ripen out in bodily conditions and circumstances, so the far more dynamic powers of aspiration, wherein the soul reaches toward the Eternal, have their fruition in a finer world, building the vesture of the spiritual man.

  

10. The series of dynamic mind-images is beginningless, because Desire is everlasting.

The whole series of dynamic mind-images, which make up the entire history of the personal man, is a part of the mechanism which the Self employs, to mirror itself in a reflection, to embody its powers in an outward form, to the end of self-expression, self-realization, self-knowledge. Therefore the initial impulse behind these dynamic mind-images comes from the Self and is the descending ray of the Self; so that it cannot be said that there is any first member of the series of images, from which the rest arose. The impulse is beginningless, since it comes from the Self, which is from everlasting. Desire is not to cease; it is to turn to the Eternal, and so become aspiration.

  

11. Since the dynamic mind-images are held together by impulses of desire, by the wish for personal reward, by the substratum of mental habit, by the support of outer things desired; therefore, when these cease, the self reproduction of dynamic mind-images ceases.

We are still concerned with the personal life in its bodily vesture, and with the process whereby the forces which have upheld it are gradually transferred to the life of the spiritual man, and build up for him his finer vesture in a finer world.

How is the current to be changed? How is the flow of self-reproductive mind-images, which have built the conditions of life after life in this world of bondage, to be checked, that the time of imprisonment may come to an end, the day of liberation dawn?

The answer is given in the Sutra just translated. The driving-force is withdrawn and directed to the upbuilding of the spiritual body.

When the building impulses and forces are withdrawn, the tendency to manifest a new psychical body, a new body of bondage, ceases with them.

  

12. The difference between that which is past and that which is not yet come, according to their natures, depends on the difference of phase of their properties.

Here we come to a high and difficult matter, which has always been held to be of great moment in the Eastern wisdom: the thought that the division of time into past, present and future is, in great measure, an illusion; that past, present, future all dwell together in the eternal Now.

The discernment of this truth has been held to be so necessarily a part of wisdom, that one of the names of the Enlightened is: 'he who has passed beyond the three times: past, present, future.'

So the Western Master said: 'Before Abraham was, I am'; and again, 'I am with you always, unto the end of the world'; using the eternal present for past and future alike. With the same purpose, the Master speaks of himself as 'the alpha and the omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.'

And a Master of our own days writes: 'I feel even irritated at having to use these three clumsy words--past, present, and future. Miserable concepts of the objective phases of the subjective whole, they are about as ill adapted for the purpose, as an axe for fine carving.'

In the eternal Now, both past and future are consummated.

Bjorklund, the Swedish philosopher, has well stated the same truth:

'Neither past nor future can exist to God; He lives undividedly, without limitations, and needs not, as man, to plot out his existence in a series of moments. Eternity then is not identical with unending time; it is a different form of existence, related to time as the perfect to the imperfect. Man as an entity for himself must have the natural limitations for the part. Conceived by God, man is eternal in the divine sense, but conceived by himself, man's eternal life is clothed in the limitations we call time. The eternal is a constant present without beginning or end, without past or future.'

  

13. These properties, whether manifest or latent, are of the nature of the Three Potencies.

The Three Potencies are the three manifested modifications of the one primal material, which stands opposite to perceiving consciousness. These Three Potencies are called Substance, Force, Darkness; or viewed rather for their moral colouring, Goodness, Passion, Inertness. Every material manifestation is a projection of substance into the empty space of darkness. Every mental state is either good, or passional, or inert. So, whether subjective or objective, latent or manifest, all things that present themselves to the perceiving consciousness are compounded of these three. This is a fundamental doctrine of the Sankhya system.

  

14. The external manifestation of an object takes place when the transformations ore in the same phase.

We should be inclined to express the same law by saying, for example, that a sound is audible, when it consists of vibrations within the compass of the auditory nerve; that an object is visible, when either directly or by reflection, it sends forth luminiferous vibrations within the compass of the retina and the optic nerve. Vibrations below or above that compass make no impression at all, and the object remains invisible; as, for example, a kettle of boiling water in a dark room, though the kettle is sending forth heat vibrations closely akin to light.

So, when the vibrations of the object and those of the perceptive power are in the same phase, the external manifestation of the object takes place.

There seems to be a further suggestion that the appearance of an object in the 'present,' or its remaining hid in the 'past,' or 'future,' is likewise a question of phase, and, just as the range of vibrations perceived might be increased by the development of finer senses, so the perception of things past, and things to come, may be easy from a higher point of view.

  

15. The paths of material things and of states of consciousness are distinct, as is manifest from the fact that the same object may produce different impressions in different minds.

Having shown that our bodily condition and circumstances depend on Karma, while Karma depends on perception and will, the sage recognizes the fact that from this may be drawn the false deduction that material things are in no wise different from states of mind. The same thought has occurred, and still occurs, to all philosophers; and, by various reasonings, they all come to the same wise conclusion; that the material world is not made by the mood of any human mind, but is rather the manifestation of the totality of invisible Being, whether we call this Mahat, with the ancients, or Ether, with the moderns.

  

16. Nor do material objects defend upon a single mind, for how could they remain objective to others, if that mind ceased to think of them?

This is but a further development of the thought of the preceding Sutra, carrying on the thought that, while the universe is spiritual, yet its material expression is ordered, consistent, ruled by law, not subject to the whims or affirmations of a single mind. Unwelcome material things may be escaped by spiritual growth, by rising to a realm above them, and not by denying their existence on their own plane. So that our system is neither materialistic, nor idealistic in the extreme sense, but rather intuitional and spiritual, holding that matter is the manifestation of spirit as a whole, a reflection or externalization of spirit, and, like spirit, everywhere obedient to law. The path of liberation is not through denial of matter but through denial of the wills of self, through obedience, and that aspiration which builds the vesture of the spiritual man.

  

17. An object is perceived, or not perceived, according as the mind is, or is not, tinged with the colour of the object.

The simplest manifestation of this is the matter of attention. Our minds apprehend what they wish to apprehend; all else passes unnoticed, or, on the other hand, we perceive what we resent, as, for example, the noise of a passing train; while others, used to the sound, do not notice it at all.

But the deeper meaning is, that out of the vast totality of objects ever present in the universe, the mind perceives only those which conform to the hue of its Karma. The rest remain unseen, even though close at hand.

This spiritual law has been well expressed by Emerson:

'Through solidest eternal things the man finds his road as if they did not subsist, and does not once suspect their being. As soon as he needs a new object, suddenly he beholds it, and no longer attempts to pass through it, but takes another way. When he has exhausted for the time the nourishment to be drawn from any one person or thing, that object is withdrawn from his observation, and though still in his immediate neighbourhood, he does not suspect its presence. Nothing is dead. Men feign themselves dead, and endure mock funerals and mournful obituaries, and there they stand looking out of the window, sound and well, in some new and strange disguise. Jesus is not dead, he is very well alive: nor John, nor Paul, nor Mahomet, nor Aristotle; at times we believe we have seen them all, and could easily tell the names under which they go.'

  

18. The movements of the psychic nature are perpetually objects of perception, since the Spiritual Man, who is the lord of them, remains unchanging.

Here is teaching of the utmost import, both for understanding and for practice.

To the psychic nature belong all the ebb and flow of emotion, all hoping and fearing, desire and hate: the things that make the multitude of men and women deem themselves happy or miserable. To it also belong the measuring and comparing, the doubt and questioning, which, for the same multitude, make up mental life. So that there results the emotion-soaked personality, with its dark and narrow view of life: the shivering, terror driven personality that is life itself for all but all of mankind.

Yet the personality is not the true man, not the living soul at all, but only a spectacle which the true man observes. Let us under stand this, therefore, and draw ourselves up inwardly to the height of the Spiritual Man, who, standing in the quiet light of the Eternal, looks down serene upon this turmoil of the outer life.

One first masters the personality, the 'mind,' by thus looking down on it from above, from within; by steadily watching its ebb and flow, as objective, outward, and therefore not the real Self. This standing back is the first step, detachment. The second, to maintain the vantage-ground thus gained, is recollection.

  

19. The Mind is not self-luminous, since it can be seen as an object.

This is a further step toward overthrowing the tyranny of the 'mind': the psychic nature of emotion and mental measuring. This psychic self, the personality, claims to be absolute, asserting that life is for it and through it; it seeks to impose on the whole being of man its narrow, materialistic, faithless view of life and the universe; it would clip the wings of the soaring Soul. But the Soul dethrones the tyrant, by perceiving and steadily affirming that the psychic self is no true self at all, not self-luminous, but only an object of observation, watched by the serene eyes of the Spiritual Man.

  

20. Nor could the Mind at the same time know itself and things external to it.

The truth is that the 'mind' knows neither external things nor itself. Its measuring and analyzing, its hoping and fearing, hating and desiring, never give it a true measure of life, nor any sense of real values. Ceaselessly active, it never really attains to knowledge; or, if we admit its knowledge, it ever falls short of wisdom, which comes only through intuition, the vision of the Spiritual Man.

Life cannot be known by the 'mind,' its secrets cannot be learned through the 'mind.' The proof is, the ceaseless strife and contradiction of opinion among those who trust in the mind. Much less can the 'mind' know itself, the more so, because it is pervaded by the illusion that it truly knows, truly is.

True knowledge of the 'mind' comes, first, when the Spiritual Man, arising, stands detached, regarding the 'mind' from above, with quiet eyes, and seeing it for the tangled web of psychic forces that it truly is. But the truth is divined long before it is clearly seen, and then begins the long battle of the 'mind,' against the Real, the 'mind' fighting doggedly, craftily, for its supremacy.

  

21. If the Mind be thought of as seen by another more inward Mind, then there would be an endless series of perceiving Minds, and a confusion of memories.

One of the expedients by which the 'mind' seeks to deny and thwart the Soul, when it feels that it is beginning to be circumvented and seen through, is to assert that this seeing is the work of a part of itself, one part observing the other, and thus leaving no need nor place for the Spiritual Man.

To this strategy the argument is opposed by our philosopher, that this would be no true solution, but only a postponement of the solution. For we should have to find yet another part of the mind to view the first observing part, and then another to observe this, and so on, endlessly.

The true solution is, that the Spiritual Man looks down upon the psychic nature, and observes it; when he views the psychic pictures gallery, this is 'memory,' which would be a hopeless, inextricable confusion, if we thought of one part of the 'mind,' with its memories, viewing another part, with memories of its own.

The solution of the mystery lies not in the 'mind' but beyond it, in the luminous life of the risen Lord, the Spiritual Man.

  

22. When the psychical nature takes on the form of the spiritual intelligence, by reflecting it, then the Self becomes conscious of its own spiritual intelligence.

We are considering a stage of spiritual life at which the psychical nature has been cleansed and purified. Formerly, it reflected in its plastic substance the images of the earthy; purified now, it reflects the image of the heavenly, giving the spiritual intelligence a visible form. The Self, beholding that visible form, in which its spiritual intelligence has, as it were, taken palpable shape, thereby reaches self-recognition, self-comprehension. The Self sees itself in this mirror, and thus becomes not only conscious, but self-conscious. This is, from one point of view, the purpose of the whole evolutionary process.

  

23. The psychic nature, taking on the colour of the Seer and of things seen, leads to the perception of all objects.

In the unregenerate man, the psychic nature is saturated with images of material things, of things seen, or heard, or tasted, or felt; and this web of dynamic images forms the ordinary material and driving power of life. The sensation of sweet things tasted clamours to be renewed, and drives the man into effort to obtain its renewal; so he adds image to image, each dynamic and importunate, piling up sin's intolerable burden.

Then comes regeneration, and the washing away of sin, through the fiery, creative power of the Soul, which burns out the stains of the psychic vesture, purifying it as gold is refined in the furnace. The suffering of regeneration springs from this indispensable purifying.

Then the psychic vesture begins to take on the colour of the Soul, no longer stained, but suffused with golden light; and the man red generate gleams with the radiance of eternity. Thus the Spiritual Man puts on fair raiment; for of this cleansing it is said: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be as crimson, they shall be as wool.

  

24. The psychic nature, which has been printed with mind-images of innumerable material things, exists now for the Spiritual Man, building for him.

The 'mind,' once the tyrant, is now the slave, recognized as outward, separate, not Self, a well-trained instrument of the Spiritual Man.

For it is not ordained for the Spiritual Man that, finding his high realm, he shall enter altogether there, and pass out of the vision of mankind. It is true that he dwells in heaven, but he also dwells on earth. He has angels and archangels, the hosts of the just made perfect, for his familiar friends, but he has at the same time found a new kinship with the prone children of men, who stumble and sin in the dark. Finding sinlessness, he finds also that the world's sin and shame are his, not to share, but to atone; finding kinship with angels, he likewise finds his part in the toil of angels, the toil for the redemption of the world.

For this work, he, who now stands in the heavenly realm, needs his instrument on earth; and this instrument he finds, ready to his hand, and fitted and perfected by the very struggles he has waged against it, in the personality, the 'mind,' of the personal man. This once tyrant is now his servant and perfect ambassador, bearing witness, before men, of heavenly things and even in this present world doing the will and working the works of the Father.

  

25. For him who discerns between the Mind and the Spiritual Man, there comes perfect fruition of the longing after the real being of the Self.

How many times in the long struggle have the Soul's aspirations seemed but a hopeless, impossible dream, a madman's counsel of perfection. Yet every finest, most impossible aspiration shall be realized, and ten times more than realized, once the long, arduous fight against the 'mind,' and the mind's worldview is won. And then it will be seen that unfaith and despair were but weapons of the 'mind,' to daunt the Soul, and put off the day when the neck of the 'mind' shall be put under the foot of the Soul.

Have you aspired, well-nigh hopeless, after immortality? You shall be paid by entering the immortality of God.

Have you aspired, in misery and pain, after consoling, healing love? You shall be made a dispenser of the divine love of God Himself to weary souls.

Have you sought ardently, in your day of feebleness, after power? You shall wield power immortal, infinite, with God working the works of God.

Have you, in lonely darkness, longed for companionship and consolation? You shall have angels and archangels for your friends, and all the immortal hosts of the Dawn.

These are the fruits of victory. Therefore overcome. These are the prizes of regeneration. Therefore die to self, that you may rise again to God.

  

26. Thereafter, the whole personal being bends toward illumination, toward Eternal Life.

This is part of the secret of the Soul, that salvation means, not merely that a soul shall be cleansed and raised to heaven, but that the whole realm of the natural powers shall be redeemed, building up, even in this present world, the kingly figure of the Spiritual Man.

The traditions of the ages are full of his footsteps; majestic, uncomprehended shadows, myths, demi-gods, fill the memories of all the nobler peoples. But the time cometh, when he shall be known, no longer demi-god, nor myth, nor shadow, but the ever-present Redeemer, working amid men for the life and cleansing of all souls.

  

27. In the internals of the batik, other thoughts will arise, through the impressions of the dynamic mind-images.

The battle is long and arduous. Let there be no mistake as to that. Go not forth to this battle without counting the cost. Ages have gone to the strengthening of the foe. Ages of conflict must be spent, ere the foe, wholly conquered, becomes the servant, the Soul's minister to mankind.

And from these long past ages, in hours when the contest flags, will come new foes, mind-born children springing up to fight for mind, reinforcements coming from forgotten years, forgotten lives. For once this conflict is begun, it can be ended only by sweeping victory, and unconditional, unreserved surrender of the vanquished.

  

28. These are to be overcome as it was taught that hindrances should be overcome.

These new enemies and fears are to be overcome by ceaselessly renewing the fight, by a steadfast, dogged persistence, whether in victory or defeat, which shall put the stubbornness of the rocks to shame. For the Soul is older than all things, and invincible; it is of the very nature of the Soul to be unconquerable.

Therefore fight on, undaunted; knowing that the spiritual will, once awakened, shall, through the effort of the contest, come to its full strength; that ground gained can be held permanently; that great as is the dead-weight of the adversary, it is yet measurable, while the Warrior who fights for you, for whom you fight, is, in might, immeasurable, invincible, everlasting.

  

29. He who, after he has attained, is wholly free from self, reaches the essence of all that can be known, gathered together like a cloud. This is the true spiritual consciousness.

It has been said that, at the beginning of the way, we must kill out ambition, the great curse, the giant weed which grows as strongly in the heart of the devoted disciple as in the man of desire. The remedy is sacrifice of self, obedience, humility; that purity of heart which gives the vision of God. Thereafter, he who has attained is wrapt about with the essence of all that can be known, as with a cloud; he has that perfect illumination which is the true spiritual consciousness. Through obedience to the will of God, he comes into oneness of being with God; he is initiated into God's view of the universe, seeing all life as God sees it.

  

30. Thereon comes surcease from sorrow and the burden of toil.

Such a one, it is said, is free from the bond of Karma, from the burden of toil, from that debt to works which comes from works done in self-love and desire. Free from self-will, he is free from sorrow, too, for sorrow comes from the fight of self-will against the divine will, through the correcting stress of the divine will, which seeks to counteract the evil wrought by disobedience. When the conflict with the divine will ceases, then sorrow ceases, and he who has grown into obedience, thereby enters into joy.

  

31. When all veils are rent, all stains washed away, his knowledge becomes infinite; little remains for him to know.

The first veil is the delusion that thy soul is in some permanent way separate from the great Soul, the divine Eternal. When that veil is rent, thou shalt discern thy oneness with everlasting Life. The second veil is the delusion of enduring separateness from thy other selves, whereas in truth the soul that is in them is one with the soul that is in thee. The world's sin and shame are thy sin and shame: its joy also.

These veils rent, thou shalt enter into knowledge of divine things and human things. Little will remain unknown to thee.

  

32. Thereafter comes the completion of the series of transformations of the three nature potencies, since their purpose is attained.

It is a part of the beauty and wisdom of the great Indian teachings, the Vedanta and the Yoga alike, to hold that all life exists for the purposes of Soul, for the making of the spiritual man. They teach that all nature is an orderly process of evolution, leading up to this, designed for this end, existing only for this: to bring forth and perfect the Spiritual Man. He is the crown of evolution: at his coming, the goal of all development is attained.

  

33. The series of transformations is divided into moments. When the series is completed, time gives place to duration.

There are two kinds of eternity, says the commentary: the eternity of immortal life, which belongs to the Spirit, and the eternity of change, which inheres in Nature, in all that is not Spirit. While we are content to live in and for Nature, in the Circle of Necessity, Sansara, we doom ourselves to perpetual change. That which is born must die, and that which dies must be reborn. It is change evermore, a ceaseless series of transformations.

But the Spiritual Man enters a new order; for him, there is no longer eternal change, but eternal Being. He has entered into the joy of his Lord. This spiritual birth, which makes him heir of the Everlasting, sets a term to change; it is the culmination, the crowning transformation, of the whole realm of change.

  

34. Pure spiritual life is, therefore, the inverse resolution of the potencies of Nature, which have emptied themselves of their value for the Spiritual man; or it is the return of the power of pure Consciousness to its essential form.

Here we have a splendid generalization, in which our wise philosopher finally reconciles the naturalists and the idealists, expressing the crown and end of his teaching, first in the terms of the naturalist, and then in the terms of the idealist.

The birth and growth of the Spiritual Man, and his entry into his immortal heritage, may be regarded, says our philosopher, either as the culmination of the whole process of natural evolution and involution, where 'that which flowed from out the boundless deep, turns again home'; or it may be looked at, as the Vedantins look at it, as the restoration of pure spiritual Consciousness to its pristine and essential form. There is no discrepancy or conflict between these two views, which are but two accounts of the same thing. Therefore those who study the wise philosopher, be they naturalist or idealist, have no excuse to linger over dialetic subtleties or disputes. These things are lifted from their path, lest they should be tempted to delay over them, and they are left facing the path itself, stretching upward and onward from their feet to the everlasting hills, radiant with infinite Light.

 

 

 

THE END

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: yvhf.txt =====


    
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

Yoga Vashist

  

-or-

  

Heaven Found

  

by

  

Rishi Singh Gherwal

  

Author of

  

Great Masters of the Himalayas Their Lives and Temple Teaching.
 Kundalini
 The Mother of the Universe
 and etc.

  

Copyrighted and Published

  

By Author

  

[1930]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, September 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion at the US copyright office at required by law at the time.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

[p. 2] [p. 3]

In Memory of my brave brother, Fateh Singh, from whom I learned a great lesson of fearlessness and who always lived true to his name, Victory, and knew not fear.

[p. 4]

If all great men were good and all good men would write a book, this world would be made better by their activities.

Rishi Gherwal's books are observation of nature and nature is God's "Master-piece". They are historical records of true facts of the Hindu books on philosophy, and are like a visit to that old ancient Temple of Mathra.

His manner of teaching and writing inspires us with the knowledge of ourselves, to be the same as the Universal Brotherhood--, Self of the Universe, with God's poise and sense of mastery.

His books give us the blessed assurance that

we no longer need to travel to get wisdom. Study TRUTH and absorb its teachings, and the world will come to you, as it has to him.

May Peace be Unto him, together with a benediction of love, with our blessings.

Dr. and Mrs. J. D. Ward.

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

INDEX

         	 

      	Page

     
     	Introduction.

      	<page 7>

     
     	Sri. Ram, the Truth Seeker.

      	<page 11>

     
     	How the Wise ought to Live.

      	<page 28>

     
     	How Suka attained Liberation.

      	<page 34>

     
     	The Way to the Blessed State.

      	<page 40>

     
     	The Creation of the Universe; Seven States of Wisdom and Seven States of   Ignorance.

      	<page 49>

     
     	Queen Chundalai, the Greatest Woman Yogin.

      	<page 63>

     
     	How Egoist Bali attained Samadhi.

      	<page 113>

     
     	King Janak.

      	<page 126>

     
     	How Suragho, the King of Hunters attained realization of the Self.

      	<page 136>

     
     	Long-Lived Yogi and the Secret of his Longevity.

      	<page 148>

     
     	Levitation and the Goal of the Yogi.

      	<page 165>

     
     	How to Live.

      	<page 179>

     
     	India's Message to other Countries.

      	<page 185>

     
   
     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

My sincere thanks to J. Muir, whose Poems I have quoted in these pages, from his well known Metrical Translations, of the Sanskrit Writers, and also to Irene Ward, Grace Curtis and Clare Mc Kinney for their wonderful help in the revision of this volume.

The Author

[p. 7]

  

INTRODUCTION

We have two Yoga Vashishts, one going under the name great, the other small. This is the small book; both hooks are the work of the Rishi Vashisht, and it is the book for those who are seeking truth but not for the ignorant. It is the best book on wisdom and gives seven states of wisdom by understanding the liberation easily to be attained, and it also gives us the seven states of ignorance. It gives spiritual food for those who hunger. "No one can miss the God consciousness within," Swami Ram Tritha once said. It is true and I agree with the Swami. It is the best work for self realization. In it, one will find the answer to, who created this universe; the cause of and how to cure diseases. It reveals the mastery of the Kundalini, the Mother of the Universe, and her power; how to perform levitation, and the secret of the long lived Yogi. How to master mind, and control matter

[p. 8]

and all the miseries of the world. In the story of Bali, it gives us encouragement and faith, that even a great egoist can attain liberation,--the goal of the Yogi or the truth seeker.

More than a year ago, I was at Los Angeles and for the first time, heard that the truth seekers were searching for this book.

Many asked if I would get some copies of it, for them. I wrote to India and also tried here, but was unable to find a copy. I then advertised in Europe but could not find it there.

A student of mine, in Los Angeles, brought a copy to my class but the owner refused to part with it, even when offered thirty dollars. I then decided to translate this work for the truth-seeker.

The reader will find this work contains the records of spiritual truths, the secret doctrine or eternal teaching of the Munis and Rishis, of India.

The ideals are wonderfully clear. They always begin on the gross and gradually take the student to a higher and finer stage of self realization. They do that because the thought, at first,

[p. 9]

is undeveloped, but step by step becomes finer and finer.

The Hindus in their attempt to find a solution to the problems of life and death in the external world, failed, as the nations of the West do to-day. They found that the senses could not help them in the problems of life, therefore, they gave up the external world and turned their attentions upon the internal. They gave all their time to the study of the Atma, which gave them finally, the solution of the problems of life and death. Their teachings give us a glimpse of the Atma that is the Absolute. They found that the individual soul is no other than the Brahma, Himself.

Those readers who will follow closely the teachings of this work and concentrate upon them will surely reach the goal "where the sun cannot shine, nor the moon nor the stars--the lightning cannot illumine, how can they? For when the Self shines, all shine."

I have put here the way my Master taught me about this work, for the benefit of the truth-seeker.

[p. 10]

It is the guidance for the daily life. The work of the Great Master, who has it made so very easy, by illustrations.

THE AUTHOR.

  

VRIDDHA CHANAKYA XV. 10

The list of books is long; mishaps arise
 To bar the student's progress; Life is brief;
 Whatever, then, in books is best and chief.
 The essence, kernel--that attracts the wise.
 J. Muir--Metrical Translation.

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

CHAPTER I.

  

Sri Ram, the Truth Seeker.

Ram who had acquired a great deal of knowledge, asked his father if he might make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land known as the Sacred Ashrams (Hermitages). His father granted him this wish. When he returned some time later, there was a decided change in his mood. It had been his custom to rise early in the morning and follow the daily ceremonies of his religion, but now instead of practicing his usual habits of worship, he sat in the Padma posture and assumed an indifferent attitude to all things.

Raja Rishi Viswamitra arrived at the King's palace (Ram's father's place). The King saluted the Raja Rishi and paid him great respect. He then bestowed greater marks of honor upon him, by saying: "By thy visit all my sins, misery

[p. 12]

and unhappiness have been removed. Tell me, what is thy need?"

Therefore, Raja Rishi said: "O King of Kings, true to your Master, Rishi Vashisht, an embodiment (in the cause) of justice, I came seeking the services of your son, Ram. I cannot bear the injustice forced upon me by the Rakshasan, for they do not permit me to do any good work."

The King answered him thus: "My son is indeed very young and is not trained in the art of fighting. He does not seem to be himself at this time and has become indifferent to the world. Life would become bitter and unhappy, to me and my family, should anything happen to my son, Ram. Therefore, in his stead, I will go with thee, and with my army I shall meet the Rakshasan in battle."

Raja Rishi Viswamitra with great anger said: "Tell me truthfully and without faltering, if you, the King, will perform such beastly acts of deception, who will keep his word? I shall go back from where I came to endure (or submit to) the injustice of the Rakshasan. You may live happily with your son and others."

The Rishi Vashisht said: "O King of Kings, keep thy word, for thy sacred duty is to protect

[p. 13]

thy subjects, and let there be no injustice at any price. Thy son will be safe with the Rishi Viswamitra. Thy son is impassive and unconcerned toward worldly things, and his association with this Great Raja Rishi will be a great enlightenment to him. Send him forth and do not reveal the knowledge of his departure to his brothers. His indifferent state of mind, toward the world and life, is not the result of disappointment in his desires, but is a longing for liberation, which is a stepping-stone toward self-realization. When all the delusions have been removed from his mind, he will attain the highest Brahmic state and will then perform his daily duties, as we are now doing."

Ram came and paid his respect to all. Although his father, the King, tried to persuade him to sit on the throne with him, he refused and sat quietly among the crowd.

Raja Rishi Viswamitra then said to Ram: "O Brave Enemy of Sensual Objects, why art thou drowning thyself in the Ocean of Delusion, which is only fit for the Ajnani (ignorant)? If thou wilt tell us the cause of thy suffering, then thou shalt be relieved of it; thou wilt then be able to attain that for which thou art longing. Therefore,

[p. 14]

I beseech thee to speak to us the truth."

Ram answered:

"O Great Rishi, embodiment of Grace, thou hast allowed me to tell the cause of my suffering, and I beseech thee to please listen to my story. I was born in my father's home (the King's palace), studied and attained an education and gained much knowledge. I have journeyed around the earth visiting all Holy and Sacred places. When I returned from this pilgrimage, I found that my desires for this Universe had ceased; that life was full of delusion, without an iota of bliss within it. This world is illusion from birth to death, and from death to birth. The worldly things are nothing except seeds of all unhappiness (pains). What is wealth or a kingdom? If we are seeking happiness, we find all unreal except Atma. When I try to learn what generates all worldly things, then I have no love for any of it. It is like the traveler who, when he has learned of the unreality of the wave of the mirage in the desert, does not crave it. I am trying to set myself free of the sensual fire, but I am burning within like the old tree which has burned within by heat generated

[p. 15]

by itself. The load of delusion is pressing me down. I cannot bear it longer. I have tried to please my relatives, that they may not condemn me for my grief, but I cannot find a way out of it, though I have cried from the house-top.

The Wealth:

"Wealth causes the mind of men to roam--seeking joy but bringing dangers. I have not seen anyone whose mind does not melt like snow, at the sight of wealth. This wealth not only destroys peace and joy which arises from the spiritual wisdom, but it also produces hate, dishonesty, envy, jealousy and the like. All people, whether rich or poor, wise or foolish, peaceful or warlike, bow down to the degrading wealth. It causes people to be unjust, although it is useless as a flower under the hood of a Cobra.

The Prana:

"The Prana (vital force) is like water pouring from a jar: it is going out of the body with the five senses; it is cutting short the lives of the ignorant. I am not enjoying this life of mine as my body is unreal. It is easy to control the ether, the winds, the waves of the ocean that

[p. 16]

rise and fall, but it is hard to control Prana (vital force). This body is not permanent. It is like winter cold and summer heat----it comes and goes. If we try to find its fruits, we only find bitter disappointments and sorrows . The life most worthwhile is that of those who have attained the highest Atmic wisdom, blessed with liberation, and freed from sorrows (pains). Life is worthwhile only to those who have freed themselves from rebirth. Others are only lives of folly--lives of the foolish. People without the power of discrimination, find that learning is only a burden to them. The person without peace of mind, finds that his mind is only a burden to him. The person who is full of passion, finds that the Atmic wisdom is only a burden to him. The person who has not found the blissful joy within himself finds that the body, the mind, the egoism and the actions are only burdens to him. Prana stays awhile in the body but often departs when the person is young, like the wise who do not stay in the company of the wicked.

The Egoism:

"I am terrified by this harmful enemy of

[p. 17]

mine, egoism, which was born by illusion. It is the mother of many dangers. There is no worse danger than that of egoism. I fear this egoism will not leave me, as I have had to contend with it for a long time. I do not eat food with water. What is the use to speak of the other enjoyments? Doing anything through egoism is unreal. The sooner this egoism is given up, the better. As long as we tolerate egoism, just so long are desires created within us. I have given up all active thoughts that I may be free from egoism, but unhappiness (pain) is still clinging to me. I have not realized my own self. May thou, O Rishi, be kind enough to bless me, that I may liberate myself of this enemy, egoism, which is the mother of all dangers in the universe. Its home is in the mind. It is false in its nature and is without intelligence or discrimination.

The Mind:

"My mind is flying to sensual objects, resistless as though drawn by a magnet. This baneful mind does not like the real joy that comes from within, but travels outward (to

[p. 18]

worldly pleasures). It is like a torrent, seething, writhing, uncontrolled, destroying in its onward rush, all the finer sensibilities. As a straw is tossed into the air, and a tree is shaken by the wind, so is the action of the mind. It lifts me up to the highest realm, then drops me unmercifully to the lowest depths of the earth. This terrible state of mind is more dangerous than a consuming flame. It is possible to dry up the ocean, to root out the Himalaya Mountains, or to eat fire, but it is harder, by far, to control the mind. It is the creator of all objects. This universe appeared when the mind came into existence, then disappeared with the absence of mind. Hence the mind should be controlled. With the control of mind, all pains and all sorrows will perish.

The Desires:

"The desires, like owls of the air (anger, passion, etc.), fly into the sky of the Atma. During the night's slumber, these restless desires are mingled with the gloom of delusion. All my longing for good works is defeated by my desires. Without spiritual mind, I am caught

[p. 19]

by desires, like a bird in a trap. The fire of my desires is burning me up, and I think that even a bath in ambrosia will not cool me. This owl of desires stirs up vain hopes within a person to strive for wealth, to attain- joy, or likes an old woman who dances for remuneration, rather than the joy of dancing. Likewise, all my desires try to roach for that which is impossible, because it is within. Desires, like monkeys, roam about without any place in view, passing over objects of desire, then longing for them again. It is these desires which bring the disease of re-birth--the worst of all diseases. This disease of desire can reach into well guarded forts. It is such desires as these that make the inner man manifest outwardly, like the rays of sunshine which cause the lotus buds to burst into blossom. These desires of the mind are like a two edged sword or like a red hot iron which consumes the greatest of men into nothingness

"The body is made of five elements which vary in form--some lean and others fat. It is a house of ill, oscillating between pleasures and pains. What good can be gained through this body, except joys and sorrows? 'It is the house of egoism. The owner of the house has ten mischievous

[p. 20]

monkeys (the organs). The servant of this house is the mind which produces thoughts. If this body should exist forever, then it would be worthy of the longing, but it will perish at the sight of death. What is this body? "It Is a composition of blood, tissues, and bones. It is subject to diseases and decay, and alike it serves for the poor, and for the rich. He, who believes in the illusory as the real, will cling to the body in delusion.

Childhood:

"Anyone who is born in the ocean of the universe will keep rolling to and fro with its waves. Childhood is possessed of dangers, helplessness, and is unable to express thoughts, ideas, etc.. This stage of life is so filled with fears incurred by the parents, relatives, and elders, that none can enjoy it.

Youth:

"The fearful and helpless time rolls out to the. next dangerous step as youth, when he receives hard blows dealt by the devil known as, The

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] God of Love, whose hiding place is in the mind. The broadening of his view, the achievements of knowledge, the help of the teacher, and all good works, could not save the youth when he falls blindly into the pit of the sensual, or is caught by the Hunter known as The God of Love. The pleasures of youth increase until he finds that the youthful period is over; that he is only a man who has attained Nirvana while in the youthful age. Such a man is fit to be worshipped. Is there any period in the life of man which is safe from surrounding dangers? Yes, if we find a tree in the sky above.

The Lusts:

"There are lusts for women, gold and wine. When man has indulged in any of the above lusts, then his body and mind burns without fuel, so that it produces heat. Men are caught through greediness for these lusts, as fish are caught with bait. If the lust for the above ceases, then men are free from all worldly bondage, which has its seat in the mind. Without giving up lust there is no chance of obtaining the Brahmic state, which is the highest state of existence.

[p. 22]

The Old Age:

"The time of childhood is past, the youth is spent, and now the worst time of all, that of old age must step into reign. If it arrives in company with disease and sorrow, then the Atma will bid it adieu. Like the love which ceases for the old wife when the husband finds a new mate, so the Atma gives up the old body full of diseases, for the new one. In old age, one suffers more and more as he has no power to gratify his desires. He is helpless to accomplish his desires, and quivers with old age while those about are laughing at him. If he happens to possess yellow dust (gold), then his children and relatives are praying for his death--that his gold may become theirs). Old age, which is beset with dangers and helplessness, is burning within and has no power to cope with the desires. The longing for various lusts will increase with old age but the power to gratify the thirst for more will leave. Day and night the fear of death seizes him from all sides. It is more difficult

[p. 23]

to control the desires in old age, for they have increased with the experiences of life.

The Time:

"As all pains arise through ignorance, so is the end of life at the sight of death, which comes to all. As certain as fish die without water, so sure is death to the rich and the poor, to the powerful and to the weak. The forest, the mountains, the whole universe will die at its given time, and the whole will be born again after that time (the cycle) is over.

The Sakti: (Power)

"This destructive Sakti (power) puts an end to all things. It melts this universe to nothingness and draws the whole to it for a time. There is no one who can withstand its victorious bow and near its arrows, for this great Sakti (powers is superior to them all. Its head is the Heaven its feet are the Hells, its body is the earth, its eyes are the sun and the moon, etc.. Sometimes it takes the form of Rudra (the God of Death), another time it is Vishnu (one of the Hindu Trinity

[p. 24]

who Preserve), another time it became Brahma (the Creator), and the Pralay (at the time this universe melted to water) it took the shape of a terrific Bhairava (a powerful woman). All these things or objects which I hays described, are not real, but have arisen through egoism and the mind. I do not know the object or aim of this birth or the reason of disease of desires within the heart of every being. It is very hard to find one who has freed himself from the diseases of desires, but a great spiritual enlightenment is gained through the contact with such a one. The wise are few and for that reason the means of liberation are not known. The mind which is deluded by illusion lacks the kindness of heart, has no compassion for good and is indifferent to good or bad. When it realizes what is good, then cowardice is replaced by courage; this world by Heaven. It is seldom we meet the blessed one whose mind is controlled, but we meet the ignorant often. All baneful thoughts produce bondage. All desires and egos will leave the body and go to the Heavens or other worlds or planets. All countries will change, all mountains become dust, all three worlds will perish, the oceans, the stars, the sun, the people, with

[p. 25]

or without power, the Trinity (Brahma--Creator, Vishnu--Preserver and Rudra--Destroyer) will be absorbed up to the highest reality. Brahma who creates by His will and along with its law, comes to an end; all the Akasa (matter) and the Macrocosm merge into the  [i.e., Parameshwara--JBH.] (non-dual; the highest God), that which is the liberator from the delusion of illusions . Ono reality, above thought or speech, is the pure wisdom. People are always anxious to engage in such thoughts as: "This is the time for good works" "When will be a good time to visit the Holy Places?" "Relatives are a great help." "I cannot do as I use to do." "I cannot enjoy the things that I once enjoyed." These people want to follow the Great One, but are too engrossed in home, wife, comforts of life, and obtaining wealth. They are always between the two. When a child is born, they are happy; when death claims another, they are grieved. Should one succeed in obtaining a great amount of wealth he is called the King of Riches. But lo! There comes death who puts an end to all!

"Lead me to the path by which I shall be free from all delusions. Surrounded by great danger, the brave hero dies at the hands of a coward.

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] Hundreds of people die at the mercy of a man. This is the play of Sakti (power). My mind is burned by earthly fire. I have no desire for wealth. I prefer death to the pleasures of life. I prefer to live without sorrow and disappointments, but I find it impossible to free my mind. If you, with your well controlled mind, will not remove my grief, then to whom shall I go? The dangers of poison are not poisonous to me, but the sensual objects are my woe. The former kills only the body, but the latter ruins many bodies of future birth. Free from objects of love or hate, the sages, like thee, with quietness of mind are ever engaged in seedless Samadhi (highest meditation). My mind is indifferent toward the material or the spiritual. Please show me the way to bliss that is above pain or pleasure, doubt or delusion. That eternal state can't be reached by the five senses. I desire the path by which the Great Righteous ones manage to escape, from the suffering's of this world. Please be kind enough to tell me--is there not a higher state of existence? Is there not a state of quietness? If there is no one who will unlock that door for me, then may I not attain that peaceful state by my own efforts alone? I am

[p. 27]

without doubt and egoism, I do not care for food, water, nor fine clothes. I will not perform my daily duties. I do not care to read scrildure, nor do I care for pleasures or pains. Above love and hate, I shall always be silent and desireless."

Thus Ram ended his story of misery and darkness, and asked for light.

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

HOW THE WISE OUGHT TO LIVE:

  

- A Dialogue -

SON

Since soon the days of mortals end,
 How ought the wise their lives to spend?
 What course should I, to duty true,
 My sire, from youth to age pursue?

FATHER

Begin thy course with study; store
 The mind with holy Vedic lore.
 That stage completed,--seek a wife,
 And gain the fruit of wedded life,
 A race of sons, by rites to seal,
 When thou art gone, thy spirit's weal.
 Then light the sacred fires, and bring
 The gods a fitting offering.
 When age draws nigh, the world forsake,
 Thy chosen home the forest make;
 And there a calm, ascetic sage,
 A war against thy passions wage,
 That, cleansed from every earthly stain, [p. 29]
 Thou may'st supreme perfection gain.

SON

And art thou then, my father, wise,
 When thou dost such a life advise?
 What wise or thoughtful man delights
 In formal studies, empty rites?
 Should such pursuits and thoughts engage
 A mortal more than half his age?
 The world is ever vexed, distressed;
 The noiseless robbers never rest.

FATHER

Tell how the world is vexed, distressed;
 What noiseless robbers never rest?
 What means thy dark, alarming speech?
 In plainer words thy meaning teach.

SON

The world is vexed by death; decay
 The frames of mortals wears away.
 Dost thou not note the circling flight
 Of those still robbers, day and night,
 With stealthy tread which hurrying past,
 Steal all our lives away at last?
 When well I know how death infests
 This world of woe, and never rests, [p. 30]
 How can I still, in thoughtless mood,
 Confide in future earthly good?
 Since life with every night that goes,
 Still shorter, and yet shorter grows,
 Must not the wise perceive how vain
 Are all their days that yet remain?
 We, whom life's narrow bounds confine,
 Like fish in shallow water, pine.
     While men on other thoughts are bent,--
 Like those on gathering flowers intent,--
 As lambs by wolves are snatched away,--
 They fall to death a sudden prey,
 Before they yet the good have gained
 For which they every nerve had strained.
     No moment lose; in serious mood
 Begin at once to practice good;
 To-morrow's task to-day conclude;
 The evening's work complete at noon:--
 No duty can be done too soon.
 Who knows whom death may seize to-night,
 And who shall see the morning light?
 And death will never stop to ask,
 If thou hast done, or not, thy task.
 While yet a youth, from folly cease;
 Through virtue seek for calm and peace.
 So shalt thou here attain renown, [p. 31]
 And future bliss thy lot shall crown.
     Death interrupts the futile dreams
 Of men who, plunged in various schemes,
 Are thinking: "This or that is done;
 This still to do; that just begun."
 As torrents undermine the ranks
 Of stately trees that crown their banks,
 And sweep them downwards to the main,
 Death tears from earth those dreamers vain.
     While some are all on traffic bent,
 And some on household cares intent,
 Are fighting hard with pressing need,
 And struggling wives and babes to feed,
 Or with some other ills of life
 Are waging an incessant strife;
     Death these hard toiling men uproots,
 Before they yet have reaped the fruits
 Of all their labour, all their thought,
 Of all the battles they have fought.
     Death spares no class, no rank, nor age;
 He carries off the fool, the sage,
 The knave, the saint, the young, the old,
 The weak, the strong, the faint, the bold.
     As soon as men are born, decay
 And death begin to haunt their way.
 How can'st thou, thoughtless, careless, rest, [p. 32]
 When endless woes thy life infest;
     When pains and pangs thy strength consume--
 Thy frame to dissolution doom?
     Forsake the busy haunts of men,
 For there has death his favourite den.
 In lonely forests seek thy home,
 For there the gods delight to roam.
     Fast bound by old attachment's spell,
 Men love amid their kin to dwell.
 This bond the sage asunder tears;
 The fool to rend it never cares.
     Thou dost advise that I should please
 With sacrifice the deities.
 Such rites I disregard as vain;
 Through these can none perfection gain.
 Why sate the gods, at cruel feasts,
 With flesh and blood of slaughtered beasts?
 Far other sacrifices I
 Will offer unremittingly;
 The sacrifice of calm, of truth,
 The sacrifice of peace, of ruth,
 Of life serenely, purely, spent,
 Of thought profound on Brahma bent.
 Who offers these, may death defy,
 And hope for immortality.
     And then should say'st that I should wed, [p. 33]
 And sons should gain to tend me, dead,
 By offering pious gifts, to seal,
 When I am gone, my spirit's weal.
 But I shall ask no pious zeal
 Of sons to guard my future weal.
 No child of mine shall ever boast
 His rites have saved his father's ghost.
 Of my own bliss I'll pay the price,
 And be myself my sacrifice.
                From Mahabharata xii. 6526 ff. (- 9932 ff.); 8307 ff.

(From Metrical Translations, Page 28, by J. Muir, C. I. E., D. C. L., LL. D., Ph. D.)

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

HOW SUKA ATTAINED HIGHEST STATE OF BLISS.

After hearing the story of Ram concerning the Universe and its miseries, every one in the assembly hall were not only pleased but the Sidhas (masters of psychic power who can remain in the air as long as they wish) showered flowers and spoke words of praise.

"O Ram, your utterances are full of wisdom. It is very difficult to drive joy from this world, for though it was created for Devas, who were full of joy, it is now full of suffering and pain. if Ram's indifference toward the world is true. O Rishis, then we may be justified with what we are doing. If we, the Sidhas and Rishis, love the things or objects which Ram hated, we should perhaps be classed with the ignorant."

Raja Rishi Viswamitra said to Ram: "Thou knowest all that should be known. Thou and Rishi Suka are full of spiritual wisdom. Both of you have attained equally the highest wisdom,

[p. 35]

but you need to acquire the state of quietness and stillness."

Ram: "O, please inform me how Brahm Rishi Suka achieved wisdom without quiescence of mind, and how he secured that blissful state?"

The Master: "Rishi Suka had absolute spiritual wisdom which is the only sword to cut the rope of re-birth. Once he tried to inquire of the origin of things, as thou art doing, and he then became doubtful of his wisdom. The object of his mind became disturbed, but he was free from sensual desires. Rishi Suka went to the Himalaya Mountains to his father, who was one of the Masters there, and asked for instruction that he might not lose his faith. Thus he said to his father: 'O Father, from whence came all this Maya (illusion), which produces misery and darkness? How did it originate? How may it be destroyed?' What part does it play in the origin of the universe?' His father replied with wisdom, as he did unto all others, but his answer did not dispel his son's doubt. Suka said to his father: 'I know all that'. And alas! his father was unable to remove his doubt. His father then requested him to go to King Janak, who was the highest being in spiritual wisdom of his time.

[p. 36]

"Rishi Suka left the Himalaya Mountains and later approached the golden gates of the King's palace. Although the King was aware of Brahm Rishi's (Suka) arrival, he refused to go forth and meet him. He requested that the Rishi should not be admitted into his palace, as he wanted to test the sincerity of his mind. Rishi Suka waited full seven days at the golden gate. At last he was conducted into a magnificent hall where beautiful women were indulging in worldly enjoyments. But Suka's mind did not lose its balance. He was not affected by the unjust act of the King in making him wait seven days at his gate, nor was he moved by the disgraceful conduct of worldly association. The King came and addressed him thus: 'O, Brahm Rishi (there are three kinds of Rishis), thou hast reached the highest state. The worldly joys and sorrows do not affect thee. I beseech thee to tell what hast brought thee here?' Rishi Suka asked: 'What has caused my illusion? How does it generate? How can it be destroyed? Please instruct me.' The King gave him the same explanation that his father had given him. Rishi Suka returned: 'I know that, and my father gave me the same

[p. 37]

information. If Maya (illusion) which is produced by a differentiation of one Atma as breath, etc.) and merged again into the Atma, then no benefit can be derived from this perishable Maya (illusion). O Highest Guru, Thou art able to dispel this delusion of my mind! Please enlighten me on this matter.'

"The King: 'Thou hast known what shouldst be known, but still thou asketh me--although thy father has instructed thee aright. The enlightenment we have given to thee is the real one. Atma alone, is that which is everywhere, just as the ether pervades all space and atmosphere. Wisdom is bound by naught else but its own thought. Freeing thyself from sensual thoughts, is freeing thyself from bondage. Thou hast clearly realized the Atmic wisdom for thou hast given up all longing for sensual objects. Thou hast by thine own efforts, through the higher mind, reached the highest Brahmic State; thou hast become a Jivanmukta (the state of emancipated embodiment). But one thing thou hast yet to accomplish--that of giving up the delusion of the illusion which has arisen through doubt in thy mind. When thou hast accomplished this, then thou wilt be free.' King Janak thus initiated Rishi Suka into the Atmic mysteries,

[p. 38]

where he acquired the highest state of wisdom, and was freed from all misery, doubt, death and rebirth. He lived for 1000 years, then merged into that higher wisdom, which is Brahm. As water returns to the ocean, so the light which departs from the "I", returns to the higher light (Atma), and becomes Brahm. Thus Rishi attained that liberation, which is above all else. O Ram, you should follow the same path.

"To become a slave of desire is bondage; to master it, is liberation. Master your desires and become indifferent to worldly enjoyments; become a Jivanmukta (emancipated embodiment), without the assistance of austerities of religions; follow the path of wisdom and you will realize the reality. O Ram, there is but one person who can remove the doubt from thy mind, and that is the Omniscient Vashisht, who knows the past, present, and the future. He is the Guru (spiritual teacher) of all mankind."

Rishi Viswamitra turned toward Rishi Vashisht and suggested that he should be taught the stories of Brahmic Wisdom, since he is qualified for such instruction. The Brahmic Wisdom should be given only to those who have complete control of themselves and 

[p. 39]

from those who doubt and are full of vice. Thus Viswamitra ends the story of Suka.

The Munis and Rishis, who were present in the assembly hall, praised Rishi Viswamitra's noble instruction.

Rishi Vashisht said: "O Muni, well Learned One in all Knowledge, I shall do according to thy request. I shall relate the stories of pure wisdom, which have been given out by Brahma, that mankind may be liberated from the chain of rebirth."

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

  

THE WAY TO BLESSED LIBERATION

Master Vashisht: "Now, O Ram, listen to me. Try to follow the Sastaric (right path). The goal of mankind (human) can he achieved in this life, which is reached by means of two paths. One is by the way of Atmic Wisdom; the other, by the ordinary path, which leads to liberation. Virtuous people will attain liberation by following the Atmic Wisdom and through the association with the Wise, thus developing high qualities."

Ram: "I am under control of desires, which I have made in my past lives. My efforts have not been in the right direction. O Master, what am I to do?"

Master Vashisht: "O Ram, by one's own efforts alone, can the Brahmic or Divine state be achieved, and by none else. Desires can be classed under two divisions: that of pure and impure. These desires will cling to future births. If the impure desires are upper-most in one's life

[p. 41]

then misery is experienced by its future lives. In case that pure desires prevail, then liberation is easily acquired. O Ram, with all thy power, cultivate the Brahmic science. Free thyself of impure desires and retain the pure. See all things with equal vision and strive to bar that door of the mind from whence cometh the impure desires; but open all other doors through which cometh the pure desires. Cast out all impure desires and generate the pure ones. If doubt arises as to where these pure desires shall lead, thou shouldst continue to hold them, as no bad can come from them until thy mind has realized the Reality of Brahm. Always follow the path of Brahm by Veda (the Sacred Knowledge). Let Guru (spiritual teacher) initiate thee into Brahm. O Ram, may thou remain immovable in the study of Realization. Free thy mind of impure desires, and with pure desires attain the Atmic state which is free of all pain and suffering. Kill all thy illusory thoughts so that they may never be resurrected again. Develop peace or mind and bliss within thyself. Free thyself of worldly desires and become One with Brahm. Try to understand the significance of the Holy sentence, "Tat Twamasi" (thou art that), and meditate upon the Reality."

[p. 42]

Rishi Vashisht's Own Story:

"Now listen to Brahm's utterances. Out of the highest Chidakasa (highest Ether) or wisdom which is all pervading and is the seat or root of all objects, arose Brahm (Lord of Creation). Vishnu (The Preserver), the earth, and all other objects rose from his heart. Brahm (Lord of Universe) found that many worthy souls were suffering in Bharatavarsa (Land of India). He was moved by pity for the liberation of these souls. He concluded that the cycle of birth or death could not be controlled by Japa Chanting (of Mantras), Tapa (religious austerities), visiting Holy places, or by bathing in the Holy Ganges: only through the Atmic Wisdom. By the power of his will, he created all mankind like unto himself. So, I was born and have paid my respects to him. I was given a seat on the North side of him. There he cured me of my illusion which had enveloped me for some time. All my wisdom had deserted me. My mind became confused and my actions were foolish, as are the actions of the ignorant. When I came out of this state of mind, He asked me the cause of my misery. In turn I asked him these questions: "How did this universe arise? How may liberation

[p. 43]

be attained?" In answer to these questions, he blessed me with true liberation of highest state, through which I realized the highest Atmic Wisdom. He said, 'it was we, who put you under the influence of Maya (illusions) and released you again. We have ordained that all souls shall be initiated by thy wisdom in order to attain their liberation. Thou shalt soon go to India which is the Land of Religions. Thou shalt initiate those who are seeking wisdom into the Atmic Wisdom, but not those who are lovers of egoism.'

"Accordingly I came to India and will live here as long as humanity exists. I have no worldly desires, consequently, I will escape that dreamless sleep state of existence. I have overcome that mental pain and misery, which is experienced daily throughout the world. O Ram, only those who prefer the Atmic Wisdom to the material knowledge will know the Atma (self).

"There are four soldiers who guard the road to liberation. They are Patience (or peace of mind), Atmic Inquiry, Contentment, and Association with the Wise. If you can succeed in making one of the above a friend, then the others will be easy. That one will introduce you to

[p. 44]

the others. Without gaining their friendship, they will not. permit you to enter upon the road to liberation. So by all means, gain the friendship of one of the above and start on the road to liberation, for without liberation there is no end to rebirths. Association with the Wise will mean to you, what Garuda Mantra means to the persons who have been bitten by the Cobra. (In India people are cured of the cobra's poisonous bite by chanting Garuda Mantra). Once that wisdom is attained then that person is safe--no harm can come to that person. No one can achieve that blissful state by merely inquiring about the Atmic Wisdom. It must come through self experience or through the help of a Guru. Merely reading books of wisdom breeds more ignorance. Keep in mind that it will be much better to live by begging food from the outcasts, than to live an ignorant life. O Ram, if only one of the four guards is made your friend--namely, Patience is mastered--then all your miseries and sorrows will fly from you as darkness flies from the light. Those who have mastered patience will never be upset by poverty or wealth. They will remain the same in peace or war. They will not make a distinction between

[p. 45]

birth and death. These noble people will be higher than the man of mere knowledge, and will surely attain liberation. May thou, O Ram, attain patience! If Atmic Inquiry along with patience should be developed, then surely the state of the highest wisdom will be acquired. This Atmic-inquiry enables one to understand cause and effect, which is the seed of rebirth. One must rid themselves of all doubt by the power of discrimination, which is always a shining light. One should always make inquiry of, 'whence came I?' 'Whence came the universe?' Such inquiries dispel that dark cloud of ignorance.

"Contentment is the Noble who will set us free of all grief, for such arises only from the sensual objects of desire. One who has mastered noble contentment will always be happy. His mind will ever seek the Atmic Wisdom. Persons of contentment will ever be worshipped by all mankind.

 

"Association with the Wise will help us to overcome the Maya (illusion). It is not the bathing in the waters of the Holy Ganges, that is so helpful to the thousands that throng there each year, but the associations with the wise

[p. 46]

are more helpful to self realization than making gifts, sacrifices, etc.. The Wise are like ships that help us safely across the ocean of rebirths. These four roads are the ways and means to bliss. O Ram, listen to these stories. They are light, which dispel the delusion of Maya (illusion). Understand the inner meaning and search deeply for the Atmic Wisdom. All delusion will perish, and the mind will become calm and peaceful like the waters of a lake. Such persons will not suffer the disappointments of life. They will not be affected by the storm of Maya (illusion). They will have balance of mind as steady as the Himalaya Mountains. The truth seeker who will follow this path of Atmic Wisdom will always find enjoyment in Samadhi (meditation). This is the way to Jivanmukta (emancipated embodiment). He is desireless, and nothing is supernatural to him. Words cannot describe this state of mind. He will move in this universe like all others, but his mind is free from the bondage of earthly desires. Good and bad cannot affect him. He will be recognized by others as the happiest. He will not interfere with the paths of others, but always follow the path of Atmic Wisdom. After he has reached this attainment, he will never

[p. 47]

be born again. He is worthy of all his accomplishments, while others may not be worthy even of their human birth. He should perform his duties of life earnestly, through earning and spending correctly. He should ever seek to reach this fourth state of existence through the Atmic inquiry, keeping his well balanced mind alert, for this state is obtained only through Atmic inquiry.

"He who attains the fourth state is above thought. If he is the Master of Quietness, he will surely gain liberation whether he lives with his family or alone; whether he is performing the daily duties of everyday life or not, he will be one with the Reality. Follow this path and many analogies will be given out in order that Brahmic wisdom may be realized within thee, as all have their purpose and aim in the One principle. The ignorant say that pure wisdom is not subject to analogies. Mixing of name and form should not be made subject of this inquiry. Such absurd argument is not worthy, for Wisdom is obtained by the Atmic inquiry. O Ram, thou shouldst not let thy mind accept thoughts of doubt. Always remember these four: Patience, Atmic Inquiry, Contentment and

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] Association with the Wise. These four guard the gate of liberation. No one can secure liberation until his friendship with the four is developed. This is the road to the attainment of bliss. By attention to the following stories, thou wilt surely attain wealth of Atmic Wisdom and a happy life.

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE

And the Rishi Vashisht, preceptor of the Divine Ram, went on:

"The poison plant of the world's illusion springs from the mind entangled in sensuous enjoyment. But it is through mind alone, that the ills of mind can be cured and eradicated. Those who live in this world without attachment to worldly objects, like a duck in a pond, are the true conquerors of the mind. For what are they--but vermin--those who cling to the objects of the senses, and taste not of the fruit of renunciation? One ought to rid the mind of all thoughts of ego, and fix it on the Soul Supreme, according to the teachings of the Vedas (Four books of Wisdom), to attain complete bliss and harmony in life.

"Even as one thorn removes another thorn, so the higher mind of a man, will remove the

[p. 50]

impurities from the lower mind of man. To cleanse the mind of its defilements and desires is the first step on the high road to salvation, trodden by the great Saint and Sages.

"When the mind that wavers and flickers like a flame in the wind, is steadied and made one-pointed, as it were, through desirelessness, then alone is the Real Truth that sustains the Universe made manifest in all its refulgent majesty. May you tread this Sacred and Ancient Path (Yoga), O Ram, and by knowing the true nature of your own self, and freeing your mind from all worldly entanglements, attain to the highest bliss of salvation. May your mind, freed from hankerings and longings for the objects of the world, be merged in God-Consciousness. Past, present and future become as one, to he who has controlled his mind, and conquered his worldly desires. When all the shining tinsel of the world becomes a mere nothing. then alone is mind conquered. These thoughts of attachment and possession,--that this is mine, that is thine, etc., belong to the realm of the lower mind. When all such lower thoughts of differentiation are lost, and the Atma, One behind

[p. 51]

all, is recognized, then alone the sorrows of the world cease to exist. May you, O Ram, attain to that Divine State. When the mind is fully controlled and the desires arising from it are destroyed, then alone comes surcease from pains and afflictions that torment humanity. When the baser passions of the mind are slain, then one attains perfect peace, and becomes, as it were, the fountain head of peace in the world for the salvation of suffering humanity.

"By meditating on the heart, spiritual Wisdom awakens, all doubts vanish, and the mind is contented. This mind of ours, is susceptible to all kinds of influences, hankering after  pleasures, and this is the greatest obstacle in the path of salvation. Control your. mind with the thought that these worldly objects are the merest tinsel compared to the liberation which is a veritable treasure-trove of all bliss and happiness. Then will you be freed from all worldly thoughts of possession and differentiation, arising from an overgrown ego.

The Divine State of liberation, where one is freed from the cycle of birth and death, confers untold bliss, and is everlasting like the Eternal One Himself.

[p. 52]

"It is indeed hard to find in this world, a mind really free from the snare of the senses. To control this ever-fluctuating mind and make it one-pointed is the aim of all meditation, and is the theme of all discourses on metaphysics. Constant meditation on the One Unchanging Reality of the Universe, which is God, the Self Supreme. The mind takes on the qualities it meditates upon. For that reason the wise keep within strict control, those tendencies of the mind which incline it toward the baser objects, and in the end attain the Bliss of complete freedom, liberation, or Nirvana.

"The moment desires and distractions crop up in the mind, they should be weeded out. The destruction of sensuous desires is akin to the destruction of ignorance. Desirelessness leads to the peace of salvation. Constant effort is necessary to attain such bliss. With the realization of the Supreme and Sustaining Reality of the Universe, one sees that all worldly objects are false and unreal to the core,--mere illusions, nothing else, like bubbles on the deep."

Prince Ram asked: "Tell us, O Saint, how one can destroy ignorance?"

[p. 53]

Rishi Vashisht, the Preceptor, replied; "Through ignorance it is, O Ram, that the Atma, which is eternal, is forced to go though the cycle of births and deaths. To conceive of the illusion, which besets the embodied soul as real, is ignorance, and a barrier to seeing true reality. A man, free from births and deaths, and realizing the all-refulgent reality of the Universe, perceives that desires are a creation of Maya. Extinction of lower desires is the extinction of ignorance."

Prince Ram asked his preceptor, the Holy Vashisht: "All visible objects of name and form, O Lord, you say are illusions, and that illusion is destroyed by meditation on the true reality of the Atma. Pray, what is this thing called Atma?"

Rishi Vashisht replied: "It is the Wisdom of the Brahma (God), who has no visible form. All things of the world, perceived through our senses, contain the essence of Brahma, such as growth, mind, birth and death, which are illusory, not real. Brahma alone is true and self-existent, the Creator and Upholder of the Universe. Out of that Supreme Soul, which is Eternal, Immortal, and Absolute, arose the intelligence that governs

[p. 54]

the Universe. This Atmic Jnan is the Absolute Self shining every where.

"From the Brahma arise different forces and powers like waves and currents in the ocean. To realize Oneself as Brahma is the goal; but to know the soul as distinct from the body is to know the truth and be free from ignorance. It is only the fancy of fools, that gives illusion the garb of reality. The wise have pierced the veil of illusion by the shafts of their Jnan (Wisdom). Know then, this body, this wealth, these kith and kin are not real. Atma alone is real and eternal. Perform actions in this world without being absorbed by them."

Sri Ram then said: "How marvelous it is that illusion, which is unreal, should cause so much pain and suffering in the world, and that which appears so solid and concrete should be but a manifestation of Maya. O Master, I cannot believe this Universe really came out of the unreality. How do you account for the pains of King Lavana?"

Saint Vashisht answered: "King Lavana was not bound by the results of his actions, as he performed them without attachment, and with complete indifference to the outcome. One morning

[p. 55]

while sitting in solitude, the King fell into a profound reverie and thought of performing mentally the Raj-suya Vajna, as performed by his powerful ancestor Harish Chandra. He thought of all the accessories to the Sacrifice, and in imagination offered oblations to the gods, and went through all the details of the sacrifice. When he awoke from his reverie, it was night-fall. It is a rule that whoever performs the Royal Sacrifice, must undergo great pain and suffering. So the King of the gods, Indra, sent a celestial messenger to inflict suffering on King Lavana. The mendicant, who appeared before the King, and put him into a trance in which he suffered cruelly, was none other than Indra's messenger. This I discovered by my ascetic powers. So you will see from this episode, that actions performed even mentally have far-reaching consequences.

The story of King Lavana is as follows: A mendicant came to the Court of King Lavana and besought him to witness has powers. On the King consenting, the mendicant waved a peacock feather before the King's face, and immediately the King sank into unconsciousness, while his body writhed fearfully. When some time later the King recovered consciousness, his minister asked him what he

[p. 56]

had experienced. The King replied "I felt dizzy when the mendicant waved the fan. Then I saw a horse coming toward me. On the mendicant's suggestion I rode the horse and was carried away to a dense forest, where I fell from the horse and felt very thirsty. While I lay dying of thirst, I saw a young woman pass my way with a pitcher of water. I asked for water, but the girl refused, saying that she was low-born and could not give water to the King unless he married her and promised to live with her folks. In my extremity, I consented. I married the girl, but found it very hard to live with her folks, who were no better than barbarians. I moved up on the hill top and built a house. There I lived with the girl for eight years, and we had two sons. Then there was a severe draught, and as a result, terrible famine. People died by the hundreds and thousands for want of food. I started, with my wife and sons, for some other land. On the way, my wife died from fatigue and exhaustion and my sons cried for food. Unable to see them suffer, I killed myself. Just at this point I recovered consciousness." So said the King, and all present marvelled at the strangeness of the dream. They looked around for the ascetic but he was nowhere to be found.--by the Author.

"O Ram," continued the Rishi Vashisht, "I will speak to you of the nature of Jnan and Ajnana--Wisdom and Ignorance. Each of these is seven-fold in character. Wisdom enables men to perceive the true reality of the Universe and thereby obtain salvation; whereas, ignorance, by

[p. 57]

regarding the physical body as the real "I", leads to bondage.

"Now, the difference between a seer and one who is denied spiritual vision. The seers are those who have conquered illusions, and have awakened to a realization of the true reality of the Universe. The ignorant slaves of illusion. Shallow human intelligence causes doubts and disbeliefs and leads men astray. This is but delusion. Wisdom leaves no room for doubts or disbeliefs. To the man who has attained true Wisdom, the human soul and the Supreme Soul becomes One.

"The seven states of ignorance are Bindu-jagrat, Jagrat, Maha-jagrat, Swapnajagrat, Swapuna, Sushupti, Bindu-jagrat is the primary state of partial perception. In the second state the individual begins to perceive the difference of mine, thine and his. In the third state the man begins to have some conception of the relationship between man and the Universe. In the fourth state the mind realizes its supremacy over matter. The fifth state is really the dream state. In the sixth state the individual recalls to mind things long past. In the seventh state the individual realizes the futility

[p. 58]

of all his previous states, fraught with pain and suffering.

 

"There are likewise seven states of Wisdom, although any number of divisions and subdivisions can be made. These seven states of Wisdom lead to Nirvana. They are Subeccha or right desire, Vicharan or contemplation, Tanumansi, the state in which the mind is alert, Satwapatti or the generation of the serenity of the mind, Asansakti or detachment of the mind from  things, Padarth Bhavana, the perception of the truth and reality, and Turya or light. These states free the seeker from delusion, and lead gradually to complete Nirvana or salvation and to the end of pain and suffering. Subhecha or right desire is of course the longing and desire for spiritual enlightenment. Vicharana is defined as meditation or contemplation of the things of spirit and mind, contemplation of the Divinity that pervades the Universe, and the realization of the Godhead, These two states lead to the third stage of keen intellectual perception, which naturally leads to the real truth or divine philosophy. Atma Jnan (Wisdom of the self) brings about emancipation

[p. 59]

from the thraldom of worldly things. This state confers ineffable bliss and enlightenment on the seeker. By logical sequence in that state of advancement, the student realizes his relationship with the Divine, and his relationship with the Universe. here he sees, knows and understands all. Then the last state of complete enlightenment and mastery is reached, when the very presence of the man radiates spiritual light. Such a soul is free from the cycle of birth and death. He is called Jivan-mukta (bodily emancipated). These souls are free indeed. Free front worldly longings and desires, pleasure, pair, success, failure, praise, blame, profit, loss, victory and defeat are as one to them. They have attained salvation by the continued discipline of their mind, by unceasing effort in the realm of divine philosophy.

"Rising by degrees from one spiritual stage of enlightenment to another, until having passed through the seven stages, you attain liberation. Those who have subjected their mind and acquired true perception of the Divine within, are truly great, worthy of every respect, and adoration. Others have to go through innumerable births and deaths. One desire leading

[p. 60]

to another, thus the wheels of Maya move on, and the soul is bound more and more, until true awakening comes, and the man starts on the path of enlightenment. This path begins with the desire for spiritual light, and attains completion with acquirement of that light, by means of the seven stages described above. Such a one realizes Brahma and becomes one with Brahma, the first Cause of the Universe, the Source of Ineffable Bliss, the Ocean of Power, the Sun of Spiritual Illumination, Immortal, Untreated, All-pervading, All-seeing, All-knowing, All-powerful, Supreme Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the Universe."

 

Rishi Vashisht continued: "O Ram, I will narrate further the story of King Lavana to illustrate the working of the Maya. On recovering consciousness, the King was seized with a great longing to visit the strange country he had dreamed of, so he started for the Vindhya mountains. and in due time reached the impenetrable forest that cover its slopes.

 

He wandered about hither and thither unlit he reached the North, where he came upon a settlement of the very people he had dreamed

[p. 61]

about. And wonder of wonders, these people were actually suffering from famine and in a miserable plight. The King and his courtiers saw an old woman bewailing the loss of her children, who had died during the famine. As they listened to her lament, they discovered with much surprise that the old woman was weeping for the girl whom the King had married in his dream, by whom he had two sons, and who had died while on the way to a land of plenty. Greatly moved by the incident, the King pacified the old woman, giving she and her tribesmen food and clothing, and conducting them to his kingdom. He then sought an explanation of the mystery, at the feet of the learned. After due discipline, meditation, and study he attained the Bliss of Nirvana. It is thus, O Ram, O Ram, that illusion works and gives the unreal, the appearance of the real."

Ram asked: "How was it, O Master, that what the King saw in his dream actually came to pass?"

Muni Vashisht replied: "You will better understand this incident by the story of Gandhi, which I will narrate for your benefit later on. What happened in this case was not really true,

[p. 62]

only a conjurer's trick played by Indra's messenger on the consciousness of the King and those aborigines on the Vindhya Mountains. The King experienced in his unconscious state, and the tribesmen saw in their conscious state, that was all. But that is how illusion works, tricking us into believing as real that which is not, piercing the veil of illusion, O Ram, by the shining shaft of Jnan (Wisdom of the self). May you attain that state of bliss, my son, in which the human soul becomes one with the Divine--the state of complete Nirvana. May you realize the Divinity within you, and know it to be the same that brought the world into being and pervades and sustains it. Conquer, O Ram, by ceaseless meditation, the ignorance of illusion, and attain the One Omnipotent and Omniscient God, from whom the world evolved, and in whom it resolves itself."

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 63]

  

QUEEN CHUNDALAI, THE GREAT YOGIN

"O may thou rest thyself in Thy all peaceful Atma [**] like the King Sikhithwaya who controlled the restless bird called Mind," said Rishi Vashisht to Ram.

Whereupon Ram asked him this, "Tell me, O Guru, who was the King Sikhithwaya, possessor of the peaceful Bliss? Let me learn that Jnana (Wisdom), which is the basis of everything, that it, may arise in me to its .fullest power."

The Rishi Vashisht replied: "King Sikhithwaya was born in the Dwapara Yuga [***]. Over his people he ruled wisely and well. His justice had no bond by-ways. He had but one purpose--to do good and perform the works of virtue. Master over body and mind, his great joy lay in the happiness of his Subjects.

"Chundalai, his Queenly Consort, born through Tapas (Meditation), to the Queen of

[p. 64]

the Sourashtra country was like a peacock in beauty. Her beauty glowed like a jewel in the perfect setting of her sterling virtue.

 

"This King and Queen lived together in perfect happiness, fulfilling their duties without the slightest difference of opinion. Their youth passed delightfully, united in body and mind, and their days flowed away like water from a broken jar, and middle age hovered over them like clouds on a rainy day. They had tasted the passion fruit of worldly things. In their youth they loved this and desired that, but now materiality fell from them like an worn-out garment: The only desire left was to obtain Adhyatmic-Jnana (wisdom of the self), for this wisdom is the only certain ending of the disease of rebirth.

"Realizing there is no escape from the disease of rebirth, except through Atma-Jnan (self-wisdom), they started toward the attainment of

[p. 65]

this goal with minds fixed in true meditation. About them were gathered the Wise and Learned of their time. In this environment of Harmony and Peace, they collected a store of Wisdom, and led a truly spiritual life.

"Queen Chundalai, she of true discernment, having heard and understood well the real significance of the Sastra (Wisdom) taught by the Wise, for the attainment of the Higher spirituality, said to herself--since there exists Atma as I fully realize, why do we use the term "I"? From whence comes this illusion to the mind; to what is it due; how does it arise? The body is not the "I", as the body is visible to us, and is changeable and incomplete in itself. Nor can it designate the organs functioning in the body, nor its moving force Prana. Further, it does not describe the mind which owes its activity to thought. The term Jiva cannot be applied to the "I", as the Jiva is the individual soul. I have learned through this enquiry that Atma-jnana (Wisdom of the self) will never be attained through the senses, but through the Eternal Jnana (Wisdom). I know my Jiva exists through Atmic reality. This Atmic Wisdom become known only by knowing oneself, not through

[p. 66]

another. This self-wisdom or self light shines everywhere.

"By divine realization the Queen enjoyed the consciousness of the reality of the Atma self, and discharged her daily duties without desire for their fruits. Longing ceased, and the inclination of her mind toward the pairs of opposites, love and hate, cold and heat. She became the receptacle of Bliss as a result of the control of her mind. Then with the daily Yoga practices, the Queen developed Atmic reality, that true realization, which is a certainty beyond explanation. Only he knows it, who has realized the reality. The beautiful Queen shone with a radiant Spiritual Light.

"The King noted the refulgence of his wife's beauty with great pleasure. He asked his Queen, 'O Beloved One, you are now radiant with such great beauty, it is as if your youth had come back again, or as if you had sipped a divine nectar by which you have attained Eternal Divine beauty. You seem so happy, your mind so blessed with divine peace, that you are perfect in body and mind. Tell me, my Queen, of the wonderous purity which so dazzles me.'

[p. 67]

"Queen Chundalai replied: 'Having abandoned and risen above this world which is form but formless, real but without reality, I attained the Mighty One, who is the reality beyond the older age or death. Hence, the radiance in my body, which is but the reflection of the refulgent peace within. I have realized That God which is the essential nature of all; being the atom of atoms; the whole, without creation or destruction. That is why my body is radiant. I have no joy in the object of the senses, yet do I partake of the Bliss and happiness of beauty. Love and hate have both gone from me, and every hour I glory in the attainment of physical beauty and contentment, but the objects my eyes and mind behold awake no response in me, either of joy or sorrow. I have attained the super-consciousness, which is the cause of my Bliss and beauty.'

"Hearing the explanation from his wife, the King without understanding or trying to understand her words, said: 'O Beloved, thou hast given utterance to words which are not befitting thee. Hast thou lost thy mental balance? How is it that thou, living in palaces and in

[p. 68]

the luxuries of wealth, should attain the realization of Atma when the greatest of men have cut themselves off from the outward world and have sought the quiet retreats of the Himalaya Mountains, in order to attain that state of Bliss, or Atma?

"'How can a Queen, like you, realize that which can only be realised by the Wise? Thou mayest say that thou hast enjoyed that blessed state, like those who were unable to reach that exalted state, but claimed they had sensed it, intuitionally, within. Tell me, how canst thou realise the Atma within? Thou who art a poor fragile creature, without Wisdom, tossed to and fro by the senses.'

"The Queen was touched by the King's remarks. She pitied the poor King, who had not reached that state in which he could understand or enjoy the Divine Bliss. Still the King and Queen lived together in Peace and Harmony as they had done in the past. The Queen had gained perfect control over her mind and desires. She thought if she were able too develop the power of levitation, then it would be easy to convince her King of her power. For this purpose

[p. 69]

she practised Madras in Yoga for the attainment of levitation."

Ram said to the Master: "Please explain how one may attain such psychic power as levitation, etc."

The Master answered: "I am telling you the interesting story of the Queen, and now thou dost ask an explanation of Yoga. However, I will answer thee. By control of Prana (Vital or Life Force), one may attain that power. One who wishes to attain that power should have a balanced diet: should practice Mudras and Postures. Control of the mind is also necessary as well as the study and ceaseless practice of Yoga. One should have the help of a Spiritual Teacher. One should be free from anger, love and hate. Try to understand the nature of Prana (Vital or Life Force) and control its movements, then you can Master the forces of nature, Sidhi (psychic), and attain liberation.

"There is in the midst of the one hundred Nadis (big vein or nerve), one which is called Kundalini, it is within every being from Brahma to worm. It is like a serpent, and is sleeping as the serpent sleeps in the winter. When the Kundalini

[p. 70]

power is aroused, it enables one to master the powers of nature. All other Nadis of the body are connected with the Kundalini. The powers of the Kundalini become useful, through the Light of Wisdom. This power, through meditation becomes meditation, through wisdom becomes wisdom, mind through mind, thought through thought, egoism through egoism.

"This greatest of all powers may easily be controlled, if one masters the Prana. The Prana (Vital or life force) always goes upward, the Apana, (or other vital force) always goes downward. These two vital or life forces cause death of the body. If Prana is brought down, and Apana be permitted to rise and mix in the heart, then disease would leave the body, never to return."

Ram again said to the Master: "Please explain how mental disease can be destroyed."

The Master answered: "Diseases which affect the mind are the first and are not the easiest to heal; those which affect the body may be classed as secondary. The desires which affect the mind are primary diseases; we have sunk thus

[p. 71]

far by absence of Wisdom, and lack of Mastery over ourselves. We are under the seeming power of delusion. We cannot realise to what extent we arc pulled down by such delusion. The mental disease is similar to the coming of a winter storm. When the power of desires gets hold of one, he then is liable to be guilty of fearful karma (wrong action); this in turn produces bodily disease.

"Bodily disease is also brought on by overeating, living in unhealthy places, association with the wicked, impure desires, evil thoughts, etc. These mental or indirect diseases have a direct effect upon the body.

"Now I will explain how both forms of disease perish, O Ram. The wise say that the mental diseases have two divisions, common and specific, the former affect this body only, but the latter tend to rebirth, also. The common diseases may be banished by correct eating and right thinking.

"When the mind is not in perfect harmony it may affect the blood and produce discord in any portion of the body. Mental discord will produce poison in the blood, and the poison will

[p. 72]

affect the nervous system. When the nervous system is affected, then Prana (Vital Force) cannot follow its right path. When Prana does not follow its right path, then it cannot reach all parts of the body as it should, and thus many of the nerves may wither or die. If harmony is established in the mind, all else is easy and simple. When harmony is established in the mind, it will naturally follow, that one will want to do good and read good books pertaining to truth. When peace is established in the mind, then Prana will follow its right course and all disease will vanish.

"The path of Yoga, by which one may master the power of the Kundalini, is through the practise of Pranayama, which causes the power of the Kundalini to arise, and then the holy becomes strong. By Pranayama the movement of Prana and Apana may be controlled; then the Yogin will be able to go up like a bird. The Prana is the cause, and when it is made to go up through the Sushumna, all kinds of psychic powers are attained, such as seeing, hearing and levitation."

Ram again questioned Rishi Vashisht; "How

[p. 73]

do such people become light and heavy, seemingly at will, and how do they gain control over the powers of nature?"

The Master replied: "Such powers are mastered only by one who has a consciousness of absolute purity, free from the worldly things. The self is finest of the fine, which is not the Universe, neither its association with it. But through its own thoughts becomes individual soul, and is known by the name Jiva (individual soul). This Jiva mingles with many things in the world, forgets its reality and thinks of the body as being real. When one has the last awakening or illumination and determines to know the Absolute Reality, then the gross and unreal vanish and the real nature comes to light, and is revealed or manifested. Through meditation the psychic powers are awakened and mastered. This is the truth revealed to those who have gained mastery through Yoga.

"Through Yoga means, the Queen mastered the psychic powers, and with it encircled the world, simply to convince her King. No one

[p. 74]

knew that the Queen possessed such marvelous power. That was one reason her King did not believe or gain the state of Bliss. For the King was as ignorant of her blessed power, as a child is ignorant of higher education. The King was without peace of mind, so this great Yogin did not try to raise the King to Atmic Wisdom."

Ram then said: "O Master, how can others hope to attain pure Wisdom when the great King failed, when his wife, the great Yogin, tried to help him realise the blessed Wisdom? Speak, O Master, and say which is the right means to attain the goal?"

Rishi Vashisht answered: "Faith in the word of the Guru (Spiritual Teacher) is the way, but discipleship alone is the means of reaching Atmic Wisdom."

Ram said: "If the disciple alone is the means of reaching the Atmic Wisdom, then why should it be necessary to have faith in the word of the Guru?"

The Master explained: "A certain hunter, who lived in the mountains, lost a shell while walking along through the grassy forest; he was greatly worried about the lost shell and

[p. 75]

went searching for it. After a long search he came upon a gem shining like a moon. Searching for his shell led to the finding of a precious gem. Such may be the experience of the disciple, in looking for the Guru (Spiritual teacher), he may find true Wisdom. Studying with the Guru will help, but the discipleship is the means of developing Atmic Wisdom.

"The King without true wisdom tried many means of attaining self wisdom, but he was working under illusion, as he thought lie would gain by giving gifts, bathing in Holy Water and observance of religious laws. These did not set him free from his mental suffering. At last he turned to his Queen and said: 'I am giving up everything in this world, but, I have one desire,--to go to the forest and live there a peaceful life, as delusion of wealth or pain do not hunt there. The bliss that is the highest attainable is in the forest; so let me go.'

"The Queen said, 'everything will be ready and ripe at the time, I pray thee do not go?'

"The King said: 'Do not interfere with my plans. You are young, and shalt rule in my place, as it is the wife's duty not to languish at the absence

[p. 76]

of her husband, but to protect those who are near her.'

"The King gave an order that the city should be patrolled that night, that every one should remain at home, within the house. That night the King made his way to the forest. After walking for two weeks he reached a spot in the Mandara Hills, which are surrounded by beautiful pools and wild flowers. He made a hut of leaves, a cloth bag for fruit, and a place for meditation. Then he started his practice; the first hour, for religious rites, the second and third, gathering flowers for Gods's worship, fourth, eating fruits; at night, chanting Mantras, thus the King did his tapasa.

"Next morning the Queen found the King had gone to the woods, leaving behind his Kingdom, wealth and Queen. She pitied the poor King, and wanted to know where he had gone, so she levitated and roamed in the sky. She appeared to Sidhas (psychic persons), as beautiful as the shining moon. She saw her husband in the forest, meditated upon what she should do, and reached the conclusion she would not disturb him. She thought it would be better to let him

[p. 77]

master himself; so she returned to her palace without letting him see her.

"The Master Yogin issued a proclamation to her people, stating that her husband was away on a secret mission. For eight years she ruled with royal grace of equal justice to all, while the poor King suffered a life of privation and penance in the forest.

"Realizing that the time had come for her to again see her husband, she went forth one night through the air. She alighted on a near by hill, where she saw a decrepit and care worn, old man, whom at first she did not recognize as her husband. But her clear vision soon discovered that it was indeed he, and she cried out with her grief, to see, through dire ignorance, the King bent, groaning in pain. The Queen thought, I have power to confer Atmic Wisdom on him at this moment, but he will reject me as his young wife, so I shall not appear before him in this form. I shall change to  form to accomplish my purpose. As his mind is now ripe for Atmic Wisdom, a single word from me will show him the way to that blessed state, at this time. At this hour a rare opportunity was at

[p. 78]

hand. She changed her form from woman to man by the power of Samayan (the Samayan is the highest power of the Raja Yogin), and  from the sky before the King. The King saw the form of a young Brahman standing in the air before him.

"The King paid due respect to him, and asked him to be seated. The young Brahman returned due respect to Raja Rishi (the King), of true Tapas (prayer, meditation etc.).

"The King said: 'By thy gracious visit I am greatly benefited, as thou art my Guru.'

"The young Brahman replied: 'Who in this world has such great qualities as you possess? May you live long. May your mind be filled with Divine Peace and be free from all delusion of the world.

"'You are performing very high Tapas, as you have given up everything for the sake of liberation. You are performing Tapas as trying, as meeting the point of the sword.'

"The King said: 'Thou being a God, art well aware of my condition. May I ask thy name, and who thou art?'

[p. 79]

"The young Brahman replied: 'I am the son of Rishi Narada, whose Atmic Wisdom shines like the sun. At my birth I was taken into the presence of Brahma (God), who paved my way to Atmic Wisdom. As I was His grandson, He named me Kumbha Muni: my mother is Saraswati (Mother of Wisdom). I continually study the Vedas (Book of Holy Wisdom).'

"The King believed every word of the Kumbha Muni. The Muni asked the King: 'What is thy name and what thy origin?'

"The King answered: 'From the pains of this world I came here for peace. My name is Sikhithwaya. I have given up my kingship as my mind was always binding me to the cycle of rebirth. I try my best to free myself from pains, but they are increasing. O Muni, the milk has surely turned to poison.'

"Kumbha Muni then replied: 'O King, without a Guru (Spiritual Teacher), the bliss of Atmic Wisdom is not to be obtained; tapas and mantras are merely a waste of time, O King. He who has not the Atmic Wisdom, but follows his duty of action is the best. Unselfish action will remove the impure desires; doing good

[p. 80]

karma will bring about heavenly bliss, and pure desire does not make any fresh karma, but the impure one does. If you know that all is Brahma, then ignorance is destroyed; the impure desires will never arise. If the impure desires are controlled, then old age and death are also controlled, and brings one to the highest state of Brahma.

"'The mind associated with impure desires is ignorance itself, but free from impure desires it is Wisdom itself. If through Wisdom, Soul realizes Reality, then one is free from the chain of rebirth.

"'When all the wise, even Brahma, have said the attainment of Wisdom is the highest bliss, why do you not try to attain it? Why do you not try to find whence came this Universe? Why are you killing time here in ignorance? Why not try to find a Guru and from him learn what is bondage and what, liberation? Go to those who have clear vision over all. They are the embodiment of wisdom. Engage ceaselessly in enquiring, then indeed you will find the real, the reality, which is the means of emancipation.'

[p. 81]

"The King cried with joy. 'O Guru, I have learned all this attainment of the way to bliss, and pure wisdom, by thy grace. I have left the company of the wise through ignorance, came to this forest to suffer, but now I am freed from pain, by thy kindness. I believe it is thy duty, as thou art within the forest, to point the way to bliss. Thou art my friend, thou art my Guru, thou art my parent. I shall be steadfast as thy disciple. Please accept me as thy disciple. Lead me in the path you have realized; you are equal to Brahma. Teach me the One-ness that sets people free from all pain, and into the consciousness of blissful truth.'

"The Kumbha Muni said: 'I can teach you if you will concentrate your mind, which has been roaming, from place to place. Without concentration, my word will not be of any help to you.'

"The King promised to believe and concentrate on the words of the Muni. The Muni said: 'First you should have full confidence in my words, as a child has in the words of his father. O King, hear what you will not understand; I will relate again the hidden meaning. In the olden days there was a man of wealth and

[p. 82]

great knowledge, but alas, he was without Atmic Wisdom. This man went in search of Chintamuni, a lucky stone that brings anything its owner wishes for. In the days when he was searching to find the lucky stone, which was bright and shining as the moon, the man without understanding passed by the lucky stone. He thought it might be only a common stone, as he could not find the lucky stone in such a short space of time. He thought, I am not pure, and I am only a poor man. So he left the lucky stone beside the road, and went on hunting. After a long search, weary and worn by hardships, a Sidha--a man of psychic powers--saw the poor man looking for the lucky stone. So he thought he would fool the poor, deluded man who had passed by without recognizing the lucky stone. The Sidha threw a piece of glass in front of the man, which, as soon as he saw it, he picked up, thinking surely it must he the lucky stone. He had passed by the real lucky stone and picked up instead the simple ball of glass. He was over-joyed and gave away all his wealth, with the hope that his lucky stone would bring him anything he desired. So he went to the forest, with the hope that he would find happiness there,

[p. 83]

as the lucky stone was supposed to bring him anything for which he wished. In the forest he tried to have the lucky stone bring forth the thing he wanted, but it did not bring forth anything, for the reason it was not a lucky stone at all, it was merely a ball of glass. The poor, deluded man brought all the hardships upon himself, suffering alone and without wealth.'

"'I will tell another story about an elephant, that will help you in the understanding of pure Wisdom.

"'In the midst of a forest there lived an elephant, the most gigantic of its kind. A Mahout of the forest followed the elephant and trapped him. His tusks were very long, sharp and dangerous. The Mahout fettered him with chains, and started to bring him to the city, tied to another elephant. This gigantic elephant became mad with pain caused by the chains, as well as the loss of his liberty. With the help of his powerful tusks he shook himself free. The Mahout seated on this elephant became frightened, and fell to the ground. The giant elephant, bewildered by his freedom, passed over the Mahout without hurting him, and raced to the security of the forest. The Mahout getting to his feet,

[p. 84]

and alarmed at the loss of his beast of wealth, went after the elephant and found him in the depth of the forest. The Mahout selected a spot where he knew the elephant would pass. Then he dug a trench and covered it with leaves. The elephant after a long time came to the place and fell into the trench. This time the Mahout fastened the elephant more securely. So again, the powerful animal was enslaved.

"'Had this gigantic elephant stepped on the Mahout, whom once he shook from his back and laid prostate upon the ground, he might easily have crushed him or dashed out his brains, then he would not have been captured again and deprived of his precious liberty. Likewise, he who does not think of the result of evil living, and that it would surely bring him to grief.

"The King asked the master: 'Please give the reason why you narrated the story of this Lucky Stone, and the story of the elephant?'

"The Master replied: 'The man who had all wealth and knowledge, without pure Wisdom, went in search of the Lucky Stone. That man is like yourself, for, although you are well versed in knowledge, you have not attained poise and peace of mind. This lesson, I meant to convey,

[p. 85]

by telling the story of the Lucky Stone. In order to overcome suffering and hypocrisy and attain true renunciation, you have forsaken your kingdom, wealth, wife and relations, which were the real Lucky Stone, and you came to the forest, which is the stone of glass.

"'The true renunciation was developing in you, little by little, in the midst of your worldly surroundings, but your mind was lead astray by the wrong ideal of renunciation. By delusion your mind was enveloped as by a dark cloud, instead of being illumined, by the clear light of Spiritual understanding. This renunciation of yours is not the renunciation which generates true happiness. With the hopes that you might attain illumination, or the realization of TRUTH--that which is real--you gave up everything that men hold dear. You have lost the Lucky Stone and are holding to the false, the stone of glass.

"'The wise say that those who reject the enjoyment which comes from their daily lives, and the mind which is filled with imaginary things, are self-destructive. By giving up your all, and running to the forest your mind did not attain Divine peace, even when the valuable Lucky Stone

[p. 86]

was laid before you. Then what advantage is to be gained by finding the stone of glass?

"'The gigantic elephant, I also applied to you. The two long tusks are discrimination and indifference. Your ignorance is the driver which inflicted suffering upon you, as the elephant was caused to suffer by the driver (the Mahout). The chain and fetters stand for desires. The chain and fetters which bound the elephant will wear out, but the bonds of desire become stronger every day. As the elephant shook itself free from the chains, so you gave up your kingdom. Throwing the Mahout, or driver of the elephant,--stands for overcoming the ignorance by the power of indifference to objects, or the fruits of your work. If we overcome the impure desires, then ignorance and rebirth will be destroyed.

"'To abandon the delusion of wealth, by sheer asceticism, will never dispel the ghost, but if the delusion of wealth is destroyed through discrimination, then the ghost of ignorance will leave forever.

"'At the time you reached this forest your ignorance was laid on the ground before you, but you did not cut its head off with the true renunciation. The great elephant did not kill the

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] Mahout, who was once laid on the ground at his feet. At that time if the elephant had put one foot upon the Mahout, then he would not have been made to fall into the trench, and suffer when he was  there.

"'But, O King, you have suffered more than the elephant here in the forest. You threw away the Lucky Stone, that, was true renunciation, but why did you not follow the advice of your wife? But you came to this forest and picked up the stone of glass, which was not worth anything.'

"The King declared: 'I have given up my kingdom, my dear wife and all. Is not this true renunciation, O Master?'

"The Master replied: 'True, you have given up your kingdom, your wife and all, but that is not renunciation, as you are a slave to your desires, even now. But by giving up all of them, you will attain the blessed state of Brahma.'

"The King said: 'All right, I will give up this forest and hills, I have no desire for them; now, I have made the true renunciation.'

"The Master again said: 'Giving up this beautiful forest, will not make the true renunciation, as long as you have with you impure desires.

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] When you give them up, then only, will you attain divine joy.'

"The King answered: 'If this is not true renunciation, then, I will give up the rest.'

"So the King threw his garments and all that he had into the fire and presented himself to the Master and said: 'Now, by thy grace, I have freed myself of all things and thoughts that were only bondage, and the seed of the rebirth. By giving up all desires I have set myself free, and attained the true renunciation by thy kindness. What else remains to be done, O Master?'

"The Master replied: 'You have not done any thing. What you call a true renunciation is only vain delusion.'

"The King said: 'While I remain within this body, the five snakes, which are the sense organs remain. Therefore, I shall give them up in your presence.'

"So the King prepared to kill himself.

"The Master stopped him by saying: 'What foolish thing are you trying to do? Is your body holding you from progress? 'What will you gain by giving up your body? To kill or destroy your body is not true renunciation. O

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] King, if you will give up the seed or cause of this body, which is the seed of rebirth, then you will make the true renunciation.'

"The King besought the Master to tell him how he might give up or control the cause, or the seed of the body.

"The Master said: 'The Wise say the mind, with its thoughts, called by many names, is one. The cause is attached to delusive objects. This restless mind forms the Universe and bondage. It is the mind which is the seed of all karma (spiritual cause and effect), and moves this body to and fro, like a tree in the wind. Controlling this mind is true renunciation and Godly Bliss. O King, all other renunciations are not true.

"'After reaching the true renunciation you will be illumined in mind, free from oscillation; then you will recognize your true self with the self of Brahma, and you will be radiant with glory.'

"The King asked: 'What is the cause of the mind? What is its true nature? How should I master it? O Master, enlighten me.'

"The Master answered: 'The true nature of the mind is determined by the desires, as mind

[p. 90]

and desires are one. Know, O King, the ideal of the "I" (Ego), which is the house in which exists all qualities of good and evil: this, is the seed of the mind. The first sprout that comes out of this seed is Egoism, and originates without form. Its apperception is by inner experience. This sprout is called Budhi (the reasoning intelligence). From this little shoot the many branches known as thoughts take their origin through differentiation. The thought of the mind, the reason and intelligence, called by different names are really only Egoism. If you try to cut off the branches (thoughts) of the tree of the mind, you will not succeed, as the branches will produce more and more, through desires. But if you cut the root of the tree with the ax of Wisdom, then the branches will die themselves, and the karma that causes the branches (desires) will disappear with them. But to merely cut off the branches, will not harm the tree of the mind. You should cut the root of the tree or through virtuous actions overcome the ideal of the Ego.'

"The King said: 'I am the Nature, that pure absolute consciousness which evolves. preserves, and destroys everything. I do not know the cause

[p. 91]

of the "I", which is the nature of Wisdom. I have not been able to find the means which will remove the Egoism, the seed of the treacherous mind. My mind betrayed me as I tried to overthrow this Ego, but it clings to me.'

"The Master said: 'No effect can be found without a cause. So search within to find the cause of the Egoism that is always within you. Answer me, O King.

"The King answered: 'The cause of this impure Egoism is the knowledge of the mind. How have I become mixed with this knowledge? I sink back when the knowledge of objects arise. How am I to arise above the objective world?'

"The Master answered: 'If you tell me the cause of knowledge, then I will give you the means to arise above it.'

"The King then said: 'The existence of the illusory objects of knowledge is produced through mind. If the illusory objects cease to exist, then no knowledge arises. Then the seed of the mind, Egoism will be absorbed.'

"The Master answered: 'As the illusory objects (body etc.) exist so the knowledge, but the illusory objects (body etc.) are unreal. Then what is the basis for knowledge, O King?'

[p. 92]

"The King replied: 'Tell me first, O Master, how the body which enjoys all karma, which  through organs, (hands etc.) can be unreal?'

"The Master answered: 'This body, arising through karma, cannot be the cause, therefore, neither the effect of intelligence, as it is itself illusory or nonexistent. The Egoism and all other illusory objects which arise through the delusion of knowledge are not real. Therefore, all the objects which are not of the nature of cause and effect, are not real, any more than the mistaken conception of the snake in the rope.'

"The King said: 'All are the creation of Brahma, who was alone in the beginning of the Universe. How, then, can you say that Brahma is not the cause of it?'

"The Master answered: 'Prior to the creation, the Parabrahma (Universal soul) alone shone as Truth, which is nondual and quiescent. He alone is without a second, then how can the Brahma be the cause?'

"The King asked: 'Is not Parabrahma (the Universal Soul) the cause?'

"The Master replied: 'Parabrahma (Universal Soul) is the emancipation, the imperishable, birthless, deathless, without beginning and without

[p. 93]

end. The non-dual and unspeakable can not be reached by thought. How can Parabrahma (Universal Soul) be the cause which is above the reach, of the mind and thought? How can one be an actor and an audience? As it would be impossible, it must follow that this Universe is not created by any one, nor is self-created. The Supreme Will of the Absolute Consciousness is the Brahma (God), nothing else is the one true Wisdom. All the objects created out of that Wisdom can be said to be none other, than the form of that Wisdom.

"'All is Brahma itself. Realize the one Reality, which will destroy ignorance, never to rise again. There is no other path through which to destroy the delusion of karma, which will surely vanish when ignorance and illusion are destroyed. The Brahmic (Godly) state will be attained, then the mind through all-pervading Wisdom will merge into Paramatma (God), and will never be evolved into new creations by thoughts. That which is called Brahma, through the Atmic Tattva (highest pure wisdom of the self), is none other than the latent aspect of the Universe.'

"The King replied: 'All that you have taught

[p. 94]

me is very reasonable. As before creation there was no Creator; so there is really no Universe, there are no objects; illusory things do not really exist according to your clear teaching. I understand the reality of myself and recognize that external objects do not really exist. I have worshipped myself through many substances. Now I realize that all were unreal, through this wise teaching. I have become one without a thought of a second, as one Akasa (Ether) is everywhere.'

"Through the Master's reasoning, the King realized his reality, also, the true discrimination of time and space.

"Mental activity is to understand the Universe, in all its different aspects. They have existed in your mind a long time, but they will depart, leaving only Brahma alone.

"The King was illumined by the Wisdom he attained and was immediately freed from Maya (illusion). He reached the state of Brahma or Brahmic (Divine) state and sank into Samadhi.

"After some hours he awakened from meditation, and the Master asked: 'Are you free from

[p. 95]

all passion? Have you enjoyed the Brahmic Bliss? Have you enjoyed the Brahmic seat which is fulness of all wealth? Have you attained Atmic Wisdom? Are you freed from all delusion? Have you met that which is worth meeting? Have you seen the Blessed One that is worthy to be seen?'

"The King replied: 'I have now the eternal peace. I have indeed reached the Brahmic state, which is above all. With thy kind help I have reached the Brahmajnan state, the powerful state of Divine Wisdom. O Master, why was I not able to reach this high state before?'

"The Master answered: 'When mind becomes absolutely at rest and one sees all with impartial eyes, with vision turned inward, with all impurities of the mind gone, then it is easy for the Master to help the disciple, as there is no doubt in the mind of the student.'

"'Doubt is the big stone in the road of divine wisdom. The king attained the wealth of wealth, bliss of bliss, which is the divine wisdom, and the highest good.

"'Master,' said the King, 'Are not the Jivanmukta (bodily emancipated) performing actions through their mind?'

"The Master answered: 'The mind is nothing

[p. 96]

without desire; mind and desires bind one to rebirth. If one knows himself (the divine self), there is no fear of rebirth. Truth sets them free. Those Jivanmukta (bodily emancipated) have realized the reality; therefore, their Minds do not generate impure desires, but generate pure desires. With pure desire, you do not create rebirth. The lower mind, or work done under the influence of the lower mind produce cause but the higher mind or work done under the influence of the higher mind does not produce any cause.'

"So the King gave up the idea of doing good for reward, but sought to do good for the sake of good. Give up the idea of going to heaven, then you will shine like the Light of Lights that is in all, and is everywhere,--which really you are. Let the lower mind go, that has a hankering to go from place to place, from earth to sky, and from sky to earth.

"With the control of the lower mind, the rebirth is also controlled,--becomes peaceful, immovable, then you become one with pure Wisdom (motion and non-motion).'

"'O, Master', said the King. 'How am I to attain that state where motion and non-motion is one?'

[p. 97]

"The Master replied: 'As the ocean is rippled by the waves, but is still one, so all the Universe is non-dual, is Absolute Consciousness, compelling, drawing intelligence unto itself. The ignorant will not understand the difference, how the Truth and Brahma is the Universe itself,--motion in itself,--this Universe Created by itself. If you realize this outwardly, then the blessed state is yours. This merely reverses the appearance, seen as the real cause, as the rope in the dark appears as a snake.

"'By following pure wisdom, and association with the wise., then the spiritual vision will develop; then only can you truly realize as I have explained to you--this creation and the destruction of the Universe.

"'If you practise according to your will, do your duty , then you will not fail to attain the Brahmic state. Does not that do away with all the differences that arise from delusion and ignorance?'

"The Master disappeared, and the King thought to himself,--how can I understand that I am All Peace, All Rest, All Bliss, and Absolute Truth? The King sank into Samadhi, which is above

[p. 98]

all pain, misery and the Universe. It is True Peace, and True Silence. The Master resumed the tender form of the Queen, and went through the sky by levitation to her chamber in the palace. There she again graciously ruled over her people three years.

"With her higher mind and power she changed her feminine body for a masculine form, and again visited the King, as she was teaching her King in the form of a Master.

"When she reached the forest where the King was, she found him in a seedless Samadhi. To acquaint him of her arrival she caused the forest to re-echo with her voice. This did not disturb the King, as he was not awakened from the seedless Samadhi. Though she shook him vigorously, he evinced no evidence of her presence.

"'This is truly wonderous', said the Queen, 'he has merged into the seat of Brahma, I will concentrate on his finer body. If I find any residue of truth typifying the seed of intelligence in his heart, I will join my King and live with him joyfully; otherwise, I shall have to give up my feminine form, and myself obtain the Brahmic

[p. 99]

[paragraph continues] State, then I will be free from re-birth.'

"The Queen concentrated on the finer form of the King, and found there was still a residue of good qualities in the heart of the King."

Ram asked: "When one's mind has control, and has merged into the inner vision, how can there still be a residue of good or bad qualities in the heart?"

Rishi Vashisht answered: "Like the tree, the branches, flowers, and fruit are all contained in the seed, so the cause of intelligence, like Satwa, always rests in the heart. The Jivanmukta (bodily emancipated) who has controlled his mind, does not die and is nut affected by diseases or pains,--he is living in the world, but above the world, like the Lotus flower that lives in the water, but does not get wet. Even in the heart of the Jivanmukta, the cause of the intelligence, latent in the heart, is like the tree that is in the seed.

"O Ram, the Great Yogin Queen gave up the grosser body of the Master and merged into the finer form of the King, that is, higher ,--without beginning or end. She caused it to vibrate and return to her body, as

[p. 100]

a bird to its cage. Again in the Master form, she chanted the Divine Song, which brought the King to consciousness, as the rays of the Sun make the Lotus flower bloom.

"The King saw his dear Guru (Spiritual Teacher) sitting before him. With great joy he praised the Master (Queen).

"The Master said: 'From the day I parted from you my mind did not find blessed peace. Even in the Higher Heavens, there is no joy for me, except with you.'

"The King replied: 'Blessed, Holy God, I have obtained this blessed state by Thy favor, and am freed from all pain and misery. Even the Higher Heavens did not give me the blessed joy that I have from the seedless Samadhi (trance-like meditation). Now I am Master of ail. Blessed Peace is mine. I can roam freely in Heaven and on earth.'

"The Master asked: 'Have you tasted the Brahmic Bliss,--God--like joy, which is above all pleasure and pains? Have you given up all older thoughts from which arise the ideas of, this is mine, and that is thine? Can you hold and equal vision over all? Are you able to do

[p. 101]

your daily duty without effort, or being affected by it? Are you free from hate and love? Have you realized your all?'

"The King replied: 'Indeed, I have acquired all the spiritual benefits. I have known all that is worth knowing, have seen all that is worth seeing, there is nothing that I long to see or hear.'

"So the Master (Queen) and the King with great respect for one another, enjoyed great bliss and Divine joy, as one in mind and one in everything. They had destroyed delusion of Maya, (illusion), by the pure Wisdom. They were firm like the Himalayan Mountains, not to be shaken by the rustling winds.

"The Queen in the form of the Master, found by the power of Samyam (highest concentration of the Raja Yogi), that the King's mind was pure and free from all illusion. She also thought, if one is filled with wisdom, shouldn't he enjoy the joy that comes without seeking; or how can it be said he or she had true wisdom? She thought she would interrogate the King further. 'There is a festival in the Higher Heavens to-day,' said the Queen, 'I shall be there, I will return tonight.'

[p. 102]

"The Queen discarded her heavy male body, and resumed her own beautiful form. She reached her palace by air, and performed her Queenly duties all day. After sunset she again went forth by levitating her body to the forest where the King was. The Queen resumed her disguise of the Master's form, descended before her husband with dejected mien, long and downcast heart.

The King rising said: 'My Perfect One, my Guru, what has affected you,--you are suffering from pain? What is it? May you overcome it as a person of Wisdom. You are not affected by pain or joy, as the water falling on the duck's back, does not affect her.'

"The Master related the following story: 'The true Jnani who visions all with an equal eye, and sees all in all, will never be a true Jnani as long as he does not use his organs, as long as he possesses a body. Otherwise, that person is an imposter. The ignorant are those who do not perform their karma (actions), but try to avoid them. They will suffer as they are trying to separate the oil from the mustard seed, which is inseparable. As long as the body exists, pains and pleasures remain. They who

[p. 103]

try to do away with affections and so forth, are like a man who tries to cut air with a sword. Pain and an impure body always go together. The Brahma has the organs of Karmaendriya (organs of action), and the Jnanendriya (organs of sense), and follows the path which is forever followed by the ignorant and wise, which has moved the concourse with Universal Law.

"'The Wise daily do their duty, as long as they stay in their bodies. They are not affected by performing actions, but the ignorant mind is never at peace, is ever moving and affected by pain and pleasure.

"'The Cause of my pain--it is not pain when told to those we love. This morning I went to the Higher Heavens for the meeting. I went there by air. After the meeting, when coming through the sky to this place, I saw before me the Rishi Divwasa coming through the clouds. I said to him, Thou art ill clad; and I acted like a silly woman whereupon the Rishi cursed me. He said, 'You are acting like a woman, so your form will change to female from now on, every night.' Hearing this I begged for pardon, but

[p. 104]

the Rishi disappeared. This is the cause of my distress. I have to change to woman's form every night. I am ashamed.'

"'Do not grieve,' said the King, 'changing your form will not change you from wise to ignorant, only the unwise can be so affected by pain.'

"'The sun is setting,' the Master (Queen) said to the King, 'and the change in me is taking place.'

"The King said: 'you are wise, and you know the true path, so you shall not be affected by the change.' So they retired for the night.

"At dawn the Queen was again the Master; so she was a man by day, and by night a woman.

"'O King, how long, I ask, are we going to live like this? I want to have a husband, but I cannot find one to equal you in the three worlds. You should marry me, without the fear of Heaven or Hell.'

"The King was prepared for her proposal, and made ready for the marriage rites. White silken robes were procured by the power of thought. When the sun set, the marriage ceremony

[p. 105]

took place. Every other day the King went into Samadhi (deep meditation), then the Queen would go to her Palace, perform her Queenly duties, and return to the forest before the King awakened from his Samadhi. Thus the time passed away.

"The Queen wanted to enquire into her husband's mind, so one day with power of her Yoga, she created a heaven of illusion in the forest, also an illusory God to appear before the King. When the King saw the God and His Heaven, he asked: 'What good karma have I performed to induce you to visit me?' "I am attracted by your love and , and I came to take you to the Higher Heavens. It is fitting for you to leave. The Divine Maidens will wait upon thee, and will always be at your command. O King, you will live there as long as you wish. This place is not good enough for you to live in; Heaven is the place for you, and you will not want to leave it. For that reason I came to take thee."

"The King with a gesture of gentle remonstrance, replied, 'I have known all the pleasure of Heaven. One locality is the same as another

[p. 106]

to me. Wherever I am, there is my Heaven and Bliss. Be pleased to return to your throne. I have no desire to go with you.' Hearing this, the Indra (God) disappeared. The Queen felt that the King had attained Master control.

"The Queen decided to try the King further. It chanced that the King was sitting at the Holy Ganges watching the Moon rise. The Queen, with power of thought, created a lover and embraced him. When the King came out of his trance and found his wife in the company of another man, he returned to the river at once, without disturbing his peace of mind. When the Queen went to the King, with embarrassment, she appeared before her husband, ashamed. Without evincing the least sign of anger, he said tenderly: 'Why did you, my dear, leave your lover so soon?--If you wish you may go back to him and gratify your passion.' Thus spoke the king without anger.

"'It is the duty,' said the Queen, 'of a good husband to overlook the faults of his wife, who is ignorant and carried away by her emotions; and I am trusting that you will forgive me.'

"The King replied: 'The sun may rise in the

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] West, but never will anger arise in me. A house may be built in the air, but anger will never arise in me. I have controlled both love and hate.'

"The Queen understood that her husband was really a Master, and had attained the pure Wisdom of Divine Peace.

"'The time has now arrived for me to show myself in my true colors, and let him see me as I really am.' She assumed her Queenly body and appeared before him. The King beheld his Queen, whom he had left at his Kingdom twenty years ago. He could not believe his eyes.

"'How is this. Am I beholding my Queen? Who are you, please speak?'

"The Queen replied: 'Yes, I am your wife, with whom you have lived for nearly one hundred years. You left me at the Palace when you retired to the forest.'

"'So dearest, it was you who came in the guise of Master Kunbhamuni to save me?'

"'It was I who took the form of Master; it was I who gave you Divine Wisdom; it was I who took the Madanika (another woman's form); it was I who tested your Wisdom. Now

[p. 108]

go into Samadhi; then you will understand all that has been happening,' said the Queen.

"The King went into Samadhi, the Brahmic or Universal consciousness. In that state he saw all the events and remembered them from the time he vacated his kingdom, to the time of his appearing to his Queen Chundalai in her feminine body. When he came out of his Samadhi, he was blessed with divine peace and joy. With joy he looked upon his wife who was standing before him. He embraced her, who was the embodiment of pure love and grace.

"The King could not find words with which to thank his wife. Later he began to speak: 'Through your great Wisdom you have saved me, who was crying in the darkness from ignorance. Who is there in the Universe to equal thee? You are the Blessed Light, dispelling the fear of the ignorant. How can I repay thee for all that you have done for me? You are on equality with the Divine Mother [**]:

[p. 109]

"'I saw you in despair,' lovingly replied the Queen. 'Your self-imposed penances were destroying your body. That kind of penance is used only by the ignorant. I came to save and lift you from worldly pain. Do not praise me. I but did my duty. Tell me, dear husband, are you free from the world's troubles? Have you reached the divine state which will not be affected by action or thought?'

"'All doubt and desire have vanished from my mind,' said the King. 'I shall never fall through the senses. I have become like Askasa (Ether). I am above pain or pleasure. I have attained the highest Samadhi. There is no joy like the joy of Samadhi. I have reached the highest state; I am the Sun of the Suns; I am the Light of the Lights; I am pure Wisdom; I am the Absolute Consciousness. I realize my Reality, which is none other than THAT (God). My wife, you are my Spiritual Teacher. I worship Thee.'

"'What do you intend to do next,' questioned the Queen?

"'From now on,' answered the King, 'according to thy dictates, I shall perform my duties. I will live in the world, but not of it, like the

[p. 110]

[paragraph continues] Lotus flowers which grow in the lake but never get wet.'

"'If Thou art willing to do as I say, then let us go back and reign over our Kingdom, as Jivanmuktas (bodily emancipated).'

"'I will do as you say,' replied her husband.

"The Queen then created an elephant. It was decorated with rubies and other gems. They both mounted the elephant's back, and when they came near the town, with the power of her mind she created an army to escort them into the city. They were received by their people.

"The King and Queen were enthroned, and ruled wisely and well ten thousand years, and then they gave up the bodies and attained emancipation of the Soul.

"O Ram, do you daily karma. Pure wisdom will develop in you. You will reach the Blessed state Which the King and Queen have attained,--Liberation."

Thus spoke the great Rishi Vashisht of Wisdom, to Ram.

[p. 111]

  

MAHABHARATA xii. 293 ff.

    "When old and grey, when strength decays,
 By foes when crushed, in evil days,
 From fortune's heights when downward hurled--
 Yes, then let men renounce the world;
 But not in days of youth and health,
 When crowned with glory, blest with wealth.
 Those scripture texts which praise as best
 A life ascetic, lone, unblest,
 Dragged sadly on in gloomy woods,
 And dreary, doleful solitudes,
 Are fictions hatched in squalid schools
 By needy unbelieving fools,
 Which look like truth, but proved, are found
 To rest on no substantial ground.

    "To savage beasts it is not given
 By forest life to merit heaven;
 Yet this same life, by hermits led,
 Their future bliss ensures, 'tis said! [p. 112]

    "When men no pleasure feel, nor pain,
 A state of stupid torpor gain.
 They then have reached perfection, rise
 To heaven, so say the would-be wise.
 But should not trees,--if this be true,--
 And boulders, gain perfection too?
 For they are calm and torpid, feel
 Nor pain nor pleasure, woe nor weal;
 They dread no want, they seek no ease,
 Like self-tormenting devotees.

    "Abandon, then, thy vain design;
 By kingly virtues seek to shine.
 See how by acts all mortals strive
 Their ends to gain, through effort thrive,
 Inaction ne'er perfection brings;
 From strenuous deeds alone it springs."

Translation by J. Muir. For more, readers should look in the Metrical Translation from Sanskrit writers.

Footnotes

^63:* Universal Soul.

^63:** Third Age in Brahma. (see pg. 80, 81 Great Masters of the Himalayas).

^108:* In India we have a Mother God, not a Father God. We address her Adakali (Divine Mother).

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

THE GREAT EGOIST--BALI

The Master Vashisht continued:

"The illumination of wisdom came like the dawn to the heart of Pavana, who had been initiated by his brother, the Muni Punya. Both of these brothers having attained Atmic wisdom, lived in the forest. For many years they enjoyed the quiet pleasures of solitude and at last reached the calm of bodiless bliss [**]--like lights which have consumed both wick and oil. For this is the fate of all beings.

"If one, in his many incarnations is related to all, where then, is the necessity of love or hate? The most reasonable course is to forego extreme and excessive desires, not to enlarge upon them. If desire is allowed to flourish lit becomes food for contemplation. When desire passes, so does the structure of thought built about it, collapse and perish. This is indeed. truth.

[p. 114]

"O Ram, mount the great edifice of renunciation and behold in spiritual vision this insignificant universe palpitating with unruly desires--then you will indeed know that you lack nothing. This exalted state contains the truth of Brahma without. impurity, delusion or the plague of ignorance. If this state be attained by faith even though the intelligence is meager, its devotees will not be subject to delusion. Therefore, O Ram, lead thus your life.

"With the progressive development of intelligence and the exercise of a fine discrimination all pain will cease. Even though one may find a close ally in a Guru, [***] it is only through individual energy and will, that all pains arising from association with kinsmen and heterogeneity can be destroyed. Having labored diligently through Atmic enquiry, books of wisdom, and noble benevolence, your mind is forced to follow the Atmic life--then pain will cease. The collective wealth of all worlds will not compare with the happiness arising from the blissful mind which has found emancipation.

[p. 115]

"Like a sandal protects the foot, however stony the path, so also, does the mind fill the whole of creation with purest joy. A mind filled to the fullest with neutrality of vision will never entertain mundane desire; nor a mind confused by conflicting desires ever have its grievances completely redressed. A mind free from desire yields pure thoughts, as readily as Muni Agastya sipped the waters of the ocean in the space of a moment; the radiance of the full moon has not such refulgence, nor does Lakshmi [**] reposing on fragrant Lotus grant such a boon.

"The ghosts of desire will dim the lustre of the stainless mind just as clouds hide the moon, or black stains deface polished stone. Liberation means only the destruction of the impurities of the mind and this mind is developed only when desire and fears of rebirth are destroyed. If this is not possible, O Ram, thou shalt arrive at wisdom by the path followed by the great Bali. Such a course is beneficial."

Thereupon Ram asked him to relate the story of Bali.

[p. 116]

Rishi Vashisht replied: "There once lived a great king who was also a great egoist. He reigned over Patala [***] as an emperor. The whole world trembled beneath his autocratic rule; even the gods were overpowered and humbled before him. He was the son of the noble Virochana, and reigned mightily for ten million years.

"One day he mounted to the parapet atop his palace--his palace which was studded with gems brought from the Manhameru [****] Heights. There in solitude he spoke the travail of his mind. He was satiated with the material pleasure of his world and his speech was replete with bitterness.

"'Of what avail is this undisputed sovereignty which has enable me to enjoy the wealth of these three worlds, when I reflect that the pleasures of wealth are but fleeting, and that I repeat to-day's actions again tomorrow with only a gain of momentary ? Enjoyed incidents do recur again; ornaments worn proudly yesterday are put on again to-day. We observe that even

[p. 117]

the intelligent do not become appeased by these recurrences and are not ashamed to enjoy them again, like children who feast repeatedly on sweets.

"'Thy cycle of days, months, years and yugas roll on, and the old is ever old, though decked in the changing garments of the mode.

"'Has the faithful performance of my duties improved my life in the slightest degree? What will bring me possession of THAT and free me of action and its results? Where is the path which will lead me to THAT which is peace, free from illusion?'

"Deep in reflection he sought the Principle which is eternal and at last was rewarded by the solution. With eyes flashing with joy he burst into speech.

"'It was in this very place that I enquired about this Principle from my omniscient father, Virochana. He explained then the manner in which I might remove my doubts when I asked (him, what is that incomparable state in which the illusions of pain and pleasure are lost, wherein the mind's delusions find oblivion, and where desires are uprooted?' I begged that he would

[p. 118]

describe to me the attainment of that goal which knows not the 'restraint of desires and the gloomy despondences of the mind.

"'Tell me, O Father, I beseech thee what is the state which is wholly permeated with Absolute bliss? O thou Knower of the Supreme, enlighten me and release me from the torment of doubts which arise!'

"And thus Virochana replied:

"'Harken to my words. There is a beautiful country which is illimitable and all pervading. In it the worlds arise and into it the worlds are absorbed. In this country there are not the five grand elements, nor are there hills, forest, temples, Devas or even the ancient souls. Illumination is the name of the King who exists there, alone. He is omnipotent, omniscient, the cause of all, perfectly quiescent and refulgent. He is Silence itself. He will unfailingly cause all acts to be performed by a minister appointed by him. The instant that a thought arises in the minister, the idea, though previously non-existent, immediately crystallizes into actuality and as mysteriously disappears. The minister enjoys nothing by his own right nor does he know anything. Acting always in concert

[p. 119]

with the King he is able to do all things. Though the minister stands always in the presence of the King, the King remains invisible and solitary.'

"So saith the father to his son.

"The son had listened appreciatively to the words of his father. Now he questioned.

"'What is the character of this enlightened country which is without disease and misery,. which though apart, yet pervades all? How can it be reached? By what means can it be attained? Who is the immortal King of that strange country? Who is his minister? Who is the mighty King, who, as if in sport, will make me ruler of this universe?'

"His father answered. 'Who is able to over-step the rigorous law of the powerful minister? Even though the hosts of the world beleaguer him, they can never overpower him. Though spears be hurled against him they will be as futile as flowers flung at a stone wall. Only the King can command obeisance from his minister, for it were easier to move the great Himalayas than to bring Him into subjection. It takes a very superior intelligence

[p. 120]

to subdue the minister, for he is like an angry serpent who when trod upon will hiss and strike.

"'All this, my son, is symbolic. The country in my story is liberation, incomparable and eternal; the King is Atmic Reality, inseparable from 'liberation and refulgent with eternal light; the -minister of the King typifies the mind or intelligence. The symbol and realization of supreme authority is the subjection, control and eradication of sensual pleasures and the building-up of an indifference to them. When the mind has overcome desire, then it resembles a mischievous elephant safely caged.

"'Those unacquainted with the true books of wisdom maintain that of the four parts into which they divide time, one-half should be devoted to a study of sensual objects, one-quarter to study of the Books of Wisdom, and the remaining quarter to the worship of a blessed Guru (spiritual teacher); that if this be done, wisdom will replace ignorance.

"'The partially knowing assert that of the four divisions one should devote half the time to contemplation and worship of a Guru, a quarter to meditation upon the spiritual truths

[p. 121]

contained in the Books of Wisdom, and the remaining quarter to the study of the actions of the sensual organs. The wisdom will prevail in him, and he will know the supreme truth.

"'The third class, who are of the wise elect;. affirm that liberation will be attained by those, who, dividing the concentration of the mind into four parts devote them to the four purposes of a study of the Books of Wisdom, which outline the pursuit of the path of Atmic Reality. Self-knowledge, desirelessness, worship, and worship of a Guru.

"May you, my son, through diligent enquiry and intelligent effort, understand Atmic worship and the subjugation of desire simultaneously. By a determined master of your desires, Atmic enquiry naturally follows, and in turn Atmic enquiry induces a relinquishment of desire. They are mutually dependent one upon the other, like' the clouds which fill the ocean.

"'Having earned, in proper ways, wealth for. relieving one's kindred and dependents. one should, by the help of that wealth, promote the qualities of truthful conduct and gradually assume indifference to the world of objects and

[p. 122]

futile pleasures. This is the state those reach who live in Jnana (wisdom). This is the glory of peace.'

"Soliloquizing thus, he asked himself, 'Who am I and what is my real nature?' After a moment's reflection he concluded that if he invoked his Guru, who had attained Realization, and should enquire of him the truth, then ignorance would forsake him. Therefore, with closed eyes he meditated affectionately upon his Guru. Thereupon his Guru took form before him, a form constituted of the blessed air. With an enraptured heart the King saluted him and spread fragrant flowers before the resplendent Guru.

"Beloved Guru, deign to hear my words and bless me accordingly. What is the NOW? What is there BEYOND? What is THAT which is limited? Who am I who speaks? And YOU who hear? What is this material universe? Favor me, Divinity, with answers to quiet all my doubts.'

"'The Guru pondered for a moment and then replied: 'I am on my way to Heaven where dwell the immortals. Why should I take unnecessary time or waste words? Briefly, I tell you this, all the manifestations before us here are wrought

[p. 123]

of wisdom, the unmanifested is also wisdom; I, who speak, am wisdom, and pure wisdom are you, who hear. The entire universe is naught but all-full wisdom. Take these conclusions, impress them upon your mind and meditate upon the Reality of Wisdom. If you can accept Reality, you will attain the Supreme state. The Sapta-Rishi [**] has just now entered a new state; therefore, I shall pass.' So saying the Guru of Bali retired.

"Contemplating the truth of his Guru's words, he became convinced that ALL IS WISDOM. This earth is none other than the manifestation of Wisdom; the three worlds are Jnana; my real nature is Jnana. The fates are Jnana. I have become the shining Brahmic One, who scintillates undimmed by the visual or the sensual. I have become the One principle, which unbound by objectives, pervades all at one and the same time--intelligence itself.

"Mentally vibrating to Om, which is the true significator of Absolute Wisdom, Bali entered a

[p. 124]

trance-like state, which was free from thought, desire or doubts, and there he remained statue-like in Samadhi for a long period.

"Thus did the Emperor Bali remain motionless, as the flame of a lighted lamp in a sheltered, windless place. And since he was illumined by the Truth, unstained by love or hate, his mind merged into Divine Peace. Such a condition can best be compared to clear, autumnal sky.

"Seeking their Emperor, his courtiers found him deep in Samadhi.

"After a long time, Bali awoke and went about his regal duties, his mind free from desire and egotism. His pure mind was never again flurried in adversity or prosperity, neither did he lose himself in either pleasure or pain. Thus his equable gaze viewed all impartially, however numerous were the hosts of good and had thoughts that arose in his mind. As the procession of countless objects passed before him, the controlled them all.

"So shall you, O Ram, pillion your mind, roving amid the pleasures of this and higher worlds, in the centre of your heart. Wherever your mind stumbles like an awkward child and falls into

[p. 125]

sensuality, you must lift it to the indivisible Jnana and there let your mind become one with wisdom. By daily and consistent practice you may chain the terrible elephant of mind, so that  by pain, you will enable it to reach liberation through control."

So saith the great Master, Rishi Vashisht.

Footnotes

^113:* Death.

^114:** Spiritual Teacher.

^115:* Goddess of wealth.

^116:** America.

^116:*** Himalaya Mountains.

^123:* One of the seven Rishis.

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

KING JANAK

"We must understand, in the words of Muni-Kacha, that this universe in reality IS NOT, and that it is formed only by the varying intensities of the flow of consciousness. Consciousness may be compared to a powerful revolving light which leaves in darkness, that which it illumined so brightly the instant before. Therefore, when the light of consciousness reveals this universe, the universe seems real. Take away the light and the world loses reality. So it is that from conscious knowledge and Atmic wisdom the universe becomes real to us.

"To the seekers after name, fame and pleasure, the house of the mind is founded on the delusion of birth and death. But the adherents of truth will be free from these delusions, for birth is but death (or cessation of consciousness) to former life, and death is birth (or renewed consciousness) into another period of life.

"All is Brahma and the 'I' is Brahma,--relinquish

[p. 127]

the idea that the universe is something outside the 'I'. The objects of creation arising from Brahmic wisdom do not really exist, but are as the foamy spray cast up by the ocean. One principle alone Brahma is constant, enduring and eternally IS. Pleasure nor pain, nor the whirlpool of birth and death do not really exist. Brahma alone exists.

"Experience and inference teach the transient nature of fleeting pleasure and pain. Why then dwell upon them? Forget the past and the future and rest in the neutral state of truth, putting aside the duality of love and hate. Look equally upon all, steadfast in the certainty of Atmic wisdom, secure in the stronghold of mind withheld from  objects.

"So may you, O lotus-eyed Ram, be the crystal, which mirrors pain but does not suffer it.

"Thus Atmic wisdom will flush the dawn of the final birth. For where shall one seek the lustrous bamboo pearl, but in the bamboo clusters? For in these blessed ones, nobility, love, benevolence and clarity of intellect find residence, and these qualities of Atmic wisdom draw to them the people of the world like the melodious

[p. 128]

flute brings rapture even to the hearts of kine. "Two paths lead to liberation. On one, the faithful following of the precepts laid down by a Guru shall let delusion fall away, to be replaced with emancipation. Peace shall come either in the immediate birth or in a succeeding birth. The other path is open to one whose mind is already bulwarked by knowledge, and who will, by meditation, cultivate the fertile seed into the full blossom of wisdom.

"Of the second path this story is related: An emperor, fearless, generous and of untold wealth once reigned over this universe. Into his domain never a taint of jealousy or envy entered. This King, Janak by name, and Videha by reputation, whose noble heart embraced the world, was a true protector of his people.

"In the first days of vernal spring King Janak walked in his charming garden among his  flowers. Without its gates the guards were stationed. Strolling about, the King heard the murmuring voices of the Sidhas (they who have attained the One-ness) from the hills. Hear attentively, O Ram, the songs of the Sidhas--they who have withdrawn from the pleasures of the

[p. 129]

visible.

"Chanted a Sidha...

"'In the union of the Knower and the Known lies the bliss or wisdom. Seek this wisdom, so that the unreal many become the real.'

"Another sang...

"'Desire will destroy the visible. Contemplate Atmic reality--the beacon to the eagle vision of higher spirituality.'

"From the chorus of voices...

"'Having become all-pervading, like he who sits between truth and untruth, meditate always upon Atmic wisdom, the Light of Lights.

"'To seek without for God, is like one who goes in quest of bright bits of glass, unmindful of the jewel blazing his own hand.

"'Atma is attained only by those who have controlled their desires. Those who recklessly entangle themselves in the quick sands of human experience, knowing better, can only be called asses.

"'The hissing serpents of the desirous organs must be slain by the mind; just as the great god Indra levelled the mountains to dust by his thunderbolt.

[p. 130]

"The mind, free from delusion which calmly surveys all as one, will attain Atmic Reality--the plenum of complete bliss. This is liberation.

"The sage counsels of the Sidhas, awoke consternation in the mind of King Janak. He left behind his cool scented garden, entered his palace and dismissed his attendants.

"Seeking a quiet apartment on the top floor of his palace, he gave himself to meditation upon the wise utterances of the Sidhas. In contemplation he hoped to discover the true meaning of these blissful counsellors. He thought how the people of the world were like birds forever on the wing, fluttering hither and thither from this bush to that flower, only to drop at last with weariness, and perish. The good King cried out in his anguish of mind.

"'Annoyances beset me. Worries, doubts and circumstances enmesh me in this uncertain world. I spin about like a leaf in a whirlpool. When I reflect that time in its true nature is eternal. I cannot but deem the one hundred years of my life, as a moment in eternity. Why, then,

[p. 131]

do I value my life so greatly and allow my strong desires to throw me into confusion and dejection? What greater debasement than a mind despoiled of tranquility? That I should consider for a moment this unsettled existence. This world of pain I rule is but an atom among the countless universes. Search as I will, I can find nothing which remains constant and beneficent, even for a fleeting moment. Behold the incongruities of this world. The greatest shall be dust, even as the lowliest. Wealth! Have I fancied riches real? Name and fame! The great men of ancient times and their valorous deeds have vanished. Where, then, is the certainty that the achievements of my time shall persist?

"'The myriad worlds with their rulers and wealth have perished, like sand washed into the sea. Where, O my distraught mind, have these universes gone? So shall this, my world, go the way of eternity. My desires and my illusions have led me to believe in a permanency, which does not exist. My many deaths have taught me nothing. When shall the blessed time come when I shall seek and find THAT, which has no end? About me the objects of the world wear

[p. 132]

the shrouds of destruction. Every instant of every day, the ignorant walk the paths of perdition their bodies enacting the baneful deeds of pleasure and pain. In youth they are unwise; maturity finds them entangled in the meshes of passion and the burden of the world bows them down in old age.

"'Harassed from birth to death, doing the deeds of desire, how can they find time to pursue virtue and seek the eternal truth? Illusion dances in this world like a will-o-wisp, and my mind dances in unison with illusion--both specters of the Real in this unreal theatre.

"'Untruth is an excrescence upon the Crown of Truth, and pain thrusts its talons into the side of Virtue. Since pain is the accompaniment of pure and impure pleasure alike, how may we discern the difference between them? If between the opening and closing of my eyes many Brahmas are created and destroyed, what is my puny self before them? Great wealth breeds pain in the mind of its owner, but a thing fraught with peril, becomes a source of 'happiness, for a mind which controls it rightly. It is only the worldly life which is the source of pain. Can happiness

[p. 133]

enter a life submerged in worldliness? The tree of the ignorant mind sprouts from the root of delusion and its branches bear poison fruits.

"'Mind is the thinking principle. By the discipline of thought, the mind itself can easily be controlled. The extinction of delusion controls birth and death. Oh, I know at last the thief who has robbed me of the Atmic jewel of my Self. His name is Mind. Long and grievously I have suffered, I shall impale him with his own bright sword of thought.

"'Until now I have not been able to pierce the pearl of mind. Now I will string this pearl upon the strand of experience, and with it adorn my person. I have listened well to the wise counsels of the omniscient Sidhas. At last I rest in the bliss in which the great Brahma floats. The unrealities of me and thee have dropped away, and I will never permit them to return.

Victory is mine over the mighty adversary of mind, who despoiled me of Atmic wisdom, and pain has ceased its affliction. I have attained the life of sustained peace. Great wisdom has rolled

[p. 134]

back the ponderous door to freedom; my adoration is thine.'

"Thus did King Janak rest motionless in Samadhi, having controlled the fluctuation and vacillation of his mind. After a long period of Samadhic bliss he looked anew upon his world, his vision cleared of the fog of desire. He reflected that he had no objective for which to strive in this world. His clear sight scrutinized the world for illusion and found pure wisdom.

"'I know nothing,' he rejoiced, 'but my immaculate divine wisdom, the realization of my Self. I shall neither seek nor turn from any object in this world. I shall remain constant in my divine Self. Events will transpire as pre-ordained.' So saying, the King was enveloped in Brahmic bliss.

"As the warm sun in the sky, without volition or desire, causes the growth of seeds in the ground, so King Janak performed the duties, which arise daily without exultation or longing. Giving heed neither to the past nor the future, productive as such cogitation is of discontent,. King Janak met the present serenely, with an undivided heart and mind.

[p. 135]

"The Atmic enquiry engendered by the words of the Sidhas, brought quiescence of mind, O Ram, to the ruler of the world, King Janak; for the wisdom of Atma can be attained only by the pure and beautiful Atmic enquiry, and not by following the ways of the worldly. For worldlings long for other goals than Atma, and realization comes only to those who have sought it faithfully. Therefore, O Ram, destroy ignorance, which slinks like a hungry wolf on the desert, that is the world.

"To the wise, the precious jewel of wisdom enthroned in their minds, will bring in a moment whatsoever they wish, like the Kalpa tree which produced any fruit one desired. Love and hate cannot dent the armour of those who dwell in Atmic bliss. The dense mist of egoism screening the Sun of Brahma obscures the intelligence, and will be cleared only by the heavenly wind of divine wisdom. He who aspires to the Supreme Brahmic throne must banish desires from his mind, for is not the ground well-tilled before the planting of the seed?"

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

SURAGHO

"Even though thou pursue thy appointed path through the world, O Ram, there is beneficent quietude in the throne of the All-Wise, if thou but recognize the Knower with thy mind. So long, Ram, as you attain the Atmic state by thy constant mastery of externals, your mind will ever be engaged in enquiry into the unlimited pure wisdom (inculcated by your wise Guru and the Holy precepts). The supreme state may be reached through Atmic enquiry; by turning aside from worldly objects., discernment of the true significance of the Books of Wisdom; one's own intelligence; initiation by a Guru; refraining from taking the life of any living thing; purity; or it can be attained by one's intelligence alone. Lacking all else, liberation will be his who is possessed of subtle and stainless intelligence, and is initiated by a Guru.

Upon hearing Muni Vashisht, Ram enquired:

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] "The persons named by you divide into two classes. One class frees itself of pain and attains the unity of wisdom by going into Samadhi while still doing the work of the world; the other retires from action in the world and goes into Samadhi. Of these two which is superior? Please enlighten me clearly on this point."

To which Vashisht answered: "In Samadhi there is recognition of the inactivity of this world. The mind becomes completely passionless, with no concern for the world or its objects. Whether one enters Samadhi from amid the turmoil of the world, or the quiet depths of a forest, there is no difference. Both have attained complete equipoise of mind, and the incalculable fruits of the great meditation are theirs. In this state of illumination, the serenity of mind is absolute. Therefore, O Ram, it matters not by what door one enter:, the sublime state of Samadhi--within lies liberation.

"When the desires are extinct, the performance of actions will be as if not done, like one, who, deep in mental concentration does not hear the voices of by-standers. But if the gross mind still has desire, though one has withdrawn

[p. 138]

from worldly action, then one's actions are performed in the dreaming state when the body is as if paralyzed. Know, O Ram, when the mind performs action, but is yet free from it, that state is called the blissful Samadhi; the unchanging Nirvana and  bliss.

"The two kinds of vision, meditation and non-meditation, are the results of the steady mind and the oscillating mind. Therefore, all the attributes of the mind must be controlled. It is said, that meditation is the firm mind itself, devoid of desire or vexatious thoughts. Pain, internal or external, wears away in this Nirvanic state. A mind which is above its worries will reach Nirvana. Desires breed endless pain and misery in mental worry, and should therefore be reliquished.

"When all conception of "I" among the multitude of visibles is vanquished, it does not matter where you live, O Ram, whether in a house, on a hillside or in the great forest. The blessed of quiescent mind, who have let go egoism find in the busiest household, the solitude of the forest. They who stroll in a street. desiring nothing therein, really possess the street. Similarly, to

[p. 139]

those in full spiritual beatitude, the city and the wood are the same. The forest retreat and the city abode become alike to him of introspective mind, and the functions of sleeping, waking or walking do not disturb this tranquillity of mind.

"O quiescent mind, thou twin of Prana, thy cooling dew will chill the hot flowers of desire, and over all the universe shall be sweet peace. But should the mind become heated with the illusion of the world, then the hot breath of desire will sweep over the universe, like a great raging forest fire, leaving but ashes in its wake.

"The inner processes of mind are revealed in external actions. The earth, sky and air are all manifestations of the lower mind. He who loses himself in earthly joys will never enjoy the surpassing delight of Samadhi. But he who recognizes that the function of the lower mind must operate, but yet is aloof from mundane enjoyment, finds pure delight in Atma (wisdom). He who lives in the life of others, spurning wealth, and seeing the world as it really is, is the real Knower.

"Whether death comes now or at the end of a

[p. 140]

cycle, these wise ones will never be corrupted in mind. The Vedas proclaim them as the blessed conquerors of the illusory conceptions of duality and belief in endings and beginnings, true enjoyers of bliss. By these characteristics, may we recognize those who have attained wisdom. But the recognition will not aid, O Ram, in the conception of the universal soul, for in words alone wisdom does not lie. Only in the divine word OM is Brahma hidden.

"O, benignant Ram, I shall relate to thee a story which illustrates the attainment of Atmic wisdom. Hear thou this history of Suragho, which is indeed wonderful.

"Suragho was a mighty hunter and ruler of the Kiratas [**]. He lived with his people, who were adepts in archery, in the Kailasa hills on the summit of the Himalayas.

"Whilst he administered royal justice with strict impartiality, rewarding the righteous and punishing the wrongdoers, he soliloquized: 'If in the exercise of my royal power I afflict my people, are not their pains mine? Yet, if I do not punish them according to prescribed law, they shall have lived in vain. It is indeed a difficult

[p. 141]

task to rule over a kingdom.'

"The tender king was sorely troubled in mind.

"Muni Mandavya made a timely appearance. To him Suragho paid honor, and addressed him: 'O virtuous Muni, thy coming fills me with happiness. It is indeed a blessing to know that I am in thy notice. Thou, righteous Lord, hast long been free from melancholy of spirit. Help me to clear my mind of the misgivings that assail me. What else torments the mind of man more than doubt? My head is awhirl, O Muni, with the miseries and joys my subjects experience in obeying my will. Let the sun of wisdom light the darkness of my mind, and equality of vision comfort me.'

"Muni Mandavya replied: 'Atmic enquiry will clear away the fog of illusion, . Ask thyself ceaselessly, Who am I? Whence came the universe? Whence came birth and death? If you do this faithfully the reward of the Brahmic Seat shall be yours. When you make Atmic enquiry habitual, your mind will obey your will and you will cease your agonizing. To a poised mind the ups and downs of life appear trivial.

[p. 142]

[paragraph continues] Does the elephant flee at sight of oxen tracks? What is of no consequence to the wise is appalling to others. For does not the rain, gathered in the footprint of a cow, seem an ocean of incalculable area to a mosquito? Know thou, Suragho, that the farther removed thou art from worldly distractions, the brighter the light of God illumines thee. Just so long as you are engrossed in the affairs of the world, the true principle of God will not be recognized by you. Deific light will not shine when dualities still exist in the mind. It is as difficult to realize Atmic Reality, as to know that the alchemy of gold is not more to nature, than that of the baser metals. Therefore, longing for the things of the world must cease. The reward is the attainment of --the supreme Brahmic state. O illustrious hunter, control your mind, and keep it free from bodily and unwise desires; so shall you then attain the stainless and beneficent Principle.'

"So saying Muni Mandavya returned to his own abode.

"The mighty hunter withdrew into his cave and in solitude began enquiry into origin of

[p. 143]

the "I". His meditations took the following form.--How absurd, he thought, to call my body "I", for my body is composed of flesh and bone, which in its separate arts is passive. Hence my body is not 'I'. The ten organs of sense are other than the 'I'. I am not, then, the organs of my body. What remains is ego. What actuates my ego? Consciousness. But the universal consciousness cannot be termed the Reality. Therefore, I shall free myself from the Jiva [**] state and become "THAT" [***] which above all else, I desire to know. The fullness of wisdom,  and stainless, alone is my Reality. This  Wisdom pervades all like the strand upon which pearls are strung,--Vishnu, Brahma, Devendra, Yama and all other states. This supreme and powerful Wisdom or Realization is not tainted by worldliness, is of divine aspect, and finds completion in all objects; has neither existence nor non-existence; is subtle and permeates all, even the abode of Truth where lives Brahma. This consciousness is the residual of all other potencies. It is due to motion or fluctuation of this consciousness, and to nothing else, that the diversified objects of this world are due.

[p. 144]

"Having  the objective world and freed himself from the shackles of desire and delusion--delusion which follows one even in his seventh rebirth--Suragho maintained equality of vision, as one stationary in the Sushupti [**] state. Free at last, though living in Atmic reality, he reached the Brahmic state and attained the status of a Brahman, like unto Raja Rishi Viswamitra, of extraordinary meditation.

"Thus did Suragho reach the Sushupti or dreamless state, wherein action is stilled, like a picture of a candle alight. In that state he was, and the opposites of love and hate, blessing or curse, association or separation, intelligence or ignorance, assailed him not.

"Vashisht continued, O Ram, pillar of strength hear also what took place between Suragho who attained, and a Raja Rishi named Parnada. Suragho had a friend, Parigha by name, of the race of Paraseeka, who was also a king. When Parigha's kingdom suffered a ten year drought, and famine and his people perished in great numbers, his heart gave way . He left his native country and went into a forest to meditate, denying himself food and subsisting

[p. 145]

upon dry leaves. Because of this he was called Parnada [**]. Through the renunciation he practiced and his holy meditations, he attained Atmic wisdom, for none could compete with the strenuosities of this kingly recluse. This Muni, who traveled the three worlds as though he walked thru the room of a dwelling, appeared before King Suragho. Each responded to the other's affectionate greeting and found pleasure in reciting their respective experiences.

"In welcome Suragho said, 'My heart overflows with joy and exquisite bliss. I hail thee, O, honorable One.'

"Parnada answered; 'The sight of thee lifts me into that Jnana [***] state into which Muni Mandavya initiated you. O, King, art thou able to direct thy worldly affairs with equality and clarity of vision? Hast thy body, changed by the passing years, remained free from diseases, either physical or mental? Canst thou preserve thy equilibrium of mind amid the inordinate luxuries of wealth? Hast thou been able to merge into Samadhi [****] without thought, by following the paths of extreme serenity and solitude and

[p. 146]

forms actions or not, he who has Realized will always be poised in the Samadhic state. O Brother in Attainment, they who have not equanimity of mind will never be able to go into Samadhi, even though they sit in the Padme posture and offer salutations to Brahma. It is the fullness of Atmic wisdom which constitutes the noble Samadhi. If the mind controlled by concentration knows Reality, such a wise one may be said to enjoy Samadhi. The intelligence of the wise, free from illusion, yet mindful of worldly action, will not forget for a moment the eternity of Atmic Reality. As air flows freely in any direction, the wise intelligence will always follow the path of unchanging Atmic wisdom. The wise, who are in rapport with the indivisible Intelligence, having abandoned the illusion of the opposites except as worldly recognition is necessary, can be said to have attained the Brahmic Seat. Therefore, those blessed in wisdom, who refrain from too much consideration for bodily action, and who have enlivened the intelligence by the acquisition of holy knowledge, may penetrate everywhere. Thou hast recognized the Intelligence which is wondrous and

[p. 147]

changeless. Thou hast attained the Brahmic state. Thy mind has been purged from worldliness, and thy heart is liberated from egoism. Having known the certainty of Atma, thou art complete and full in thy Self.

"Suragho made answer: 'Of what avail are circuitous expressions? To say it briefly, it is this, when all longing for the fruits of action cease, and the mind looks upon all equally, being directed within itself, then Brahmic bliss arises, the incomparable Wise-Vision is developed, and the resolute Atmic Reality alone illumines.'"

Footnotes

^140:* Hunters.

^143:* Ego

^143:** Brahma

^144:* Dreamless.

^145:* Parna--leaves; ad--to eat.

^145:** Wisdom.

^145:*** Blissful state.

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

  

THE LONG-LIVED YOGI THE SECRET OF HIS LONGEVITY

Master Vashisht: "As there is no time, no place, the non-dual Brahma alone is radiating as Absolute Consciousness, without beginning or end; none else exists. With this in mind, you should not identify yourself with objects. Reaching the Jivanmukta (bodily emancipated) state, you may attain the non-dual latent silence and enjoy the final blessedness. So long as the ideas of ignorance remain with us, so long the Brahmic state will not be reached. As long as there is enjoyment of illusory sense, that long the false creation of mind will continue. In fact, neither illusion, nor mind, nor ego exist, but the Shining One, Brahma, alone, which is like a Great Ocean rising and falling. As long as this "I" identifies itself with the body, etc., so long the illusions of the mind exist. So long as one has a love for possession of objects, so long the illusion of the mind will exist. If through the

[p. 149]

pure and eternal, the desire for the three worlds be sacrificed in the fire of Wisdom, then the illusion of mind will drop away. Those who are constantly meditating upon the All Pervading Self, which is the One Wisdom above material sense. looking with equal eye upon those who want to feed them and those who want to kill them, they may be said to have realized their Alma. Those who have meditated continually upon the Pure Wisdom and have put an end to the desires are like the sun which dispels darkness. Those who have known the real meaning of AUM (OM) as it should be known, will find. that their minds have become peaceful. Those who have dried to realize, but have not succeeded in seeing the Brahmic Principle, which is pure Wisdom, will be ever like a whirlwind in their mental attitude, or like a dry leaf in a storm.

"Though this Wisdom is imperishable, all beings do not try to attain it and are ever downcast. The egoist and the ignorant are attacking from all sides, like arrows on a battle field. These worthless ones will kill their time, but will not try to find the imperishable True Wisdom. To the ignorant, the significance of OM is like

[p. 150]

unto casting a treasure into the ocean. "Cast not your pearls before swine." All dangers are caused by the ignorant. No danger comes from the wise. This Maya (illusion) is that which appears as the only reality to the ignorant. This world is as a shallow pool to the wise, but as a great ocean of pain to the ignorant.

"Reality cannot be realized by the senses. Out of this Reality, which is the witness of all an Intelligence arose, and subject to change, produced three states, the Finer, the Middle, and the Grosser. By these three qualities, Sattva (goodness), Raja (passion for name and fame) and Tamas (darkness or doing evil), all beings are bound to rebirth. By rising above these three qualities, the Brahmic state is attained. This triune may be divided into nine classes each. Under the class of goodness are: Rishi, Munis, Nagas, Sidhas, Vidyadharas, Devas, and others. Nagas and Vidyadhara come under the Tamasic aspect of the Sattva. Sidhas and Munis come under the Rajasic aspect. All the others come under the Sattva aspect of Truth fulness. The Vidya (knowledge) arose out of Avidya (ignorance). This Vidya is no other than

[p. 151]

the Avidya itself. Again it is stated that Raja and Tamas each have their three divisions. The Tamasic intelligence has to live within the ignorant body."

Ram asked: "How came the Intelligence to be entangled in the ignorant body?"

Rishi Vashisht replied: "The Intelligence, when it is without meditation, will first be as in a wild savage state; then it reaches the middle state between truth and untruth, and finally Wisdom, which has been lying dormant within the finer body. It will be idle as an indolent person without pains, until awakened by the Absolute One."

Ram asked: "Why not consider the fixed state of objects in the universe as liberation, as long as the Intelligence is in harmony with One-ness?"

Master Vashisht answered: "The attainment of the One-ness belongs to all beings. When one knows what is real and what is not real, that is the Supreme Liberation. When all desires have been sacrificed on the fire of Wisdom, then,. one attains the state of One-ness and Freedom..

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] As a tree is in the seed, so are the desires within the heart. This is the dreamless state from which arose all rebirths, the cause of all desires within the heart. After the different worldly thoughts are killed, then the mischief maker, (the cause of pains) goes to sleep--goes to the dreamless state--but arises again and again, like a tree from the seed, or dust from the earth. The unkilled desires will be hiding within the heart. This dreamless state, which is the mother of all desires, cannot be called liberation. The only one which is not the seed of that dreamless state is liberation or freedom. We should not be friendly to our enemy, namely impure desires, which like fire or poison, will ruin our life. The person who has done away with impure desires will never be affected by pain. The powers of mind are desires; its seed is ignorance. The wise stated that not to realize the eternal wisdom is the Avidya (ignorance). Do away with all ignorance and unreality and become nondual. Believe that this universe is the Brahma and not Avidya (ignorance). To understand and see this universe as Brahma, alone is the emancipation. May you be blessed with that certain understanding which is found within the pure minds

[p. 153]

of Rishis and other great ones."

Ram asked: "Will you please enlighten me concerning the painless state of the Great One?"

The Master replied: "All varieties of things, whether large or small, are only Brahma. Wisdom is Brahma. We are Brahma. Our friends, kinsmen and our enemies are Brahma. To the blind this universe seems dark, but it is shining to those who have eyes to see; it is blissful to the wise, but painful to the ignorant. He, who sees and realizes this universe as Brahma, is Brahma himself; he will never miss immortality.

"The spotless is the self alone, which shines everywhere. That silent wisdom is Brahma, which will become a direct perception when a, person sees only one alone. The wisdom which exists then is called the all-pervading wisdom of Brahma, and that is what we are.

Let us call that, Atma, which gives us the fruits of all thoughts, which is the Light of Lights and which is neither with nor without qualities. Let us offer our solution to that Pure Wisdom which is devoid of all thoughts, pleasures or pains. Those who have conviction of the nothingness

[p. 154]

of thoughts and who act according to truth only, will enjoy the highest of the Brahmic state, which is filled with truth, quietness and equality. Those brave persons whose minds are filled with pure wisdom, and are looking with equal eyes over all, are free from desires, and will never become slaves of any thing."

Ram; said: "Please explain the two paths through which the Jivanmukta (body emancipated) has freed himself from all pains and desires.

Master Vashisht replied: "There are two methods of Yoga to overcome dire pains. The two are True Wisdom and the Control of Prana (vital force), which are given out by Paramesuara [i.e., Parameshwara--JBH.] (Shiva). To the constitution of some, Yoga is the most desirable; also, to the constitution of others, knowledge is preferable. These two, as I have explained, are based upon True Wisdom. [**]

"Now I shall explain the meaning of Yoga. I shall tell you a beautiful story. Once upon a time I was in the company of other Rishis and heard from them the story of the long-lived Yogin. A little hut was built in the top of the Kalpa Tree (a tree that produces what one wishes).

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] This was a lofty one, on the northeast, side of the top of a big mountain. In that hut lived Bhusunde, a Yogin. There was no one in Heaven nor on earth who could sit with this Yogin in his practice of Yoga. This Yogin was the longest lived Yogin in the world, and was without desire. He possessed the wealth of liberation, and could see clearly the three periods of time. When the story was finished by the Great One in the assembly of the great, I was very eager to go and see personally, the long-lived Yogin. So I did, and saw the tree, the mountain with its slopes and caves and flowers in full bloom. On the tree were sitting many colored birds (persons), some chanting Samaveda, others Mantras. Many parrots, kokilas, peacocks, and others. were developing in knowledge. Then I came before the long-lived Yogin, who was amid the-others. He was in perfect silence, without any motion of Prana (vital force) and was enjoying bliss within himself. He came to greet me, and was overcome with joy when he recognized me. He welcomed me with kind words, and beautiful bunches of flowers which he produced by the power of his thought. He asked me to be seated, and showed me much kindness and courtesy. He

[p. 156]

said to me: 'I am overjoyed by thy visit. Thou hast taken a long journey. By thy holy presence I have known all. All the learned ones think of me; therefore, thou hast come here, too. I wish to sip the nectar of thy words.'

"I said: 'It is true, as thou hast stated, O King of birds (men) . I came here to see thee, who hast been here a very long time. To what race dost thou trace thy family? How didst thou attain pure Wisdom? How long hast thou been in the present body? What hast thou learned about Nature's laws? By which Wisdom hast thou been here? Please answer.'

"The long-lived One replied: 'In the best company of Supreme Shiva (who is higher than the Hindu Trinity), who is elephant faced, sheep faced, camel faced, bear faced, etc.. Many of them have different heads, hands, etc.. These elementals (beings) will encircle around Shiva at Kailasa Hills (holiest mountain in the Himalayas). The Saktis (powers) will dance before Him, having their abode everywhere. These powers have different names, which are according to their degrees and forms (bodies). Once upon a lime, a crow by the name of Chanda (an element)

[p. 157]

went to a meeting ordered by Shiva, where all Saktis (powers and elements) get together to celebrate the great festival in the sky, where they dance and laugh with intoxication. The Chanda (elements) sported himself with the female swan (another Saktis or element), and by the joining of the two, the female swan became pregnant. When the dance was over, the pregnant swan of the power told the fact, of the incident of the conception, to their head one.

"'Thereupon, the Saktis power spoke: 'Thou art pregnated by destiny. Thou wilt not be able to hold our pace, hence thou must live according to thy free will.' Saying this, Devi (God) went to the highest Samadhi.

"'My mother and father lived on Manasa Lake, and I, and my twenty brothers and sisters were born there, lived with our parents, and worshipped the Brahma power for a long time. Devi (divine Mother) awoke from her Samadhi and blessed us with her love--with liberation. Great peace was established within our hearts thereafter. In order to live alone without mixed associates, we said farewell to our parents. We attained liberation through the grace of a Sakti

[p. 158]

(spiritual power). We asked for a place where divine bliss could be enjoyed. We were directed to this place, giving thanks for the liberation, or freedom. We came here to live free from pain. All the karma I had made up to that date was now bearing fruit.

"'What will not be blessed by the Brahmic bliss? All good things arise by the grace of the wise. I am a knower of Brahma, and will free myself soon of all material existence, by thy visit. This birth of mine is full of wonderful experience. You know, as thou art Iswara (God), himself. By saying this, he increased his respect to me.'

"I asked him how his brothers and sisters parted from him.

"'Here we lived for many yugas (a yuga is more than four million years. Relative to "yugas" see page <page 80>, Great Master of the Himalayas). At last my brothers and sisters wearied of the body and gave it up for liberation. They were blessed with great power and longevity and disappeared at will."

[p. 159]

"I asked him: 'How did you save yourself at the time of pralaya, when the twelve suns melted all the universe?'

"The long-lived Yogin answered: 'Do you think that action of nature will ever stop? At the time of pralaya, when the twelve suns melted the universe, I gave up this place of mine and by the Dharana I went up to the sky. When the mountains burst forth, red hot rocks were thrown high into the air. I changed to the Fire Dharana (one who practices Fire Dharana cannot be burned by the fire). When all the world was sunk under the water, I floated by the Air Dharana. When the time came for the destruction of the universe, I took the Brahmic state and remained there until the beginning of creation over again. After the new creation, I returned again to this place. As for living, by my power, I rose above the mountains and created this tree.

"I interrupted him and asked: 'By Dharana you preserved long life, while other Yogis perished?'

"The long-lived one answered: 'No, they did not perish, but they got tired of the burden of the human body and gave it up at will.'

[p. 160]

"I asked him: 'You are master of all divine wisdom, and you see three worlds by the marvelous power of Yoga. I desire to know what you have seen.'

"The long lived one explained: 'For eleven thousand years of Devas there was one nebulous mass, devoid of anything. The next four yugas, over 11,000,000 years, there was a forest; the next four yugas over 11,000,000 years, this earth was a chain of mountains; the next four yugas, this earth was overspread. Then Brahma became crafty and created by his will. At that time, men and women were not chaste but did as they liked. O Vashisht, I was witness to all these; the origin of the sun, and such like. I saw Vishnu, one of the Trinity, who preserves, saving the earth and gathering together the Vedas (the holy book of knowledge) that was scattered in all directions. Many of these happenings, juniors may be able to tell thee, but you should know there have been countless Avatars (Christs), and it is difficult to count their number. O Great One, thou hast reincarnated eight times; this is our eighth meeting.

"'First, thou wert born of Akasa (ether or

[p. 161]

air), then of fire, and then of water. I have witnessed this and seen great ones like Buddha reincarnated, and many others. The eternal Vedas (the Wisdom) will arise again and again in every age, as suited to human beings. They will understand it more and more.

"'As they advance, pure wisdom will be embodied in every yuga in the shape of Ramayana, like this one recited by Rishi Valmik. Twelve Valmiks had been before this one. They wrought the same wisdom in the form of Ramayana. Notable Vyasa composed Mahabhart. The Ram has been on this earth eleven times. He will incarnate again in the wealthy house. The illusion of this world sometimes will manifest, and other times not. All this illusion will be hidden within the Atma (self), as the foam in the ocean some times arises and again disappears. So I have seen the universe come and go.'

"I interrupted him by asking: 'When acting in a worldly way, how did you save yourself from the hands of death?'

"The long-lived one answered: 'What good will they gain if they will not act as the great

[p. 162]

ones have advised? You know all, but I will explain to thee. Yama (death) will not come to those whose minds are above pain. Death will not come to those who have mastered the serpent of desire. Yama (death) will not come to those whose minds have attained peace; death will not come to those who have overcome the serpent of greed; yama (death) will not come to those who have control of anger and passion; death will not tome to those who have reached the highest divine state by daily meditation; death will not come to those who have attained the non-dual state. Mental diseases and pain will not reach those who are non-dual, but have equal vision upon all.

"The mind should be kept under control. It should not become abstract on the way to reaching the highest state which is the Atma, or God, where no differentiation of this or that exists, having overcome all fear. Reaching this state is a difficult work, as it is all Bliss, without pain, and cannot be attained by the ignorant, who are roaming in the darkness. Wisdom is the way which leads to the state of highest bliss, the control of Prana, which is the way to control old age and death.'

[p. 163]

"I then asked him, 'will you please explain what it means to control Prana.'

"The long-lived one answered: 'Within this body, composed of the five elements, there are two vital forces, Prana and Apana. These two forces run smoothly, one upward and the other downward. Both are very fine forces and produce vibration. When these forces are arrested, then the Yogi can do most wonderful things, and he knows all. One should always practice to control the Prana and Apana, as that leads to liberation and sets one free from rebirth.'

"'How can pain arise when one has mixed Apana in the Prana or Prana in the Apana? When Prana and Apana become as one, there will be no more pain or death. I followed this course. After controlling Prana, I attained the Supreme State. I do not care for the past nor the future, but only the present. I do not recognize that, by one course or another, I have succeeded in living a long life. I am all things to all men,--with the married I am married, with the suffering I suffer, with the happy I rejoice, as I am one with the whole universe.

[p. 164]

"'My own life has been a happy one, free from pain, riches or poverty which do not affect me. My long life is due to the absence of egoism, and to thy grace. With pure Wisdom I am blessed.'

"Thus did the long-lived one end his story. I said to him: 'I am enchanted with all that you have related. It is indeed marvelous. May your glory shine as the sun. May I start on my way.'

"So I started by air. He accompanied me many miles; then I forced him back to his palace. It was heart-rending to part with such a wise one.

"O Ram, this is the path of the Long-Lived Yogin. O Ram."

Footnotes

^154:* See Chapter on "The Goal of the Yogi. And Levitation" also" Creation of Universe."

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

  

THE GOAL OF THE YOGI AND LEVITATION

"Why is it that many Jivanmuktas (emancipated persons) do not have higher psychic powers developed, such as levitating in the air, etc.?", asked Ram.

Rishi Vashisht replied: "Those whose wisdom is not pure, but desire psychic powers are slaves of the world. The higher psychic powers are developed through Mantras, Postures, Mudras, etc., but the true Jnani (truth seeker) does not seek or need the higher psychic powers. The truth seeker will ever try to attain the true vision of the Atma. The Jnani always tries to rest in wisdom but never goes in quest of psychic powers, levitation, etc.. Desire for worldly things or possessions are mere Maya (illusion).

"These Jnanis (truth seekers) who have risen above Maya (illusion) will never sink into it again. Jnanis who desire  power may develop it by Mantras, Postures, Mudras, etc., but psychic powers in their development will never bring beneficent liberation. That is the goal of the true Jnani (truth

[p. 166]

seeker). Desire for psychic powers tends to bondage; for that reason it will never appeal to the truth seeker.

"To those who have given up all desires, the Atma Jnana (Wisdom of Self) will arise without any doubt. But those who are after Sidhas (psychic powers) only, which is the seed of desire, will never attain Atma (the Self) ."

"Please explain the secret of the Yogis who live as long as a Kalpa", (4,380,000 years) asked Ram, of Rishi Vashisht.

The Master answered: "As long as Prana is moving, the Yogi is moving, but When movement or Prana ceases, the Yogi becomes as immovable as a rock. Those Yogis who can control Prana (vital force) may live as long as they desire. By controlling Prana (vital force), the mind also is controlled, externally and internally. He who controls Prana and mind arrests old age and death. Old age and death will never come near him. As the body becomes spiritualized, it will never retrograde.

"Those Yogis only can be said to have found the , who always follow the path of Atma Jnani (wisdom of the Self). They, who have

[p. 167]

given up all their desires and have been liberated from mental bonds, are free."

"By giving up all desires, the mind is merged into its Reality; then what becomes of the four gunas (qualities)?" asked Ram, of the Master.

Rishi Vashisht answered: "There are two ways in which the mind may be controlled, as the mind consists of the formless and the formed. By controlling the Rupa (with form) mind, one will bring about the Jivanmukti state (embodied emancipation or liberation in this life). By controlling Arupa (formless) mind, one will bring the Videhmukti state (emancipation of the Soul).

"Uncontrolled Rupa (with form) mind, generates all kinds of pain. But by control bliss will come. You must master Rupa (with form) mind, as it identifies itself with matter. Then it is not able to find its Reality, and therefore it brings pain. This form mind is the ego. This form mind is ever involved in pleasures and pain. It is the seed of Maya (illusion). This will give you the idea of the Rupa (with form) mind.

"Now I will deal with the controlling of the

[p. 168]

mind. Please listen. It is said by the wise that the fruitless mind can be controlled by looking with equal eyes upon all, and not being affected by pleasure or pain. As the mountain is not affected by the storm, also one is able to retain his poise in the presence of riches or poverty, joy or sorrow. Of such a person it may be said; he has control over his mind; he has overcome ignorance, which is the lower mind itself. Through control it brings out high  intelligence. Such a mind does not subject itself to rebirth. By the desires of the four gunas (qualities), one will come to the state which belongs to the Jivanmukta (embodied emancipation) or (liberation) in this life.

"This Rupa (with form) mind, is the destroyer of the peace of mind. In this mind the four gunas (qualities) will grow as the lotus in the lake. By controlling the Arupa (formless mind), one may gain the state of Videhmukti (emancipation of the soul.) This state will be attained by overcoming the four gunas (qualities) known as: Sattva (truthfulness), Raja (ambition for name and fame), Tamas (evildoing), etc..

"There is no other way of controlling the

[p. 169]

[paragraph continues] Arupa (formless) mind, than doing away with differences. The Brahmic state is that in which one does not see differences. What has or has not been, that which has or has not qualities, which has or has not wealth, contentment or discontentment, light or darkness, day or night.

"This state is the home of those who have conquered all desires toward this universe. One becomes like Akasa (ether) or air, which is not affected, but takes odors. These great Yogis, living as if their bodies were Akasa (ether) are in the Brahmic state, that is all bliss. Pain, pleasure, name or fame does not affect them in any way. These great ones have controlled their minds."

"What is its seed? "What is the seed of this seed? And what is the seed of the last one?", asked Ram. "Please explain to me."

Rishi Vashisht answered: "The body is the first seed, it generates all pleasure and pain. It gives rise to the ever revolving Samsara (universe). The seed of this seed is the mind, which always pursues the track of desires and is the cause of pleasure and of pain, birth and death. By the mind, hosts of bodies are generated, which

[p. 170]

seem to exist though they do not exist. It enjoys these bodily objects as in a dream.

"To this mind, which is always surrounded or encircled by the worldly action, there are two seeds. One is desire, the other is Prana (life force). These are the four seeds. O Ram, the all-pervading one wisdom becomes the visible wisdom, by the motion of Prana (life force). If this Prana (life force) stopped expanding in every direction, then it would attend one's welfare and progress.

"The intelligence becomes attached to the visible world by desire. The visible world is the root of all misery. If the intelligence could always remain in the dreamless state, without lapsing into the dreaming state, that would be the real Nirvana or the Atma. It would result in liberation, or freedom from rebirth.

"If the desire for sensual objects, which arise through the Prana movement are gradually controlled, the accumulation of these thoughts will constitute mind. With such a mind alone, people live in this world. For controlling this kind of mind, the wise and the Yogi practice or perform Pranayama. Pranayama is the practice

[p. 171]

of controlling Prana (life force) and concentration. The wise say, that the benefit of control of the Prana (vital force) brings the equality of mind--the ability to look upon all as one. This generates blessed joy and not pain.

"The seed of the mind seed is the ego, which with its partner, desire, enjoys the external objects. The desires make people slaves  the sensual objects. The power of true discrimination is developed through firm determination. If this power is lost, the ego or false self binds itself to the mercy of desires, which make it see, that which is real as unreal and regards that which is unreal, as the real. The power of desire makes everything appear in an illusory light. This mind is most disgraceful, as it identifies the "I" with that which is not "I". Through this mind, old age, death and birth are brought about.

"As the oscillating of the mind arises through its confusion with objects, birth and death, also arise. It is only when this mind is subdued and has no more attraction or repulsion toward objects, that it will cease oscillating.

"If thoughts are controlled by giving up desires,

[p. 172]

the result will surely be peace of mind. If there is no desire for worldly things, then how can this mind go roaming in the sky? O Ram!

"I think so long as sensual thought exists in the mind, so long will desires remain. The idea of their reality, and the enjoyment of pleasure therein, can be said to be the thought of the mind. All thought or desire makes karma.

"How can mind oscillate in the wise, who are purer than ether, and have risen above desires? It is said, that the realization of Reality by one who understands true discrimination, is that he is not in this material world, and the world is all Maya (illusion), made by the mind.

"The wise say that the mind denudes itself of its form, even though engaged in actions. When mind has dissolved all things into itself, then it becomes as cool and refreshing as ambrosia. Those Jivanmuktas (liberated in this life) who have freed themselves from desires, will live to wear out their past karma. Those Jivanmuktas are in  of pure desires, without any pain or rebirth. It is these emancipated ones, whose minds have found the Reality of Being, and have reached the highest wisdom. It is these

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] Jivanmuktas (bodily emancipated) who, when they give up the body, attain the highest state, as they are the lofty ones.

"The two seeds of mind as has been stated before, are the desires, and the movement of Prana, and if one of them is controlled, both are controlled. By desire, Prana is moved, and by Prana desire is moved. Therefore, we may say that these seed motions of Prana and desire are the dried fruits of the mind, and their roots are in the external world. Hence, if they are released from the external world, then the movement of Prana and desires are also controlled. The mental actions are the seeds of the eternal world. If the intelligence does not play its part in the external world, then the external world will cease to exist. As the sesame oil cannot exist without the sesame seed, so the existence of the external and the internal are not different.

"The awakening of pure wisdom will produce a kind of creation, through which pure wisdom will see in itself the external objects. As in a dream, though one forgets himself, still he sees things in himself by some inherent power:

[p. 174]

so the external is known by mental knowledge. Those who by their knowledge of discrimination control this reflected mind, whether they have analyzed it or not, will also control disease and death. It is the non-control of the reflected of the external, that puts us into the great universe, but through its control the goal is attained. Who can say that the external does not bring great pain upon us, O Ram?

"Through the absence, of the external and the nonrelation of objects, arises divine bliss. You may stop your mind from oscillating, give up all love for worldly enjoyment, forget the objective world, and still not be in a dull state. Thou art above the  (universal soul). In the wisdom state, the external is not seen. This is true, without doubt."

Ram asked: "How can non-intelligence arise, where there is no visible or external? How can the external or visible vanish, from where there is no wisdom?"

'Master Vashisht answered: "Atma (the self) is the All-pervading One, without any attraction. It has no power of knowing nor not-knowing. Any inert object is without the visible or intelligence.

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] If Atma attains, then that wisdom will not be mixed with the visible or objective. It will stand alone. Though engaged in all actions, it will not be affected by the visible or objective. He, alone, is the Jnani (True wise); he alone, is the Jivanmukta (emancipated). Such a person by controlling all desires is as a child in intelligence. At this stage when all external subjects are given up, he attains full Atmic Wisdom, without any mental knowledge. Then he will not be attached to any object, but liberated front pain through Divine Bliss, or Samadhi. He will have all bliss. A truth seeker should always cling to such meditation, without longing for the unreal, and he will always enjoy himself in his own Blessed Atma, whether walking, talking or working. He will be above all of those conditions, as they have no attraction for him. He is not attracted by the external with its enjoyment, but lives in consciousness of perfect bliss.

"Understand thoroughly this wisdom, and you become conscious of the truth that you are the All-pervading Wisdom itself, after rising above the sea of pain, although engaged in worldly activities.

[p. 176]

"To this wisdom the Eternal Absolute is the seed. Out of this One-ness, wisdom arises as the light from a flame. The One-ness has two appearances. Now, I shall explain them; jars, vases and other objects appear to be different, but still they are all one, as they are all made of earth. The seat of the Truth is in One-ness alone, non-dual, without any attributes. Therefore, you should be free from the three elements--time, space, and causation, and sink thyself into the Eternal Absolute. Time, space and causation seem to be three different elements in their action, but they belong to One-ness. These three elements are the cause of creating diversified action, in this world.

"Meditate alone upon the Non-dual or One-ness which is common to all. You may pervade everywhere with the Self-bliss, that which is the goal of One-ness. That state is the seed of this pure One-ness. From this One-ness the universal consciousness arises. From this point all thought of doubt vanishes, and one gains a blessed consciousness, of ever present joy. This is the primal seed, but there is no seed to the state of Pure Wisdom. He, who is capable of holding

[p. 177]

the Pure Wisdom without wavering, will never sink himself into illusion. This is the cause of al, but it is a causeless cause, it is the essence of all, but there is no essence to it.

'In this great glass (the Self), all things will appear as images, as do the trees in the bank of a lake, where they are reflected in the water. This is the Pure One. It alone is the ageless; it alone is the Atmic Reality. By attaining this state, the mind will become peaceful. May you, after realizing it firmly, become that Atma. May you attain that Nirvanic state."

Ram said to the Master: "Thou hast been kind enough to explain about the nature of four seeds. With what effort, can one attain that state of bliss and wisdom?"

Master Vashisht replied: "By proper efforts in the direction of overcoming those seeds, and the cause of the pains, which I have explained, the state of bliss and wisdom may be attained. To reach that state is the highest of all other states, and is the common goal of all. You will have to give up the entire host of desires, for if any are left lingering with you, it may be a hindrance to your progress. Realize your Higher Self,

[p. 178]

and at that very moment, you will have attained that highest state. Should that One-ness, just referred to, be first attained by you, then, with a little more effort you will attain the highest state. Therefore, direct your meditation toward attainment of this state of One-ness, and the rest will follow.

"O Ram, it is difficult indeed, to reach this blissful state, as long as one clings to the external world. With all your might you should endeavor to give up the idea of duality and desires, then, all mental discord, disease and pain will vanish. One will find it as difficult to control the desires, as to remove the mountain. As long as the desires are not controlled, the mind will be uncontrolled. As long as the mind is not mastered, so long desires will not be mastered, as they are one. As long as Pure Wisdom has not arisen, so long the desires will be uncontrolled. Pure Wisdom, the controlling power of mind and mastery of desires, is naturally dependent upon no other cause than it-self, for its control or mastery. It is by effort of his will, that the Yogi walks in the right path."

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 179]

  

HOW TO LIVE

Truth and Faith, my Pride.

Sri Ram was the eldest son of King Dasarath and was the rightful heir to the throne of his father's kingdom. His step-mother, Kaikeyi, however had another plan, one which she had held for many years.

Once when the King was sick, Kaikeyi acted as his nurse and as a reward, for so faithfully caring for him, the King told her she could ask three boons of him; could ask for whatever she wanted.

Upon being told that, Kaikeyi immediately asked the King to marry her. He did this at once and asked what her other boon might be. To which she replied, "at a future date I shall ask you." To this the king readily agreed, never dreaming what could be in her mind.

[p. 180]

She then bore a son whom she named Bharath.

Years passed and the King being old in years, decided to retire and according to his wish everything was in readiness for Sri Ram to take the duty of ruling.

But as Kaikeyi wanted her own son, instead of Sri Ram to be King, she reminded her husband (the King) of his promised boon. She then requested him, to exile Sri Ram for twelve years. This was a surprise to the King, as he and the people wished that Sri Ram should rule, so he refused her request.

Sri Ram, desirous that his father should keep his promise to Kaikeyi, voluntarily went into banishment. This was much against his father's and the people's will, but Sri Ram made it quite clear that this was the best course, and started on his exile. His wife, Sita, who stands above all women, in the hearts of every Hindu, followed him; also his brother Lashman.

When his step-brother, Bharath, who was not home at the time, learned from Kaikeyi, how she had procured the crown for him, he cried, "O, cruel and unjust woman, you have sent my brother

[p. 181]

into exile. I shall never wear the crown and from now on, do not call me son."

Good Bharath loved his step-brother and at once set out to the country to find him, to try and persuade him to return to his home and rule over the kingdom. His cruel mother sent a message to Ram, saying, "Bharath is coming to kill you,"--that, being another trick against her son.

After a long and hard search Bharath found Sri Ram. Running with outstretched arms to greet Sri Ram, Bharath clung to him, like a child clinging to his mother. He cried uncontrollably and begged Sri Ram to return and rule the country, but he refused to do this and asked his step brother to rule instead.

Bharath, in tears, appealed to Sri Ram to come home and said to him, "Our father, who could not stand the separation has passed away, and I shall never wear the crown, never, never." But Sri Ram sent his brother home to rule in his stead.

Bharath ruled the country for twelve years, but never wore the crown nor sat on the throne, always placing a picture of Sri Ram there.

[p. 182]

A very learned Priest of that time, Jabali, by name, went to see Sri Ram, hoping to persuade him to give up his exile and come home to accept the throne and rule over the people, who still grieved for him.

What passed between Sri Ram and the Priest is a long story but I would like to share Sri Ram's answer with my readers.

"When thus the unbelieving priest,
 His subtle lies to vent had ceased,
 Then Rama made this wise reply,
 Unmoved by all his sophistry.

Thou would'st that I should cast aside
 Good faith and truth,--my joy and pride,--
 That I may present good secure,
 And flee the ills I now endure.
 Thou would'st persuade me not to dread
 The pains that wait the wicked dead;
 Thou would'st that men should all despise,--
 With scorn reject as silly lies,--
 The earnest words of all who teach
 A future life, and duty preach.
 Thy words, I know, are kindly meant, [p. 183]
 But thou hast failed in thine intent.
 As wholesome words at first they sound,
 But proved, are false and noxious found.
 A show of right they have, but tried,
 They cannot reason's test abide.
 Believe me, all the good and wise
 That foolish, wilful, man despise,
 From virtue's path aside who turns,
 And all restraints impatient spurns.
 By conduct only men we know,
 As pure and noble, vile and low;
 Their natures we can only test,
 As acts those natures manifest.
 Should I the sacred books despise,
 And act as thou dost now advise,--
 Would I not all the world delude
 By seeming noble, pure, and good,
 'While I was vicious, vile, and base,
 A blot upon the royal race?

If virtues garb assuming, I
 Should virtue by my deeds deny,
 Should lead a base and vicious life,
 With order, law, and right at strife,
 How could I, leading men astray,
 By such a course, from wisdom's way, [p. 184]
 Aught else but condemnation stern
 From righteous men and sages earn?
 By such a course should I not miss
 Both present joy, and heavenly bliss?
 The kings their subjects' weal who seek
 Should never fail the truth to speak;
 Whatever promise once they make,
 Though tempted, they should never break.
 The good examples rulers give
 Direct their people how to live;
 For common mortals watch the great,
 And all their doings imitate.
 A righteous King will rule by truth,
 And temper, too, his acts with ruth.
 When truth abides its guiding law,
 Then kingly sway is free from flaw.
 Both gods and holy Seers delight,
 In those who practice truth and right;
 Though such on earth no bliss attain,
 The highest future good they gain.

Good faith and truth are virtue's root;
 From them abundant blessings shoot.
 Truth rules supreme on earth, and nought
 Surpassing truth can e'er be thought.
 All holy rites, all acts austere,
 The sacred books which men revere,--
 Which duty's laws and forms disclose,-- [p. 185]
 These books themselves on truth repose.
 Why should I then be led astray
 My sire's command to disobey?
 No fancied good, no dazzling lure,
 My sense of right shall e'er obscure,
 Or tempt me under foot to tread
 My sacred promise to the dead.

From book of J. Muir; Metrical Translations From Sanskrit writers.

     
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

  

ASOKA'S MESSAGE TO HIS PEOPLE

Asoka, the Great, ruled  from 222 to 260 B. C., embraced the  religion, and spread it over India and far beyond the limits of India. "If a man's fame," says Kopen, "can be measured, by the number of lips that have mentioned and still mention him with honor, Asoka is more famous than Charlemagne or Caesar."

Thus spake royal Piyadasi,
      Of the Gods beloved;
 "Grace and righteous exhortation
      Have my subjects moved. [p. 186]
 For my pastors to the people
      Holy lessons sing,--
 And my priests to countless thousands
      Loving message bring!

I have spoke to subject peoples,
      Precepts I have loved;
 I have carved on rock-made pillars,
      Lessons I have proved.
 Ministers of faith and duty
      Have my mandates told;
 Spoke to near and distant nations,
      Maxims, loved of old!

And within my spacious empire,
      By each highway made,
 Figs and mangoes I have planted,
      For repose and shade;
 Wells I made, for man and cattle,
      All that breathe and move,--
 But with higher toil constructed
      Springs of faith and love!

Scatter then my royal riches,
      Spread my bounty, then,
 To the monk and to the toiler,--
      To all living men,
 To the Brahman and the Sharman,--
      To all sects of fame;
 Let each clan and corporation
      Know Asoka's name!

And unto my royal bounty,
      Others add their store,
 For my queens, with queenly mercy,
      Help the helpless poor;
 And my white-robed, royal children,
      Acts of kindness prove,
 Charity and Truth and Kindness,
      Purity and Love! [p. 187]

Thus, in ever-growing current,
      May our bounty flow,
 To the Brahman and the Sharma,--
      To the poor and low:
 For the humble and the lowly,
      Special kindness crave!
 May our mercy reach the menial,
      Cheer the unchained slave!

Laws severe, we vainly fashion,
      Codes we vainly start;
 Gentle teaching, soft persuasion,
      Touch the people's heart.
 Hence, I carve this loving edict,
      Speak these maxims, pure,--
 Future  shall work as long as
      Sun and moon endure!

Since I won my father's empire,--
      Since this state was mine,
 Past are seven and twenty autumns
      When I carve this line.
 Where 'tis writ on stony pillar,
      In this empire, vast,
 Unto far and distant ages
      May this Edict last!"
                        Pillar Edict, .

  

ASOKA'S MESSAGE TO FOREIGN NATIONS

King and Victor Piyadasi,
      Of the Gods beloved,
 O'er the plains of broad Kalinga,
      With his army moved.
 Hundred thousand men were taken,--
      Hundred thousand died;
 Righteous sorrow wrung his bosom,
 And the Victor cried; [p. 188]

'Brahmans pure and Sharmans holy,--
      Men who toil in life,
 Faithful fathers, loving children,--
      Husband and the wife;
 These to pain and separation,
      Slavery and death,
 I have doomed, and swept Kalinga
 With destruction's breath!

Let me seek for other trophies,
      Win the spoils of faith;
 Peace and plenty, not disaster;.
      Life and love, not death!
 Speak then to my farthest frontiers,
      To each distant soil:'
 'Warfare ends, the work of mercy,
      Henceforth is my toil!

Syria's monarch, Antiochus,--
      Egypt's Ptolemy,--
 Macedonian Antigonas,--
      Cyrenean Magas, free,--
 Alexander of Epiros,--
      These five kings of West,
 Have received my loving message,--
      Gospel true and blest!

Cholas and the mighty Pandyas,--
      Tamba-pannis, meek;
 Henaraja-Vismavasis,
      And the Bactrain Greek;
 Nabhakas and Nabha-pantis,--
      Bhojas only stirred;
 Andhras and the brave Pulindas,
      Have my tidings heard!

Messengers of Piyadasi
      To these lands are sent,--
 Grateful kings and listening nations [p. 189]
      To his faith have bent;
 Thus I win a brighter conquest,
      And a holier fame;
 And a more than earthly gladness
      Thrills my mortal frame!

Rich and rare the golden fruitage
      Of a life of faith;
 Full and ample is the harvest
      Gathered after death:
 Hence, the monarch Piyadasi.
      Carves his sacred line, --
 That his royal sons and grandsons
      May to faith incline!

That the kings of earth, hereafter,
      May all conquest shun,
 Wrought by rapine and by bloodshed,
      Deeds of darkness done.
 That the monarchs may, hereafter,
      Conquer realms by faith;
 Fame on earth awaits such conquest,
      Glory after death!"
              

From the Translation of R. C. Dutt.

Note by Author--A workable scheme for the League of Nations.

The night approaches now; hold fast
      The lamp of holy knowledge, bright
 With ever slowly kindling light,
      To guide thee till the gloom is past.
 
                  Mahabharata xii. 12064

Om! Om! Om!

    
Yoga Vashisht or Heaven Found, by Rishi Singh Gherwal, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

The following three pages of advertisements for other books by Singh Gherwal accompanied the original publication. They are included here for completeness. Note that the image below does not pertain to this book, but is a specimen illustration from his 'Kundalini' book. The addresses and prices in these advertisements are long out of date and we cannot provide further information about this.--JBH

[p. 190]

The symbolic chart of the six Chakras, their Powers, Deities, and location of the Kundalini are here well explained in this book--see next page.

[p. 191]

  

KUNDALINI

  

THE MOTHER OF THE UNIVERSE

India is the mysterious land. The things of which we have read in old histories and all the bibles, of their marvelous feats are still happening today.

Yogis are performing such feats as, walking on red hot coals of fire; being buried alive for months and others quite as extraordinary, however, far too many to enumerate.

These are all accredited to the Power of Kundalini, and in the pages of this book, you will find the answer as to how this wonderful power is created.

         	 

      	CHAPTERS

     
     	1

      	Poem to Kundalini, Mother of the Universe.

     
     	2

      	Introduction

     
     	3

      	"Yoga and Its Objects".

     
     	4

      	Location of Kundalini.

     
     	5

      	What the Kundalini is: when She awakens, what then?

     
     	6

      	Mudras move the Kundalini.

     
     	7

      	Power of Pranayama Yoga.

     
     	8

      	Power of Dharana, Dhiyana and Samyama Yoga.

     
     	9

      	Power of Samadhi Yoga.

     
     	10

      	The Highest Occult Mantrams of Kundalini.

     
     	11

      	Why we worship Siva?

     
     	12

      	Review of Rev. Leadbeater's "Off the Trail".

     
   In ordering Book write to

Rishi S. Gherwal or J. Falkenstein.

P.O. Box 533                  Santa Barbara, Calif.

U. S. A.

[p. 192]

  

THE BOOK YOU'VE BEEN WAITING FOR

At last a book giving an intimate glimpse into the lives of the great Masters, by one who lived among them.

Read their priceless words of teaching, and read of the marvels they daily perform.

No other book like this has come out of India In its pages YOU, too, may walk beside the MASTERS, may listen to the Eternal Voice of the Ages chant the song of the Infinite, may even dine on Prana.

When you are thru with the book, you will have had a visit with me to the Holy Temples of the Himalayians.

Great Masters of the Himalayas. Their Lives And Temple Teachings.

By Rishi Singh Gherwal.--Price $1.25

The Prasna Upanishad: Price $.75

Marvelous Feats Performed by Yogis, through Yoga. Doctors, Scientists and Chemists unable to solve the mysteries. PRICE $.35

By Same Author

For the book and correspondence course

write

Rishi S. Gherwal or J. Falkenstein

P. O. Box 533                  Santa Barbara, Calif.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: zfa.txt =====


    Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

Sermons of a Buddhist Abbot

  

[Zen For Americans]

  

addresses on religious subjects

  

by the Rt. Rev. Soyen Shaku,

  

lord abbot of Engaku-ji and Kencho-ji, Kamakura, Japan,
 including the sutra of forty-two chapters;

  

translated from the Japanese by Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki.

  

Chicago, The Open Court Publishing Company;

  

[1906]

  

Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, October 2004, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

The original title of this book in the 1906 edition was 'Sermons of a Buddhist Abbot'. It has been reprinted numerous times as 'Zen for Americans.'--JBH.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

THIS little work is a collection of some of the lectures delivered by the Right Reverend Soyen Shaku., Lord Abbot of Engaku-ji and Kencho-ji, Kamakura, Japan, during his sojourn in this country, 1905-1906. He came here early in the summer of 1905 and stayed with friends on the Pacific coast until March in the following year. Lectures on Buddhism were frequently delivered at the request of his hostess, Mrs. Alexander Russell of San Francisco, for the benefit of her friends. He lectured on the Sutra of Forty-two Chapters, and naturally chose the texts for his sermons from this most popular among the canonical books. As His Reverence did not speak English, the burden of interpreting his speeches fell upon my shoulders.

During his stay on the coast, His Reverence was occasionally invited by his countrymen, scattered throughout the State, to such places as the Buddhist Mission and the Japanese Consulate in San Francisco, to Los Angeles, Sacramento, Fresno, San Jose, and Oakland. Wherever he went, his addresses were most enthusiastically received and greatly appreciated by

[p. iv]

the Japanese residents, and by Americans when his speeches were repeated in English.

In March, 1906, the Right Reverend Soyen Shaku crossed the continent to the Atlantic coast, visiting Washington, New York, Philadelphia, and Boston. Whenever he was asked by his countrymen or by his American friends to speak on his faith, he always acceded to their wish. These addresses were added to the sermons already under my charge, and when His Reverence was leaving for his European tour towards the end of April, he left all the manuscripts with me with a view of publishing them in book form.

In going over these documents critically, I found that I could not make use of all the material as it stood; for the talks during his stay on the Pacific coast were mostly of a very informal nature, and a copy of them prepared from shorthand notes needed a great deal of revision; besides, some of the talks were suited only to special audiences and adapted to their peculiar needs. So with his permission I condensed several articles into one, while in other cases I selected a subject only incidentally or cursorily referred to in several different addresses, and made a special essay of the scattered passages. Sometimes I found his expressions too Buddhistic, that is, too technical, and intelligible only to those who have made Buddhism a special study. In such cases, I put the thoughts in a more conventional

[p. v]

and comprehensible form for the benefit of the American public. Again, when I thought that His Reverence took too much knowledge of his subject for granted on the part of his audience, I endeavored to express his thoughts more plainly and explicitly.

In spite of these alterations and the liberties I have taken with the manuscripts of the Reverend Shaku, these lectures remain a faithful representation of the views as well as the style of preaching of my venerable teacher and friend.

*      *      *

As to the text of the Sutra of Forty-two Chapters, I have decided after much consideration to incorporate it here. In the first place, it is not a long sutra, and like the Dharmapada it contains many characteristic Buddhist thoughts. Secondly, most of the Reverend Shaku's lectures have a close relation to the sutra; and when they are read after the perusal of the text, his standpoint as a modern Japanese representative of Buddhism will be better understood. Thirdly, being the first Buddhist literature introduced by the first official Hindu missionaries into the Middle Kingdom (A. D. 67), the sutra has a very interesting historical background.

*      *      *

I have to add that this collection also contains two articles and one letter by the Reverend Shaku, all of which previously appeared in THE OPEN COURT. The letter was addressed to the

[p. vi]

late Dr. John H. Barrows as a sort of protest against his lecture delivered at the Chicago University, 1896, in which Dr. Barrows unfortunately fell in line with the popular misconception of the spirit of Buddhism. The two articles referred to deal with the problem of war as seen from the general Buddhist point of view; and I may remark that the first of the two attracted at the time the attention of such an eminent thinker of our day as Count Leo Tolstoy and was alluded to in his famous anti-war declaration.

DAISETZ TEITARO SUZUKI.        

LaSalle, Ill., 1906.

 

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

CONTENTS

         

       PAGE

     
      Preface

       <page iii>

     
      The Sutra of Forty-two Chapters

       <page 3>

     
      The God-Conception

       <page 25>

     
      Assertions and Denials

       <page 37>

     
      Immortality

       <page 53>

     
      Buddhist Faith

       <page 62>

     
      Buddhist Ethics

       <page 69>

     
      What is Buddhism?

       <page 79>

     
      The Middle Way

       <page 90>

     
      The Wheel of the Good Law

       <page 101>

     
      The Phenomenal and the   Supra-phenomenal

       <page 111>

     
      Reply to a Christian Critic

       <page 123>

     
      Ignorance and Enlightenment

       <page 126>

     
      Spiritual Enlightenment

       <page 132>

     
      Practice of Dhyana

       <page 146>

     
      Kwannon Bosatz

       <page 160>

     
      Buddhism and Oriental Culture

       <page 170>

     
      The Story of Deer Park

       <page 182>

     
      The Story of the Gem-Hunting

       <page 186>

     
      The Sacrifice for a Stanza

       <page 189>

     
      Buddhist View of War

       <page 193>

     
      At the Battle of Nan-Shan Hill

       <page 199>

     
      A Memorial Address

       <page 204>

     
      Index

       215

     
  

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS [*1]

HAVING attained Buddhahood, the World-honored One thought thus: "To be free from the passions and to be calm, this is the most excellent Way."

[p. 4]

He was absorbed in Great Meditation, [*1] subdued all evil ones, and in Deer Park [*2] caused to revolve the Wheel of Dharma, which was the Fourfold Truth, [*3] and converted the five Bhikshus, [*4] Kaudinya, etc., inducing them to attain Enlightenment. [*5]

Again, there were other Bhikshus who implored the Buddha to remove their doubts which they had concerning his doctrine. The World-honored One illumined all their minds through his authoritative teachings. The Bhikshus,

[p. 5]

joining their hands and reverentially bowing, followed his august instructions.

(1) The Buddha said: "Those who leave their parents, go out of the home, understand the mind, reach the source, and comprehend the immaterial, are called Cramana. [*1]

"Those who observe the two hundred and fifty precepts [*2] of morality, who are pure and spotless in their behavior, and who exert themselves for the attainment of the four fruits of saintship, [*3] are called Arhats.

"The Arhat is able to fly through space and assume different forms; his life is eternal, and there are times when he causes heaven and earth to quake. [*4]

"Next is the Anagamin. [*5] At the end of his life, the spirit of the Anagamin ascends to the nineteenth heaven and obtains Arhatship.

"Next is the Skridagamin. [*6] The Skridagamin

[p. 6]

ascends to the heavens [after his death], comes back to the earth once more, and then attains Arhatship.

"Next is the Srotaapanna. [*1] The Srotaapanna dies seven times and is born seven times, when he finally attains Arhatship.

"By the severance of the passions is meant that like the limbs severed they are never again made use of."

(2) The Buddha said: "The homeless Cramana cuts off the passions, frees himself of attachments, understands the source of his own mind, penetrates the deepest doctrine of Buddha, and comprehends the Dharma which is immaterial. He has no prejudice in his heart, he has nothing to hanker after. He is not hampered by the thought of the Way, nor is he entangled in karma. No prejudice, no compulsion, no discipline, no enlightenment, and no going up through the grades, and yet in possession of all honors in itself,--this is called the Way."

(3) The Buddha said: "Those who shaving their heads and faces become Cramanas and who receive instruction in the Way, should surrender all worldly possessions and be contented with whatever they obtain by begging. [*2] One meal a day and one lodging under a tree, and neither should be repeated. For what makes one stupid and irrational is attachments and the passions.

[p. 7]

(4) The Buddha said: "There are ten things considered good by all beings, and ten things evil. What are they? Three of them depend upon the body, four upon the mouth, and three upon thought.

"Three evil deeds depending upon the body are: killing, stealing, and committing adultery. The four depending upon the mouth are: slandering, cursing, lying, and flattery. The three depending upon thought are: envy, anger, and infatuation. All these things are against the Holy Way, and therefore they are evil.

"When these evils are not done, there are ten good deeds."

(5) The Buddha said: "If a man who has committed many a misdemeanor does not repent and cleanse his heart of the evil, retribution will come upon his person as sure as the streams run into the ocean which becomes ever deeper and wider.

"If a man who has committed a misdemeanor come to the knowledge of it, reform himself, and practise goodness, the force of retribution will gradually exhaust itself as a disease gradually loses its baneful influence when the patient perspires."

(6) The Buddha said: "When an evil-doer, seeing you practise goodness, comes and maliciously insults you, you should patiently endure it and not feel angry with him, for the evil-doer is insulting himself by trying to insult you."

[p. 8]

(7) The Buddha said: "Once a man came unto me and denounced me on account of my observing the Way and practising great lovingkindness. But I kept silent and did not answer him. The denunciation ceased. I then asked him, If you bring a present to your neighbor and he accepts it not, does the present come back to you?' The man replied, 'It will.' I said, 'You denounce me now, but as I accept it not, you must take the wrong deed back on your own person. It is like echo succeeding sound, it is like shadow following object; you never escape the effect of your own evil deeds. Be therefore mindful, and cease from doing evil.'"

(8) The Buddha said: "Evil-doers who denounce the wise resemble a person who spits against the sky; the spittle will never reach the sky, but comes down on himself. Evil-doers again resemble a man who stirs the dust against the wind; the dust is never raised without doing him injury. Thus, the wise will never be hurt, but the curse is sure to destroy the evil-doers themselves."

(9) The Buddha said: "If you endeavor to embrace the Way through much learning, the Way will not be understood. If you observe the Way with simplicity of heart, great indeed is this Way."

(10) The Buddha said: "Those who rejoice in seeing others observe the Way will obtain great blessing." A Cramana asked the Buddha,

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] "Would this blessing ever be destroyed?" The Buddha said, "It is like a lighted torch whose flame can be distributed to ever so many other torches which people may bring along; and therewith they will cook food and dispel darkness, while the original torch itself remains burning ever the same It is even so with the bliss of the Way."

(11) The Buddha said: "It is better to feed one good man than to feed one hundred bad men. It is better to feed one who observes the five precepts of Buddha than to feed one thousand good men. It is better to feed one Srotaapanna than to feed ten thousands of those who observe the five precepts of Buddha. It is better to feed one Skridagamin than to feed one million of Srotaapannas. It is better to feed one Anagamin than to feed ten millions of Skridagamins. It is better to feed one Arhat than to feed one hundred millions of Anagamins. It is better to feed one Pratyekabuddha than to feed one billion of Arhats. It is better to feed one of the Buddhas, either of the present, or of the past, or of the future, than to feed ten billions of Pratyekabuddhas. It is better to feed one who is above knowledge, onesidedness, discipline, and enlightenment than to feed one hundred billions of Buddhas of the past, present, or future." [*1]

[p. 10]

(12) The Buddha said: "There are twenty difficult things to attain [or to accomplish] in this world: (1) It is difficult for the poor to practise charity; (2) It is difficult for the strong and rich to observe the Way; [*1] (3) It is difficult to disregard life and go to certain death; (4) It is only a favored few that get acquainted with a Buddhist sutra; (5) It is by rare opportunity that a person is born in the age of Buddha; (6) It is difficult to conquer the passions, to suppress selfish desires; (7) It is difficult not to hanker after that which is agreeable; (8) It is difficult not to get into a passion when slighted; (9) It is difficult not to abuse one's authority; (10) It is difficult to be even-minded and simple-hearted in all one's dealings with others; (11) It is difficult to be thorough in learning and exhaustive in investigation; (12) It is difficult to subdue selfish pride; (13) It is difficult not to feel contempt toward the unlearned; (14) It is difficult to be one in knowledge and practice; (15) It is difficult not to express an opinion about others; [*2] (16) It is by rare opportunity that one

[p. 11]

is introduced to a true spiritual teacher; (17) It is difficult to gain an insight into the nature of being and to practise the Way; (18) It is difficult to follow the steps of a savior; (19) It is difficult to be always the master of oneself; (20) It is difficult to understand thoroughly the Ways of Buddha."

03) A monk asked the Buddha: "Under what conditions is it possible to come to the knowledge of the past and to understand the most supreme Way?" The Buddha said: "Those who are pure in heart and single in purpose are able to understand the most supreme Way. It is like polishing a mirror, which becomes bright when the dust is removed. Remove your passions, and have no hankering, and the past will be revealed unto you."

(14) A monk asked the Buddha: "What is good, and what is great?" The Buddha answered: "Good is to practise the Way and to follow the truth. Great is the heart that is in accord with the Way."

(15) A monk asked the Buddha: "What is most powerful, and what is most illuminating?" The Buddha said: "Meekness is most powerful, for it harbors no evil thoughts, and, moreover, it is restful and full of strength. As it is free from evils, it is sure to be honored by all. [*1]

"The most illuminating is a mind which is

[p. 12]

thoroughly cleansed of dirt, and which, remaining pure, retains no blemishes. From the time when there was yet no- heaven and earth till the present day, there is nothing in the ten quarters which is not seen, or known, or heard by such a mind, for it has gained all-knowledge, and for that reason it is called 'illuminating."'

(16) The Buddha said: "Those who have passions are never able to perceive the Way; for it is like stirring up clear water with hands; people may come there wishing to find a reflection of their faces, which, however, they will never see. A mind troubled and vexed with the passions is impure, and on that account it never sees the Way. O monks, do away with passions. When the dirt of passion is removed the Way will manifest itself."

(17) The Buddha said: "Seeing the Way is like going into a dark room with a torch; the darkness instantly departs, while the light alone remains. When the Way is attained and the truth is seen, ignorance vanishes and enlightenment abides forever."

(18) The Buddha said: "My doctrine is to think the thought that is unthinkable, to practise the deed that is not-doing, to speak the speech that is inexpressible, and to be trained in the discipline that is beyond discipline. Those who understand this are near, those who are confused are far. The Way is beyond words and expressions, is bound by nothing earthly. Lose

[p. 13]

sight of it to an inch, or miss it for a moment, and we are away from it forevermore."

(19) The Buddha said: "Look up to heaven and down on earth, and they will remind you of their impermanency. Look about the world, and it will remind you of its impermanency. But when you gain spiritual enlightenment, you shall then find wisdom. The knowledge thus attained leads you anon to the Way."

(20) The Buddha said: "You should think of the four elements [*1] of which the body is composed. Each of them has its own name, and there is no such thing there known as ego. As there is really no ego, it is like unto a mirage." [*2]

(21) The Buddha said: "Moved by their selfish desires, people seek after fame and glory. But when they have acquired it, they are already stricken in years. If you hanker after worldly fame and practise not the Way, your labors are wrongfully applied and your energy is wasted. It is like unto burning an incense stick. However much its pleasing odor be admired, the fire that consumes is steadily burning up the stick."

(22) The Buddha said: "People cleave to their worldly possessions and selfish passions so

[p. 14]

blindly as to sacrifice their own lives for them. They are like a child who tries to eat a little, honey smeared on the edge of a knife. The amount is by no means sufficient to appease his appetite, but he runs the risk of wounding his tongue."

(23) The Buddha said: "Men are tied up to their families and possessions more helplessly than in a prison. There is an occasion for the prisoner to be released, but householders entertain no desire to be relieved from the ties of family. When a man's passion is aroused nothing prevents him from ruining himself. Even into the maws of a tiger will he jump. Those who are thus drowned in the filth of passion are called the ignorant. Those who are able to overcome it are saintly Arhats."

(24) The Buddha said: "There is nothing like lust. Lust may be said to be the most powerful passion. Fortunately, we have but one thing which is more powerful. If the thirst for truth were weaker than passion, how many of us in the world would be able to follow the way of righteous?"

(25) The Buddha. said: "Men who are addicted to the passions are like the torch-carrier running against the wind; his hands are sure to be burned."

(26) The Lord of Heaven offered a beautiful fairy to the Buddha, desiring to tempt him to the evil path, But the Buddha said, "Be gone.

[p. 15]

[paragraph continues] What use have I for the leather bag filled with filth which you have brought to me?" Then, the god reverently bowed and asked the Buddha about the essence of the Way, in which having been instructed by the Buddha, it is said, he attained the Srotaapanna-fruit.

(2 7) The Buddha said: "Those who are following the Way should behave like a piece of timber which is drifting along a stream. If the log is neither held by the banks, nor seized by men, nor obstructed by the gods, nor kept in the whirlpool, nor itself goes to decay, I assure you that this log will finally reach the ocean. If monks walking on the Way are neither tempted by the passions, nor led astray by some evil influences, but steadily pursue their course for Nirvana, I assure you that these monks will finally attain enlightenment."

(28) The Buddha said: "Rely not upon your own will. Your own will is not trustworthy. Guard yourselves against sensualism, for it surely leads to the path of evil. Your own will becomes trustworthy only when you have attained Arhatship."

(29) The Buddha said: "O monks, you should not see women. [*1] [If you should have to see them], refrain from talking to them. [If you should have to talk], you should reflect in a right spirit: 'I am now a homeless mendicant. In the world of sin, I must behave myself like unto

[p. 16]

the lotus flower whose purity is not defiled by the mud. Old ones I will treat as my mother; elderly ones as elder sisters; younger ones as younger sisters; and little ones as daughters.' And in all this you should harbor no evil thoughts, but think of salvation."

(30) The Buddha said: "Those who walk in the Way should avoid sensualism as those who carry hay would avoid coming near the fire."

(31) The Buddha said: "There was once a man who, being in despair over his inability to control his passions, wished to mutilate himself. [*1] The Buddha said to him: 'Better destroy your own evil thoughts than do harm to your own person. The mind is lord. When the lord himself is calmed the servants will of themselves be yielding. If your mind is not cleansed of evil passions, what avails it to mutilate yourself?"' Thereupon, the Buddha recited the gatha,

"Passions grow from the will,
 The will grows from thought and imagination:
 When both are calmed,
 There is neither sensualism nor transmigration."

The Buddha said, this gatha was taught before by Kashyapabuddha.

(32) The Buddha said: "From the passions arise worry, and from worry arises fear. Away with the passions, and no fear, no worry."

(33) The Buddha said: Those who follow

[p. 17]

the Way are like unto warriors who fight single-handed with a multitude of foes. They may all go out of the fort in full armor; but among them are some who are faint-hearted, and some who go halfway and beat a retreat, and some who are killed in the affray, and some who come home victorious. O monks, if you desire to attain enlightenment, you should steadily walk in your Way, with a resolute heart, with courage, and should be fearless in whatever environment you may happen to be, and destroy every evil influence that you may come across; for thus you shall reach the goal."

(34) One night a monk was reciting a sutra bequeathed by Kashyapabuddha. His tone was so mournful, and his voice so fainting, as if he were going out of existence. The Buddha asked the monk, "What was your occupation before you became a homeless monk? "Said the monk, "I was very fond of playing the guitar." The Buddha said, "How did you find it when the strings were too loose?" Said the monk, "No sound is possible." "How when the strings were too tight?" "They crack." "How when they were neither too tight nor too loose?" "Every note sounds in its proper tone." The Buddha then said to the monk, "Religious discipline is also like unto playing the guitar. When the mind is properly adjusted and quietly applied, the Way is attainable; but when you are too fervently bent on it, your body grows tired; and

[p. 18]

when your body is tired, your spirit becomes weary; when your spirit is weary, your discipline will relax; and with the relaxation of discipline there follows many an evil. Therefore, be calm and pure, and the Way will be gained."

(35) The Buddha said: "When a man makes utensils out of a metal which has been thoroughly cleansed of dross, the utensils will be excellent. You monks, who wish to follow the Way, make your own hearts clean from the dirt of evil passion, and your conduct will be unimpeachable."

(36) The Buddha said: "Even if one escapes from the evil creations, it is one's rare fortune to be born as a human being. Even if one be born as human, it is one's rare fortune to be born as a man and not a woman. [*1] Even if one be born a man, it is one's rare fortune to be perfect in all the six senses. Even if he be perfect in all the six senses, it is his rare fortune to be born in the middle kingdom. Even if he be born in the middle kingdom, it is his rare fortune to be born in the time of a Buddha. Even if he be born in the time of a Buddha, it is his rare fortune to see the enlightened. Even if he be able to see the enlightened, it is his rare fortune to have his heart awakened in faith. Even if he have faith, it is his rare fortune to awaken the heart of intelligence. Even if he awakens the heart of intelligence, it is his rare fortune to

[p. 19]

realize a spiritual state which is above discipline and attainment."

(37) The Buddha said: "O children of Buddha! You are away from me ever so many thousand miles, but if you remember and think of my precepts, you shall surely gain the fruit of enlightenment. You may, standing by my side, see me alway, but if you observe not my precepts, you shall never gain enlightenment."

(38) The Buddha asked a monk, "How do you measure the length of a man's life?" The monk answered, "By days." The Buddha said, "You do not understand the Way."

The Buddha asked another monk, "How do you measure the length of a man's life?" The answered, "By the time that passes during a meal." The Buddha said, "You do not understand the way."

The Buddha asked a third monk, "How do you measure the length of a man's life?" The monk answered, "By the breath." The Buddha said, "Very well, you know the Way."

(39) The Buddha said, "Those who study the doctrine of the Buddhas will do well to believe and observe all that is taught by them. It is like unto honey; it is sweet within, it is sweet without, it is sweet throughout; so is the Buddhas' teaching."

(40) The Buddha said: "O monks, you must not walk on the Way as the ox that is attached to the wheel. His body moves, but his heart is

[p. 20]

not willing. But when your hearts are in accord with the Way, there is no need of troubling yourselves about your outward demeanor."

(41) The Buddha said: "Those who practise the Way might well follow the example of an ox that marches through the deep mire carrying a heavy load. He is tired, but his steady gaze, looking forward, will never relax until he come out of the mire, and it is only then that he takes a respite. O monks, remember that passions and sins are more than the filthy mire, and that you can escape misery only by earnestly and steadily thinking of the Way."

(42) The Buddha said: "I consider the dignities of kings and lords as a particle of dust that floats in the sunbeam. I consider the treasure of precious metals and stones as bricks and pebbles. I consider the gaudy dress of silks and brocades as a worn-out rag. I consider this universe as small as the holila (?) fruit. I consider the lake of Anavatapta as a drop of oil with which one smears the feet. I consider the various methods of salvation taught by the Buddhas as a treasure created by the imagination. I consider the transcendental doctrine of Buddhism as precious metal or priceless fabric seen in a dream. I consider the teaching of Buddhas as a flower before my eyes. I consider the practice of Dhyana as a pillar supporting the Mount Sumeru. I consider Nirvana as awakening from a day dream or nightmare. I consider the struggle

[p. 21]

between heterodox and orthodox as the antics of the six [mythical] dragons. I consider the doctrine of sameness as the absolute ground of reality. I consider all the religious works done for universal salvation as like the plants in the four seasons."

Footnotes

^3:1 This is the first Buddhist literature ever translated into the Chinese language. It was brought into China by the first missionaries from Central India, A. D. 67, who were specially invited by the Emperor Ming of the Han Dynasty. Though some authorities think that the sutra existed in Sanskrit in the present Chinese form, the most probable fact is, as maintained by another authority, that the translators extracted all these passages from the different Buddhist canonical books which they brought along for their missionary purposes, and compiled them after the fashion of the Confucian Analects, beginning each chapter with the stereotyped "The Buddha said," which corresponds to the Confucian "The Master said." This was the most natural thing for the first Buddhist workers from India to do in the land of Confucianism.

The sutra, besides being a collection of moral and religious sayings of the Buddha, is interesting to us at least in the following two points: (1) It throws some light on the development which Buddhism made in India from the Parinirvana of Buddha down to the times of these two translators; and (2) it allows us to see what the first Buddhist propagandists thought best to introduce, as the most essential [p. 4] doctrines of their faith, among the people who had hitherto been educated mostly by the Confucians but partly by the Laotzeans.

The first translators did not think it wise to present their doctrine systematically by writing a discourse or a lengthy treatise, as they were wont to do in their native country, nor did they think it advisable to reproduce an entire sutra in the language of their newly adopted country. On the other hand, they culled Buddha's short sayings and dialogues from various sutras, imitating the general style of the Confucian sacred book Lun Yu. They must have thought that Buddhism, which has so many voluminous canonical books and deeply metaphysical treatises, would be best promulgated in China through an anthology, and not through an exact reproduction of the original texts. The present sutra is undoubtedly the result of these considerations, and on this account it must be said to be well suited for popular reading.

^4:1 Cf. "The Practice of Dhyana." (<page 146>.)

^4:2 "The Story of Deer Park" is told elsewhere. (<page 182>.)

^4:3 This is explained in the article entitled "The Wheel of the Good Law." (<page 101>.)

^4:4 Buddhist monks are called Bhikshus, literally "beggars."

^4:5 What the Buddhists understand by Enlightenment is explained in the sermons. (See <page 132>.)

^5:1 Or Cramanera, from the root cram, "to exert oneself," "to make effort."

^5:2 This is fully explained in the Vinaya texts in the Sacred Books of the East, Vols. XIII, XVII, XX.

^5:3 The Arhats, the Anagamins, the Skridagamins, the Srotapannas. These are explained below.

^5:4 This and the following three passages seem to be a gloss, incorporated in the text later by a copyist. Arhat, according to the traditional Chinese interpretation, means "one who kills robbers," that is, the robbers of passion and prejudice.

^5:5 Anagamin means "one who never returns." The nineteenth heaven is called Akanishtha, the highest in the world of form (rupaloka).

^5:6 Skridagamin means "one who comes back."

^6:1 Srotaapanna means "one who gets in the stream."

^6:2 Cf. Luke, Xii, 33 et seq.

^9:1 This seems to be a very sweeping assertion on the part of the Buddha, but the principle remains ever true. The [p. 10] fundamental fact of the religious life is purity of heart. If there is a dark corner in your heart, all that you do is hypocrisy. When the Emperor Wu of Liang saw Bodhidharma, he asked the saint, "I have built so many monasteries, I have converted so many souls, I have copied so many sacred sutras; now what does Your Holiness think my merit will be?" To this, Bodhidharma made a curt response, "No merit whatever."

^10:1 Cf. Matt. xix, 24.

^10:2 Cf. Matt. vii, 1, 2.

^11:1 Matt. V, 5

^13:1 Earth, water, fire, and air.

^13:2 A Japanese poet sings:

"When pulled together
 And bound, there stands
 A hut well thatched:
 But take it apart,
 And we have the wilderness eternal."

^15:1 Matt. v, 28.

^16:1 Matt. V, 29 and 30.

^18:1 Cf. I Cor. xi, 3, 7, 8, 9.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

[p. 23]

  

THE TEACHINGS OF SOYEN SHAKU

[p. 24]

[p. 25]

  

THE GOD-CONCEPTION OF BUDDHISM [*1]

AMONG the many critical opinions which are passed upon Buddhism by Christian or Western scholars, there are two which stand out most conspicuously and most persistently. One of them declares that Buddhism is a religion which denies the existence of the soul, and the other that it is atheistic or at best pantheistic, which latter term implies what is practically tantamount to the rejection of a God, that is, a personal God as believed in by the Christians. The object of this discourse is to see to what extent the second criticism is, if at all, justifiable. In other words, I propose here to elucidate the Buddhist conception of God.

At the outset, let me state that Buddhism is not atheistic as the term is ordinarily understood. It has certainly a God, the highest reality and truth, through which and in which this universe exists. However, the followers of Buddhism usually avoid the term God, for it savors so much of Christianity, whose spirit is

[p. 26]

not always exactly in accord with the Buddhist interpretation of religious experience. Again, Buddhism is not pantheistic in the sense that it identifies the universe with God. On the other hand, the Buddhist God is absolute and transcendent; this world, being merely its manifestation, is necessarily fragmental and imperfect. To define more exactly the Buddhist notion of the highest being, it may be convenient to borrow the term very happily coined by a modern German scholar, "panentheism," according to which God is pan kai en (all and one) and more than the totality of existence.

One of the most fundamental beliefs of Buddhism is that all the multitudinous and multifarious phenomena in the universe start from, and have their being in, one reality which itself has "no fixed abode," being above spatial and temporal limitations. However different and separate and irreducible things may appear to the senses, the most profound law of the human mind declares that they are all one in their hidden nature. In this world of relativity, or nanatva as Buddhists call it, subject and object, thought and nature, are separate and distinct, and as far as our sense-experience goes, there is an impassable chasm between the two which no amount of philosophizing can bridge. But the very constitution of the mind demands a unifying principle which is an indispensable hypothesis for our conception of phenomenality; and this

[p. 27]

hypothesis is called "the gate of sameness," samata, in contradistinction to "the gate of difference," nanatva; and Buddhism declares that no philosophy or religion is satisfactory which does not recognize these two gates. In some measure the "gate of sameness" may be considered to correspond to "God" and the "gate of difference" to the world of individual existence.

Now, the question is, "How does Buddhism conceive the relation between these two entrances to the abode of Supreme Knowledge (sambodhi)?" And the answer to this decides the Buddhist attitude towards pantheism, theism, atheism, and what not.

To state it more comprehensively, Buddhism recognizes the coexistence and identity of the two principles, sameness and difference. Things are many and yet one; they are one and yet many. I am not thou, and thou art not I; and yet we are all one in essence. When one slays another, there is an actor, an act, and a sufferer, all distinct and separate; and yet

"If the red slayer think he slays,
    Or if the slain think he is slain,
 They know not well the subtle ways
    I keep, and pass, and turn again."

[paragraph continues] Buddhism, therefore, says that while we have to acknowledge the world of particulars in which individuality predominates, we must not forget that looking through the gate of sameness all

[p. 28]

distinctions and contradictions vanish in a higher principle of unity. A Japanese poet thus sings:

"Rain and hail and ice and snow,
 Neither like the other. So!
 When they melt, however, lo,
 See one stream of water flow!

Intellectually, the coexistence of the two mutually excluding thoughts is impossible, for the proposition, "Mine are not thine," cannot be made at the same time the proposition, "Mine are thine." But here Buddhism is speaking of our inmost religious experience, which deals directly with facts and not with their more or less distorted intellectual reflections. It is, therefore, really idle to say that Buddhism is pantheistic or atheistic or nihilistic. Buddhism is not a philosophical system, though it is the most rational and intellectual religion in the world. What it proposes is to make clear facts of the deepest spiritual life and to formulate a doctrine which leads its followers to the path of inward experience.

Thus, according to the proclamation of an enlightened mind, God or the principle of sameness is not transcendent, but immanent in the universe, and we sentient beings are manifesting the divine glory just as much as the lilies of the field. A God who, keeping aloof from his creations, sends down his words of command through specially favored personages, is rejected by Buddhists as against the constitution of human

[p. 29]

reason. God must be in us, who are made in his likeness. We cannot presume the duality of God and the world. Religion is not to go to God by forsaking the world, but to find him in it. Our faith is to believe in our essential oneness with him, and not in our sensual separateness. "God in us and we in him," must be made the most fundamental faith of all religion.

We must not, however, suppose that God is no more than the sum-total of individual existences. God exists even when all creations have been destroyed and reduced to a state of chaotic barrenness. God exists eternally, and he will create another universe out of the ruins of this one. To our limited intelligence there may be a beginning and an end of the worlds, but as God surveys them, being and becoming are one selfsame process. To him nothing changes, or, to state it rather paradoxically, he sees no change whatever in all the changes we have around us; all things are absolutely quiet in their eternal cycle of birth and death, growth and decay, combination and disintegration. This universe cannot exist outside of God, but God is more than the totality of individual existences; God is here as well as there, God is not only this but also that. As far as he is manifested in nature and mind, they glorify him, and we can have a glimpse of his image and feel, however imperfectly, his inner life. But it will be a grievous error,

[p. 30]

let us repeat, to think that he has exhausted his being in the manifestation of this universe, that he is absolutely identical with his creations, and that with the annihilation of the world he vanishes into eternal emptiness.

There is a favorite saying in Buddhism which declares that "sameness without difference is sameness wrongly conceived, while difference without sameness is difference wrongly conceived"; to express this in Christian terms, "God not in the world is a false God, and the world not in God is unreality." All things return to one, and one operates in all things; many in one and one in many; this is the Buddhist conception of God and the world. Billows and waves and ripples, all surging, swelling, and ebbing, and yet are they not so many different motions of the eternally selfsame body of water? The moon is serenely shining up in the sky, and she is alone in all the heavens and on the entire earth; but when she mirrors herself in the brilliant whiteness of the evening dews which appear like glittering pearls broadcast upon the earth from the hand of a fairy,--how wondrously numerous her images! And is not every one of them complete in its own fashion? This is the way in which an enlightened mind contemplates God and the world.

God is immanent in the world and not outside of it; therefore, when we comprehend the secret of the "little flower in the crannied wall," we

[p. 31]

know the reason of this universe. Reason is the inner life of all beings, it is the subjectivity of existence, it is the quickening spirit of all creation, it is a realization in our finite minds of infinite divinity. When we know ourselves, we know heaven and earth, we know God, we know everything and anything. We know his presence even in the most insignificant flower in the field which is trampled under foot by men and beasts carelessly and pitilessly, to say nothing about the starry heavens with their grandeur which is replete with suggestions, or about the huge mass of inert matter on which mountains rise, oceans roar, and sentient beings walk. When we come to realize this mysterious presence of the highest reason in all things, we are struck with the fact and there arise mingled feelings of awe, admiration, and helplessness, which latter is strangely tinged with a sense of self-exaltation. We are awe-stricken because it is beyond our human intelligence to grasp thoroughly the scheme of God. We admire it because of the wonderful beauty and harmony which are traceable in every step of his, though our imperfect minds are sometimes set against almost insurmountable difficulties in the reconciliation of contraries and opposites. We feel helpless because our fragmentary consciousness is unable to review the entire range of divine operation and thus to know the why of all these things, though the recognition of divinity in us lifts us above the wearisome condemnation

[p. 32]

piled upon humanity by some moralists and religionists.

*      *      *

Having thus expounded the Buddhist conception of God and his relation to us, I wish to proceed to explain some terms which. are generally used by Buddhists to designate the highest being in its various modes and phases.

As I mentioned before, Buddhists do not make use of the term God, which characteristically belongs to Christian terminology. An equivalent most commonly used is Dharmakaya, which word has been explained in one of the sermons herein collected, and it will not be necessary to enter again upon the discussion of its signification. Let us only see what other equivalents have been adopted.

When the Dharmakaya is most concretely conceived it becomes the Buddha, or Tathagata, or Vairochana, or Amitabha. Buddha means "the enlightened," and this may be understood to correspond to "God is wisdom." Vairochana is "coming from the sun," and Amitabha, "infinite light," which reminds us of the Christian notion, "God is light." As to the correct meaning of Tathagata, Buddhists do not give any definite and satisfactory explanation, and it is usually considered to be the combination of tatha = "thus" and gata = "gone," but it is difficult to find out how "Thus Gone" came to be an appellation of the supreme being. There are,

[p. 33]

some scholars, however, who understand gata in the sense of "being in" or "situated in." If this be correct, Tathagata meaning "being thus," or "being such," can be interpreted in the same sense as Tathata or Bhutatathata or Tattva, as explained below. But in this case Tathagata will lose its personification and become a metaphysical term like the others, though it has been so persistently used by Buddhists in connection with the historical Buddha that it always awakens in their minds something more concrete and personal than a mere ontological abstraction.

Buddhism is the most speculative of all the existing religions in the world and abounds with many highly abstract terms which may sound empty to ordinary minds. Among them we have such words as Tathata (or Tathatva), Tattva, Bhutatathata, Bhutakoti, Cunyata, Alakshitam, Nirvana, etc. These are all philosophical terms for Dharmakaya. To explain: Tathata or tathatva or tattva is "suchness," or "being such," and Buddhist scholars assert that, strictly speaking, these terms alone rightly designate the nature of the highest reality. When we speak of its absolute transcendentality, people are liable to take it for an empty nothing; while if we state that it is eternally true and real, they may consider it something concrete and particular. To avoid both extremes, or rather to synthesize them, the term "Suchness" has been coined; but in reality all human efforts are altogether

[p. 34]

insufficient to express the true nature of the Ultimate. Says Acvaghosha, "The Immortal Essence is absolutely beyond intellectual demonstrability, but we as rational beings need some words to express ourselves, and for that purpose the term 'suchness' has been selected, disposing of all others." The words in which Goethe makes Faust utter his feeling concerning God may here be quoted also as corroborating Acvaghosha's conception of Suchness:

"Who dare express Him?
 And who profess Him,
 Saying: I believe in Him!
 Who, feeling, seeing,
 Deny this being,
 Saying: I believe Him not!
 The All-enfolding,
 The All-upholding,
 Folds and upholds He not
 Thee, me, Himself?
 *      *      *
 *      *      *
 Vast as it is, fill with that force thy heart,
 And when thou in the feeling wholly blessed art,
 Call it, then, what thou wilt,--
 Call it Bliss! Heart! Love! God!
 I have no name to give it!
 Feeling is all in all:
 The name is sound and smoke,
 Obscuring Heaven's clear glow."

When even this Tathatva is found inadequate for certain purposes, Buddhists add Bhuta = reality thereto and coin the word Bhutatathata, which means "that which really exists as such." Suchness, being an abstract term, may breed

[p. 35]

some misconception, when the term is used alone, on the part of the uninitiated. To avoid this, "reality" has been prefixed, which purposes to make it clear that the ultimate reason is not an abstraction, not a mere subjective creation, but a real objective (or rather transcendental) existence. Bhutakoti serves the same end, as it means the "highest point of reality," or "the real end of things."

Alakshitam, Cunyata, and Nirvanam express the negative phase of the Dharmakaya. When affirmation alone is not sufficient, we frequently resort to the negative way of defining things, showing thereby at least what they are not. The human mind cannot have a positively adequate conception of things which are beyond the realm of conditionality, for it is bound up within spatial and temporal relations; and in order to give expression to these non-conditional objects, we use the negative method and say that they are not such and such. In innumerable ways, this negation is as effective in defining things as affirmation.

When Buddhists assert that the Dharmakaya is cunya = empty, or alakshana, = devoid of particular marks, or nirvana = emancipating, or nacrava = faultless, they are following the inevitable course of mentation. All these and some other negative terms unfortunately have caused a great deal of misunderstanding on the part of unsympathetic critics who have either forgotten

[p. 36]

or ignored the peculiar proclivity of human reason to onesidedness and exclusiveness.

Lastly, Paramartha and Satya are the terms used to designate the epistemological phase of the Dharmakaya. Paramartha is the first or highest reason, and Satya is truth or that which truly is. And for the psychological aspect of the Dharmakaya, or as it is manifested in the human consciousness, we have Bodhi or Hridaya. Bodhi is the divine wisdom incarnated in our limited intelligence, or the divine love as reflected in our human sympathy and compassion. Hridaya is the inner life of existence which prompts and quickens us to do the will of the Dharmakaya, and which is awakened to its full dignity and glory when intelligence passes over the limits of relativity. The reason why we are able to have an insight into the nature of the ultimate being and to recognize the truth that sameness and difference are co-existent and really identical, is because our Bodhi or Hridaya is essentially one with the Dharmakaya. When the Bodhi comes to know itself, it also knows the inner being of Dharmakaya, however fragmentary the knowledge be, and we lie blissfully at rest in the bosom of eternal motherliness.

Footnotes

^25:1 It may be interesting for our readers to read in connection with this article Dr. Paul Carus's Buddhist story entitled Amitabha.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS

THERE are two avenues leading to the realization of the Buddhist life; one may be called positive and the other negative. They are complementary and mutually supporting. They are like the two sides of a shield, the two wings of a bird, or the two wheels of a cart. When one is asserted, the other necessarily follows as a logical consequence. What are they? The negative phase of Buddhism I may call the doctrine of the non-ego and the positive phase the doctrine of Dharmakaya (which latter may be considered to correspond to the Christian conception of God, though not exactly, as explained later).

Let me first expound the doctrine of the non-ego. Non-ego may not be a very appropriate term to express the Buddhist conception of Anatman, but what I mean by this will become clearer, I hope, as I proceed. The Sanskrit term, Atman, which is generally translated by "ego," "self," "soul," or "individuality," is rather comprehensive and is used by different philosophical schools in different senses. Buddhists understand by Atman that something which,

[p. 38]

lurking behind all our mental experiences, directs them as it pleases, somehow after the fashion of an organist striking the notes as his whim or sentiment moves, or like a show-performer who makes his marionettes dance up and down according to his good pleasure. This strange something which is popularly supposed to be a concrete individual existence abiding somewhere within the body, and which is known by the masses as the ego or soul forming the central part of our existence, is denied by Buddhists as a superstitious belief, which has no foundation in reality. And this denial constitutes the negative side of Buddhism.

The absolute denial by Buddhism of the existence of the ego-soul may be somewhat startling to our Christian audience. They have been accustomed to such expressions as "the resurrection of the soul," "the immortality of the soul," "the redemption of the soul," "the reality of individuality," and so forth. Besides, we use the term "soul," or "ego," so constantly in our common parlance, taking the notion as the most positive fact, which does not allow of any doubt or refutation whatever. Our thoughts have thus become saturated, as it were, with the ego-conception; and when we see some one attempting to prove the phantasmagorial character of the ego or soul, we are unconsciously and unrestrainingly inclined to ridicule him. But let us stop for a moment and reflect seriously

[p. 39]

whether there is really such a thing as soul or self. Are we not deceiving ourselves when we condemn those who refuse to believe in the reality of self as agnostics, atheists, blasphemers, and charge them as immoral and faithless? Is not our own deception so fundamental and thoroughgoing as to put ourselves in a most puzzling position, difficult to extricate from when our cherished notion is brought out into the daylight and mercilessly examined by the tribunal of most advanced thoughts? Let us see how it is.

The first question I wish to ask is: What do we understand by the soul or ego? For instance, when we speak of the immortality of the soul, what mental image do we have about the soul? Do we not think that there is something, possibly within the body, as it cannot be abiding outside of us, which is so subtle and ethereal as to elude our gross senses, but which is a sort of concrete individual existence not belonging to any part of the body, and which departs from the latter when it breathes its last and either ascends to Heaven or goes into Hell, whereby this mythical entity receives its due and last judgment? As to the manner of its ascent or descent after the expiration of its earthly life, we are entirely ignorant, for no soul has ever come down among us to tell its unique experience, its flight through the air. It may be conceived that the soul performs this miraculous deed after the fashion of the Egyptian Ba, which

[p. 40]

is pictured commonly with two wings, earthly and material. Does such a ghostly being really reside within us? The very idea seems ridiculous.

We wanted to make the soul as immaterial as possible, but we have only succeeded in making it as material as any body which we have around us. For, however ethereal and astral the soul may be conceived, it cannot be anything but material, as long as it is concrete and individual. And for this reason I can declare that those self-advertising spiritualists are no more nor less than crass materialists,--the designation they wanted so much to hurl upon others.

Next, let us search in our own minds whether there abides such a thing as the self, to which we are so fatally attached. Is the will my self? Is intelligence my self? Are my ideas my self? Is consciousness my self? Are my numerous desires my self? My instincts? my judgment? my imagination? my experience? They are all my self in a sense, to be sure, but are they of such nature as to be thoroughly simple, constant, self-willing, and permanent, as we imagine the soul to be? Consciousness seems to be so, but are there not many occasions in our mental life when consciousness is altogether gone? And, again, are there not many cases of double or triple personality? In these cases, which consciousness shall I have to call my own real, permanent self or soul, which goes after my death to some unknown region? And, again, every one

[p. 41]

of us is acquainted with the fact that when I was a child I had a child-consciousness, that when I was a young man, I had a youth-consciousness, and that when I have grown to full manhood, I have a man-consciousness, and that when I am an old man, I shall have an old-man consciousness. My personality is thus constantly changing, in no case being the same. Which of these consciousnesses shall I call my real and true ego or soul and wish its immortality?

Of course, we have to admit that there is a unity of consciousness in our mental activities. But how fragile and inconstant is this so-called unity! This is so, not only in pathological cases, but in our normal condition. When I have an idea, I am the idea; when I have a desire, I am the desire; when I will, I am the will; for it is not warranted by experience to say that I have such and such thoughts or desires or impulses. But I am those thoughts or desires or impulses. I am constantly shifting from one thing to another, now a desire, now an idea, and so forth. However hard you may endeavor to catch this sort of "Wandering Jew," you will find it so slippery, so evasive, so inconstant, and finally you have to give it up as wasting labor.

A learned scholar was once very much troubled with the problem of the soul. He utterly lost peace of mind, and spent many years in agony and vexation, when at last he was informed of the news of the arrival of a saintly Buddhist

[p. 42]

monk in his land. He hastened to the monastery where the monk was settled in his temporary sojourn, and most piteously implored him to be instructed in spiritual discourse. The monk was, however, apparently so absorbed in his contemplation that he did not even turn his head to acknowledge a stranger. The scholar was not disappointed, however, and it is said that he stood at the same spot for a period of seven days and nights. Finally, he drew a sword which he carried in the belt as was the fashion of the time, and cut off his own left arm, which he reverentially presented to the inscrutable mystic, saying: "This is a token of my sincere desire to be instructed in your religion. I have been searching for my soul for so many years, and I am indescribably vexed in my spirit. Please be gracious enough to pacify my soul." The Buddhist monk then slowly turned toward the supplicant and said, "Where is your soul? Bring it to me, and I will have it pacified." The scholar said, "The very trouble is that I cannot find it." The monk exclaimed, "Pacified is your soul!" and it happened that upon hearing this a sort of spiritual flashlight went across the mind of the scholar.

A favorite parable used by Buddhists to illustrate the unreality of soul or self (I take these two meaning the same thing), is that of the house. The house is composed of the roof, walls, posts, floor, windows, and so forth. Now, take each

[p. 43]

one of these apart, and we have no such thing .as a house, which appeared to have a permanent actuality awhile ago.

The house did not have any independent existence outside the material whose combination only in a certain form makes it possible. From the beginning there was no house-soul or house-ego, which willed according to its own will to manifest itself in such and such way by combining the roofs, walls, et cetera. The house came into existence only after all these component parts were brought together. If the house-soul insisted that "I am a thing by itself, distinct from any of you, members of my being, and therefore I shall abide here forever even when you, component parts, are disorganized. I will go up to heaven and enjoy my reward there, for I have sheltered so many worthy people under my roof," this soul would be the most appropriate object of laughter and derision. But are we not standing in a similar situation when we speak of our eternal self dwelling within us and departing after death in its heavenward course?

*      *      *

So far the argument has been theoretical. Let me see the practical, ethical consequence of the ego-soul hypothesis. I find it producing most pernicious effects on our daily life, for the assertion of self-will, which is the root of all evil, is the logical, inevitable conclusion of the belief in the existence of a real ego-soul. But most people seem not to be aware of this fact. They

[p. 44]

complain so much of the weakness of the flesh, or the worldly inclinations of the "old man," but they do not endeavor to go to the bottom of the matter and to find there the cause of all spiritual vexations. When the cause is discovered the remedy is at hand. Let us ask, therefore: "What is the flesh? Who is the 'old man'? Why does the flesh eternally interfere with the aspirations and doings of the spirit? Why is the flesh so meddlesome? Why has the old man an evil eye on the new man?" When these spirit-harassing questions are thoroughly investigated, we find that the arrogance of the flesh is based on belief in the ultimate reality of the ego-soul, that the impertinence of the "old man" comes from the secret thought that the self is real and abiding. "Crucify him," therefore, says Buddhism, "as the first work in your religious discipline; destroy this chimerical, illusory notion of self; get convinced of the truth that there is no such creature dwelling in the coziest comer of our minds; free yourselves from the yoke of the ego-soul which exists not; and you will see how vexatious and spirit-harrowing it was to be confined within the self-made, self-imposed prison. You will see again how free and unhampered your life is in the ego-less atmosphere where we all forget the limitations of individualism and participate in the feeling of universal brotherhood." The so-called "I" is possible only when it is thought of in connection

[p. 45]

with its fellow-selves. Indeed, this self and other selves are one in each other, I in you and you in me; and this sense of universal oneness breaks most effectually the barrier of egoism and glorifies the significance of individual existences. When we realize this exalted spirituality, we can truly say with the Gospel of John that "all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them."

The conclusion thus here reached sheds light on another field of spiritual experience where many religionists are groping in the dark. They tell us that we must love our neighbors and even enemies. The injunction is noble, but we are not enlightened as to the reason why we must not assert ourselves to the destruction of enemies or to the disadvantage of neighbors. They simply insist that it is the command of a divine authority. This is very well with those who blindly accept it.. But there are other religious people, often designated as heathens or pagans or atheists, who want to know the reason why. Seeing that man is a rational being in some measure, we cannot afford altogether to suppress their legitimate doubt by the name of some august being. When we want to prove the universality of a certain proposition, we find mere appealing to a power above us not so convincing and satisfactory as appealing to our own human nature or rationality. When we are told, "Say this, or do that, because it is in

[p. 46]

accord with the inner reason of our being," we feel more the nobility of human nature.

According to Buddhism, the question why we must not discriminate between friends and foes is answered by the doctrine of non-ego, as above explained at some length. Therefore, the Buddhists declare: Regulate your thoughts and deeds according to the feeling of oneness, and you will find a most wondrous spiritual truth driven home to your hearts. You are not necessarily thinking of the welfare and interest of others, much less of your own; but, singularly enough, what you aspire and practise is naturally conducive to the promotion of the general happiness, of others as well as of yourselves. In such an enlightened mind as has realized this most homely and yet most ennobling truth, there is no distinction to be made between friend and enemy, lover and hater. He is filled with lovingkindness and brotherly-heartedness. And such a one is called by Buddhists a Bodhisattva, which translated means "intelligence-being," or is one who has realized wisdom."

*      *      *

At this point we can turn to the positive phase of Buddhism and ask ourselves what is the doctrine that supplements the theory of non-ego; for the latter is mainly concerned with the destruction of the popular belief relating to the nature of the ego, and, on that account, it tends to emphasize the negative aspect of

[p. 47]

[paragraph continues] Buddhism. We must have something positive when this erroneous belief is removed and be taught how to behave among the new surroundings into which we have thus been ushered. Most people are exceedingly alarmed when they are told that the self or the soul, which they cherished so fondly, is void in its nature, and will overwhelm us with a multitude of questions. To answer all these, however, is not my present purpose, as it will require a volume to satisfy those anxious truth-seekers. I wish only to say a few words here concerning the doctrine of Dharmakaya, which is the affirmative side of Buddhism.

Dharmakaya is a Sanskrit term, and it is very difficult to find a good English equivalent for it. Dharma means "doctrine," "law," "religion," "righteousness," "being," "essence," "norm," and such like; while kaya means "body," "organized being," "system," and so forth. Dharmakaya as a combined form of the two may be rendered "essence-body," "system of being," or "totality of existence." Whichever way we translate it, we find it very inadequate to express all that is contained in the original. In a word, it may be considered to be equivalent to the Christian conception of Godhead, and as such I will treat it in this discourse.

The Dharmakaya, however, differs from the Christian God, perhaps in its most essential aspects. Of course, even among Christians the

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] God-conception is subject to various interpretations; and the Buddhist notion of Dharmakaya, I venture to say, somewhat corresponds to the Johannean view of God. Intelligent Christians, I think, are well aware of the fact that the Gospel of John strikes quite an independent key among the Synoptics. Philosophically speaking, it rings with a pantheistic note, while the other gospels are monotheistic, true to the Jewish tradition. Buddhism has a pantheistic tendency, too, and in this respect the Gospel of John may be considered echoing somewhat the Buddhist sentiment.

Buddhists do not think that God has any special abode, that his administration of the universe comes from a certain fixed center or headquarters, where he-sits in his august throne surrounded by angels and archangels and saints and pious spirits who have been admitted there through his grace. In short, the Buddhist God is not above us, nor below us, but right in the midst of us; and if we want to see him face to face, we are able to find him in the lilies of the field, in the fowls of the air, in the murmuring mountain streams; we can trace his footsteps in the sea, we can follow him as he rides upon the storm; we can meet him in the bush; indeed, wheresoever we may turn, we are sure to be greeted by the smiling countenance of the author of this universe. Who says, then, that God is in Heaven, in some unknown region where we

[p. 49]

mortals are never allowed to venture in without his special permit?

This God of Buddhism works constantly and everlastingly; he knows no rest, no fatigue, he has not to stop his work after six days of toil; he does not resort to any special revelation in order to announce his existence to the world; he has no favored son to sacrifice for the sake of the sin of which the poor innocent child has no conception. On the other hand, the Buddhist God is able to turn the meanest creature in the world to the noblest figure in which his glory is manifest to its full extent. He can destroy this whole universe and raise it again in the twinkling of an eye, it not being necessary for him to wait even for three days. His revelation is not an historical event, but it is happening every minute, and those who have eyes see it, those who have ears hear it. And to know the truth of this, it is only necessary to cleanse the heart of its egoistic impurities and defilements, which have been accumulating by virtue of our subjective ignorance. When this fundamental purification is completed, "we all, with unveiled face reflecting as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image, from glory to glory." Again, we are glorified with the "glory which he had with him before the world was." When we arrive at this exalted stage of spiritual enlightenment, Buddhism declares that we have attained Nirvana. (Most Christian critics have

[p. 50]

a very mistaken notion about the nature of Nirvana, and this allusion is made with the view to clearing their minds.)

*      *      *

Supposing that I have made the Buddhist conception of God now somewhat intelligible to you, however broadly and sketchily, let me see what practical conclusion is drawn by the Buddhists from the above statement. If Buddhism teaches, as the Gospel of John declares, that "the Father is in me and I in him," or that "I and my Father are one," the practical ethics of Buddhism, it is evident, is to manifest the glory of God in all our conduct, in all our thoughts, in all our wishes and desires. It is evident, further, that as we are all one in God, his glory cannot be made manifest unless we break down the barrier of egoism which our ignorance and shortsightedness have built between mine and thine. Though this world, as it is, is manifesting the glory and love of God, the thought of selfishness which is so dearly cherished by our limited consciousness must be removed from the root, in order fully to appreciate the fact and truth. Buddhism does not exactly agree with Christianity when the latter emphasizes so much the distinction between the flesh and the spirit, as if they were altogether antagonistic to each other in their fundamental nature.

Buddhism, on the other hand, declares that all such distinctions as thine and mine, ego and God,

[p. 51]

soul and flesh, "old man" and "new man," come from our own subjective ignorance, and that when this darkness of nescience is eradicated the flesh becomes at once the spirit, the ego instantly assumes the aspect of the Holy Ghost, as Christians would say. For from the beginning there is neither flesh nor spirit, neither "I" nor "thou," but the infinite intelligence and love of the Dharmakaya. Therefore, Buddhists do not complain, "The spirit is willing, and the flesh is weak"; but of the evil influence of ignorance; and they concentrate all their spiritual energy on the eradication of this ignorance and on the bringing about of enlightenment. For enlightenment is Nirvana; and herein the doctrine of non-ego merges with the doctrine of Dharmakaya.

*      *      *

I am not going here to draw a parallelism between Buddhism and Christianity, nor to present you a list of differences between the two: I wish to give you in a summary way the main points of the preceding discourse and conclude this address. In a word, Buddhism is the religion of enlightenment, in which the intellect and the sentiment are harmoniously blended together so as to realize the beatific state of Nirvana. Through the intellect Buddhists know that there is no ego-soul which hides itself snugly in the deepest recesses of the mind, that the universe is the immanent expression of an

[p. 52]

absolute, whence we come and whither we go, and that when we recognize negatively the unreality of the ego-monster we positively perceive the truth of the universal oneness of all sentient beings in the Body of Intelligence. While this is attained through the intellect, we come to feel through the objectives of the religious consciousness that the ultimate reality in which we live and move and have our being is not only intelligence but love--by love meaning the complete union and sameness of me and you.

Therefore, the Buddhist does not make it the purpose of his life to rise from the dead, to gain the immortality of a mythical being known as self, to lay up treasure for the future, to expect some reward in Heaven however spiritually that reward be considered, or to find consolation, to seek tranquillity of mind in relying upon some historical personage; but he endeavors to actualize the glory of God in this world while he is alive--the glory which he had before the world was--and which is made manifest only by following the way of God, by doing his will, that is, by practising in thought as well as in person the doctrine of non-ego, the precept of lovingkindness.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

IMMORTALITY [*1]

ONE of the many questions which I am very often requested to answer from the Buddhist point of view concerns the immortality of the soul . Thinking that this will also interest you, I wish to present my view on the question here.

It seems, everything depends upon the conception of the soul. Both you and I may use the same term, but if it is understood differently we cannot expect to come to any definite conclusion. I often think that if every notion, every concept, every sentiment we may happen to have, is so clearly defined as not to leave any point in obscurity, a great bulk of philosophical and religious controversy, which seems almost to make up the history of thought, will vanish. However this may be, let me first try to show you what I understand by the soul.

Buddhism uses the term Atman in place of soul and makes it signify that mysterious something which lurks in the background of our mental activities, and which soars up to an

[p. 54]

unknown quarter usually known as heaven after its departure from the body, within which it has been imprisoned, and on which account it used to long for liberation. The atman or soul, according to this conception, is not material, exactly speaking, but something very much akin to it, for it is an individual existence and therefore subject to the limitations of space and time as well as to the law of causation. Though it is impossible to think the soul other than material if it is at all individual as conceived by ordinary people, yet they make it at once spiritual and individual--two qualities impossible to reconcile. Therefore, in point of fact, they materialize the soul by their unwarranted--though pious enough--attempt to make it immaterial and spiritual. They are not indeed spiritualistic in spite of their persistent claim to be so. They are in fact materialistic. For if things are truly spiritual and immaterial, in them there must be the absence of all those qualities which make up materiality, that is, they must not be bound by the conditions of space and time. The existence of a soul of this nature is most positively denied by Buddhism. And those who aspire after its immortality are designated ignorant, however wise and intelligent they may be in affairs other than religious.

It needs a certain amount of reflective power to see in the popular conception of the soul a grievous error which Buddhism endeavors to

[p. 55]

remove. It may be more readily comprehended by the majority of people when we say that there is a mysterious metaphysical something in the mind which directs all its functions and operations according to its whimsical will, and which makes us believe in the reality of an ego-substance; than when we say that the so-called soul is no more than the unity of consciousness which is liable at any moment to dissolve, and which comes to exist when there is a certain co-ordination of all mental faculties. If you make the soul signify the notion which is popularly more intelligible, Buddhism will give you a very poor consolation, as it denies even the existence of such a shadowy object, not to speak of its continuance after the decay and dismemberment of the corporeal existence.

If this is found by you to be a little too abstract to be quite comprehensible, let me give you a favorite illustration frequently used by Buddhists to show the fallacy of belief in the existence of the soul. Do you think there-is such a thing as the soul of the house who picks up the beams, roof, floor, walls, windows, etc., and puts them together in such a fashion as to make a house, and then hides himself in it somewhere, though altogether unrecognizable? Do you think again there is what is to be called the spirit of water who mixes up a certain amount of hydrogen with a portion of oxygen in order to make that most familiar and useful liquid and then convert

[p. 56]

it into his own hiding-place? When the intellect had not yet attained the present stage of development, people thought that there was in everything a spirit or a soul residing and living, and who, when in wrath, found expression in raising a tempest, in creating a hurricane, or in quaking the foundation of the earth. But that time seems to have departed forever.

A house is here when all the necessary things, such as walls, pillars, beams, etc., are brought together according to a certain form. Water comes into existence when hydrogen and oxygen combine themselves, each in a certain definite percentage, according to their inherent constitution. It will be ridiculous, then, to imagine that whenever we observe the waves stirring or a mountain-stream rushing there is a soul in the water who makes all these phenomena. The conception of the human ego-soul is in perfect parallel with that of the water soul-entity. if waves, cataracts, whirlpools, or fountains are possible without presuming the existence of a water-ego, why do we hypostatize mentality and conceive the ego as an ultimate reality? Even scientifically speaking, this hypothesis does not at all satisfactorily explain our mental phenomena, but instead involves us in more difficulties and complications. Accordingly, those who hanker after the immortality of the soul are said to be pursuing fata morgana which vanish into airy nothingness as you approach.

[p. 57]

Buddhism seems to be perfectly justified in declining to acknowledge the ego-soul.

What will then become of our innate desire after immortality? This is the question which will naturally come to you after you have followed me so far. To this I will answer: Seek that which is above birth and death, identify yourselves with it, and in that measure in which your identification is complete you will acquire immortality, and your religious sentiment will be thoroughly satisfied. Buddhism does not seek enlightenment in egoism, does not realize Nirvana in the assertion of selfishness. Have your self-will removed and put in its place the divine will. "Not my will, but thy will," as Christians say, is that which is immortal in us, as well as that which constitutes the reason of our individual existences. As long as you have your selfish desires, impure motives, ignorant impulses, your immortality will never be gained. To be egoistic and to be immortal is to make "a" equal to "not-a," or to mix water with oil, as a Japanese saying goes; they exclude each other, and the result is unspeakable tribulation of spirit.

The problem of immortality has never troubled Buddhists, to speak frankly. When we were first asked about it, we did not know exactly how to grapple with it, for Buddhists are used to look at the matter from a totally different point of view. Their first effort is to comprehend the

[p. 58]

whole, leaving the details behind. They first want to grasp that which is changeless, is above the transiency of phenomenality. When this is accomplished, they find that they themselves are part and parcel of that imperishable something. Though mortal as individual, particular beings, they are a manifestation of the Great All, and as such they will most assuredly survive all forms of change and transformation. They have then nothing to trouble themselves concerning soul or no-soul and much less with its immortality. All that they have to do is to come to a clear consciousness of the reason of the universe and to make its realization in them as perfect as they can. Whether they live or not after the expiration of their physical lives does not concern them at all. Let "thy will be done," and everything else will run its own course, and are we not relieved of the useless, wasteful worry and anxiety?

If, in spite of all this, you feel somehow inconsolable on account of nothing concrete surviving after you but cold ashes and crumbling bones, I would give you the immortality of work (karma) instead of the immortality of the soul. Or we might say that what you wish to understand by the soul does not exist in the ego-entity but in the work you do, in the sentiment you feel, in the thought you think, and if all these are in accordance with "thy will" which disposes, they will be what is left after you, that is to say,

[p. 59]

you will forever live in them. When we stand before a canvas painted by a great painter, do we not feel the presence of the artist, as his ideas and feelings are embodied in it? Cannot we say that the artist is still living in his work? We do not know whether his soul has gone up to the heavens and is enjoying the celestial happiness, but we do know for certain that he is still living among ourselves and inspiring us to higher ideals of life.

Do you prefer the immortality of the soul as popularly understood to this kind of immortality that I have endeavored to expound here? If you do, I have nothing further to say, but that the immortality of work or deed or thought or sentiment seems to be more in accordance with the result of modern scientific investigation--not only that, but to be more satisfactory to our religious consciousness.

Before concluding, there is one thing I should like to ask the believers in a materialistic, individual soul and its immortality; that is, What do you want to do up in heaven when you are ushered in there after you have finished your earthly career? Is it your wish to sit quietly beside your Father and among the host of celestial beings and passively enjoy inexpressible blessings? If this is your wish for individual immortality, I fail to see the purpose and significance of this life on earth. The history of civilization seems to lose its purport when you are away from here.

[p. 60]

Buddhists think otherwise than Christians in this respect. We consider our existence here below as a sort of link in the eternal chain of the divine revelation in the universe. We have not come on earth, each singly and separately, to assert only our individuality; but our fates are most solidly linked to our ancestors and their civilization as well as to our successors and their destiny. What we are to-day is due to the karma of our predecessors and at the same time Will determine the fates of posterity. If we fail to enrich and ennoble our spiritual inheritance which originally came from the hand of the Dharmakaya, we entirely ignore the meaning of the history of humanity, we altogether disregard our responsibility to our forefathers and grandchildren. We must not go to heaven and selfishly enjoy our individual immortality. On the contrary, we must abide where we are, and co-operate with one another for the ennoblement and enrichment of our earthly life. We must not be ungrateful for what our ancestors did for us, nor must we be inconsiderate of the welfare and enlightenment of coming generations. We must behave nobly, we must think rationally, we must feel unselfishly, and let us live in this karma which endureth forever, even after the dissolution of this physical existence.

Again, according to Buddhism, this universe is a sort of spiritual laboratory, in which all our ideal possibilities are experimented upon and

[p. 61]

developed and perfected. When this material garment wears out after a long use, we throw it away and put on a new one and appear in the same laboratory (and not anywhere else, not even in Heaven, let me remind you) as our own successors. We examine what our former lives have accomplished and apply all our moral and spiritual energy to the furtherance and perfection of the karma. The doctrine that the Buddha was able to reach his ideal eminence after his untiring practice of the six virtues of perfection (paramitas)} [*1] throughout his innumerable lives since the dawn of consciousness, is no more than the Buddhist conception of immortality and of the eternal striving after ideals. Let us, therefore, go not anywhere else after death even if an indulging benefactor should attempt to persuade us to join his celestial hosts; but let us remain in this universe, let the karma we have accumulated here bear its fruit and be brought to a happy consummation; for we are not strong enough to stand the grave charge to be preferred by posterity to the effect that we have scattered all our precious ancestral legacy to the four winds.

Footnotes

^53:1 Read before Green Acre Fellowship, Washington, D. C., April, 1906.

^61:1 (1) Charity, (2) Observation of Moral Precepts, (3) Meekness, (4) Energy, (5) Meditation, (6) Wisdom.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

BUDDHIST FAITH.

BUDDHISM is so deep and comprehensive--and, we might say, even unfathomable--that scholars are sometimes at a loss how and where to begin its measurement. In some respects it appears to be a chaotic mass of superstitions, while in others it is a systematic and thoroughgoing application of an idealistic pantheistic theory. The present discourse does not propose, however, to clear up all these difficulties, but only to give a certain clue with which students of Buddhism may be guided in their exploration. Buddhism, then, will be treated here broadly under two headings, Faith and Discipline.

First, of Buddhist faith, which is summed up in this gatha:

"The Buddha-Body fills the world,
 Being immanent universally in all things;
 It will make itself manifest wherever and whenever conditions are matured,
 Though it never leaves this Seat of Bodhi."

Generally speaking, faith means trusting--trusting in something external to oneself. When religion is defined as a faith, it is considered to imply that there is a being or power which has created this world and presides over it, directing

[p. 63]

its course and shaping its destiny; and that religion teaches to trust or believe in this being or power, which is thus proved to be greater and wiser than human beings. Therefore, Christians believe in a God who is a personal reality and who is supposed to exist above and outside of us poor mortals; and some Buddhists believe in Amitabha Buddha, who resides in Pure Land or Western Paradise (Sukhavati); and for this reason religion has come to be identified with a belief in an external object, whatever this be, particularly by Occidental scholars. But Buddhist faith does not belong to this category, for Buddhism rejects the existence of a personal God as he is ordinarily understood by some religionists. What, then, is the faith that keeps Buddhists together?

Briefly, Buddhists believe in three most fundamental facts which are universally observable about us and which cannot be refuted by any amount of argument. They believe first in the sameness of things (samata). By sameness is understood the presence of a unifying principle in all phenomena. However diversified and differentiated may appear those particular existences with which we come in contact in this world of the senses, they universally partake of one nature, of one essence; and it is on account of this presence of a supra-individual reason that life becomes possible, that existence, this phenomenal world, becomes possible,

[p. 64]

Secondly, Buddhists believe in the difference between things (nanatva), in their manifoldness, in their particularity, in their. individuality; for it is an undeniable fact that things are all separate and distinct, that each has its own individuality, that each moves according to its own inherent necessity.

Thirdly, Buddhists believe in the fact that all things move or work. For there is nothing in this world that is not endowed with the possibility of motion, the power of doing something, the capacity of accomplishing a work; and in exercising this power everything works upon another and is at the same time worked upon by another. The universe is a network of all these particular forces mutually acting and mutually being acted upon. This is called the principle of karma, and Buddhists apply it not only to the physical world but to the moral and spiritual realm.

This threefold faith constitutes the cornerstone of Buddhism, which makes it appear somewhat too metaphysical to be a religion of the masses, but the fact is that Buddhism is far from being a system of philosophy. Those who take Buddhists for speculative thinkers will lose sight of the inner life of the religion in which its followers are living. It must never be supposed that Buddhists try to get us entangled in the endless maze of sophistic reasoning. Anything that is to be designated at all as a religion

[p. 65]

never proposes to argue with us after the fashion of a philosopher; for religion is not to analyze, to demonstrate, or to argue with logical thoroughness, but to see facts directly and to believe and to live them accordingly.

In the gatha recited in the beginning, the idea of sameness is rather dogmatically expressed: "The Buddha-Body fills the world." In this the content of sameness is called Buddha-Body or in Sanskrit Buddhakaya. The Buddhakaya, which is also often called Dharmakaya, is the reason, life, and norm of all particular existences. When we penetrate through the diversity of all these individual phenomena, we encounter everywhere this indwelling Body and therein find the unity or sameness (samata) of things.

The principle of diversity is declared in the second line of the gatha, which makes the Buddha-Body universally immanent in all things. The Buddha-Body, the essence of existence, though absolutely one in itself, allows itself to be diversified as the lilies of the field, as the fowls of the air, as the creatures of the water, or as the inhabitants of the woods. For it is in the inherent nature of the Buddha-Body that it individualizes itself in the manifoldness of the phenomenal world. It does not stand alone outside particular existences, but it abides in them and animates them and makes them move freely. By thus abandoning its absolute transcendentality, it

[p. 66]

has subjected itself to certain conditions such as space, time, and causation '. Its essence is infinite, but its manifestations are finite and limited. Therefore, the Buddha-Body has to wait to express itself in this relative world till all the necessary conditions are matured. This creation, so called, is no more than a manifestation of the self-limiting Buddha-Body.

Suppose here stands a mirror--the mirror of Buddha-Body. Anything that comes in front of it is reflected therein, and this without any premeditation on the part of the mirror. If there comes a man, he is reflected there; if a woman, she finds herself reflected in it; if it is a beautiful flower now which presents itself before the mirror, it is immediately and instantly reflected with all its magnificence. It is even so with things unsightly or even repugnant, for the mirror does not refuse its illuminating power to anything, high or low, rich or poor, ugly or beautiful, good or evil. Wherever and whenever conditions are ripe, all particular things will be reflected in the supra-natural mirror of Buddha-Body, without hesitation, without reasoning, without demonstration. This is the way in which the principle of karma works.

The fourth line of the gatha is more or less a continuation of the third and expresses the same sentiment from another point of view. Things are many, and are subject to constant transformation as regulated by their karma, but the

[p. 67]

[paragraph continues] Buddha-Body eternally abides in the Seat of Bodhi, which is our inmost being.

The moon is one and serenely shines in the sky, but she will cast her shadow, wherever the conditions are mature, in ever so many different places. Do we not see her image wherever there is the least trace of water? It may be filthy, or it may be clean; it may consist of only a few drops, or it may be a vast expanse, such as the ocean; but they all reflect one and the same moon as best suited to their inherent nature. The shadows are as many as different bodies of water, but we cannot say that one shadow is different from another. However small the moon may appear when there is only a drop of water, she is essentially the same as the one in the boundless sheet of water, where its heavenly serenity inspires awe and reverence. So many, and yet one in all; so diverse, and yet essentially the same; we see it reflected everywhere, and yet is not the Buddha-Body sitting, all alone, in the Seat of Bodhi?

Several questions present themselves here: How can we attain a spiritual insight into the -Sameness of things, and have our minds so transparent as to reflect one eternal truth? How can we understand the principle of sameness in its phenomenal aspect and recognize it in the diversity of desires, feelings, passions, instincts, motives, etc.? How can we see the Buddha-Body in its manifold activities and recognize it

[p. 68]

at once without abstraction and premeditation and elaboration?

The most practical way to solve these problems is not through mere intellection. We must first acquire mental tranquillity, we must be purified spiritually, we must be freed from all disturbing passions, prejudices, and superstitions. Buddhism is a religion first and last, and its aim is always practical and spiritual. Philosophers and scientists will endeavor to come to a definite solution of the problems here cited logically, intellectually, metaphysically, analytically, relying on their demonstrative knowledge. But the way that leads us practical religionists most effectively to the satisfactory adjustment of the puzzling world-riddles which so greatly disturb all deep, serious souls is the practice of meditation, called Dhyana [*1] by Buddhists.

As to the practical part of Buddhism, or Discipline, it will be treated under "Buddhist Ethics," which follows.

Footnotes

^68:1 See the article "Practice of Dhyana." (See <page 146>).

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

BUDDHIST ETHICS

PAI LU-TIEN, a famous Chinese poet, author, and statesman who lived in the thirteenth century of the Christian era, once went to see an eminent Buddhist monk whose saintly life was known far and near, and asked him if he would instruct him in the essentials of Buddhist doctrine. The monk assented and recited the following gatha:

"Commit no wrong, but good deeds do,
   And let thy heart be pure,
 All Buddhas teach this truth,
   Which will for aye endure." [*1]

[paragraph continues] The statesman-poet was not at all satisfied with this simple moral teaching, for he expected to have something abstruse, recondite, and highly philosophical from the mouth of such a prominent and virtuous personality. Said the poet, "Every child is familiar with this Buddhist injunction. What I wish to learn from you is the highest and most fundamental teaching of

[p. 70]

your faith." But the monk retorted, "Every child may know of this gatha, but even a silvery-haired man fails to put it into practice." Thereupon, it is said, the poet reverentially bowed and went home meditatively.

If we are requested to-day to state what is the most fundamental in Buddhist ethics, we have to make the same assertion. There may be and in fact are many schools and denominations in Buddhism, each claiming to have transmitted the true spirit of Buddha; but they will be unanimous in declaring that the gatha aforementioned is one of the common grounds on which they all stand. "Sabba papassa akaranam" is heard in all Southern monasteries, and the lines "Chu wo mo tso, etc.," are seen everywhere in the Eastern lands of Buddhism. If Buddhism were called a sort of ethical culture society on account of this simple code of morality, its followers would make no objection to it, for the recognition of a personal God, or the conception of original sin, or belief in a risen Christ is not thought indispensable to Buddhist salvation. Let a man do what is good and avoid what is bad and have his heart as pure as he can of all egotistic impulses and desires, and he will be delivered from the clutches of ignorance and misery. What ever his dogmatic views on religion, he is one of the enlightened who are above bigotry, intolerance, vanity, conceit, pedantry, and prejudice. He must truly be said to be one whose spiritual

[p. 71]

insight has penetrated into the depths of existence.

Now, the question is: What is good? What is evil? And how is the heart to be cleansed? I am not going to discuss here these great ethical and religious problems from a mere theoretical point of view. Buddhism has nothing to do with utilitarianism or intuitionalism or hedonism or what not. Buddhism is most practical in its announcement of what constitutes goodness. It dogmatically and concretely points out good deeds one by one. First, negatively, it enumerates ten deeds of goodness (kusalam) as most fundamental in Buddhist ethics; while, positively, it considers the six paramitas (virtues of perfection) or eightfold path as the route leading to a virtuous life.

The ten deeds of goodness are: (1) Not to kill any living being; (2) Not to take anything that does not belong to oneself; (3) Not to look at the other sex with an unclean heart; (4) Not to speak falsehood; (5) Not to calumniate; (6) Not to use vile language; (7) Not to make sensational utterances; (8) Not to be greedy; (9) Not to be out of temper; and lastly, (10) Not to be confused by false doctrines. Later Buddhists, however, make ten affirmative propositions out of those just mentioned, thus: It is good (1) to save any living being, (2) to practise charity, (3) to be clean-minded, (4) to speak truth, (5) to promote

[p. 72]

friendship, (6) to talk softly and gently, (7) to be straightforward in speech, (8) to be content with one's own possessions, (9) to be meek and humble, and (10) to think clearly and rightly.

The six paramitas or virtues of perfection are: (1) Charity, which includes the giving away of worldly possessions as well as the proclamation of the Good Law, (2) The observation of the moral precepts as formulated by Buddha, (3) Meekness, (4) Strenuosity, (5) Contemplation, (6) Spiritual enlightenment.

The eightfold path is: (1) Right view, (2) Right reflection, (3) Right speech, (4) Right deed, (5) Right livelihood, (6) Right striving, (7) Right understanding, (8) Right contemplation.

In these various enumerations of Buddhist virtues, what is most unique are perhaps the virtues of strenuosity and those of contemplation and enlightenment. To be good Buddhists, we must never be indolent, whiling away our time to no purpose. Mere piety will not do, so long as there is some work to be accomplished for the sake of humanity and civilization. Love, again, must be accompanied with enlightenment, for the affection is very frequently wasted on account of its blindness. God-fearing is recommendable, but without contemplation we fail to recognize the purport of our own position in the system of the universe. Mere passion leads to fervor and violence if not properly guided

[p. 73]

by contemplation which brings enlightenment, revealing the reason of existence and purifying the heart of ignorance.

Ignorance, according to Buddhism, is the root of all evil, and therefore it advises us in strong terms to have ignorance completely destroyed. And it is only then that the all-illuminating light of enlightenment guides us gloriously to the destination of all beings, where we gain purity of heart, and whatever flows from this eternal fountain of purity is good.

It is evident, then, that by purity of heart is meant absence of ignorance and self-will. But it is not a negative condition, for the most essential postulate of Buddhism is that in each of us there abideth the indwelling reason of the universe, which, when released from the temporal bondage of ignorance and self-will, becomes the master of itself by reducing everything to subjection and restoring it to its right place. In a pure heart, therefore, the universal reason manifests itself in its full glory and works its own destiny unmolested. What one with such a heart wills is what makes the bird sing and the flower smile, what has raised the mountain and makes the water flow. He is hungry and the universe wishes to eat; he is asleep and all the world hybernates. This sounds extraordinary, but the enlightened understand it perfectly well. We cannot make the blind see what we ourselves see. The blind may protest that we are deceiving

[p. 74]

them; but could we do otherwise, inasmuch as they are deprived of the sense we have, or they have not yet learned how to make use of it? It is declared by Buddhists, therefore, that to realize fully the sanctity of religious life one must have Buddha-wisdom awakened from its unconscious slumber in which it is indulging from time out of mind.

Analytically, purity of heart consists of sympathy and intelligence, and on this groundwork the structure of practical Buddhism is founded. Sympathy is the tremulation of the spiritual cord which unites the hearts of all sentient beings; and it is intelligence that discovers the presence of the sacred cord in every one of us and keeps it from being entangled. The cord freely responds to cries of suffering. The heart contrives to effect all the possible means to relieve sentient beings from misery and ignorance. The ten deeds of goodness, the eightfold path, the six virtues of perfection, and many other good things all flow from this one source of pure-heartedness.

It is, then, of unqualified importance in the ethics of Buddhism to have one's heart perfectly cleansed and free from the dust of egotism which has been accumulating through the want of enlightenment. In this sense "blessed are the pure in heart"; they may not see God as he is superficially and superstitiously understood, but they will surely come into personal touch with the

[p. 75]

ultimate authority of conduct and also perceive that the author is not residing outside of their being but within themselves. We read in the Dharmapada:

"Manopubbangama dhamma, manosettha, manomaya;
 Manasa, ce padutthana bhasati va karoti va,
 Tato nam dukkham anveti, cakkara va vahato padam.

"Manopubbangama dhamma, manosettha, manomaya;
 Manasa ce pasannena bhasati va karoti va,
 Tato nam sukhara anveti, chaya va anapayini." [*1]

[paragraph continues] In this respect Buddhism can be said to have a decidedly idealistic tendency, since it fully recognizes the paramountcy of ideas in the moral realm. But we must not lose sight of the fact that Buddhism is not a system of metaphysics, but a religion which is practical more than anything else. What it teaches is the profound spiritual experience of every enlightened man, while the philosopher and theorist will speculate on the facts and offer whatever interpretation they may please or feel compelled to give to account adequately for them.

Buddhism is often charged with passiveness and quietism, lacking the "push" of some other religions; and the backwardness of Asiatic

[p. 76]

nations in the general march of humanity is sometimes ascribed to the influence of Buddhism. Though I am not here entering upon any lengthy polemics, a few words may not be altogether inopportune to refute such an erroneous opinion as this.

If there is anything passive in Eastern culture, which is often no more than tolerance or indifference or self-restraint, it is not due to Buddhism but to the racial idiosyncrasy of Asiatic peoples. Buddhism teaches contemplation and tranquillity and at the same time strenuosity, indefatigable energy in following truth and in destroying ignorance. We see many admirable examples among its believers who have fully illustrated these virtues in their person. The history of Buddhism, while perfectly free from bloodshed and inhumanity, evidences how far its moral teachings have been carried out. Buddhist ethics is not certainly passive or negative, unless the absence of arrogance, aggressiveness, intolerance, bigotry, and fanaticism could be called so.

Religion in its social aspect is not omnipotent, nor is it absolute, as is imagined by some. It is, like many other things created by man, a human institution; it has been discovered, shaped, developed according to the inner necessity of mankind; and as long as he is imperfect and steering his course through innumerable obstacles, religion also must share his imperfection and

[p. 77]

adapt itself to ever-changing surroundings. Instead of imposing its ideals upon man tyrannically and absolutely, religion reconciles itself to his needs, going through all the necessary modifications. Therefore, one religion is diversely interpreted by different peoples among whom it may thrive. To suppose that religion could do anything it desires without regard to individual, national, racial peculiarities is far from the fact. The difference between Oriental and Occidental civilization is by no means due to the difference between Christianity and Buddhism. On the other hand, the difference between the two religions is due to the difference between the two great types of Civilization. Truth, be it religious or philosophical or scientific, is universal, and as such does not allow any modification or distortion. But it suffers modification in its practical application, for it is like a mathematical formula or figure. When conceived a priori, it is formal and not subject to any concrete individualization, which latter in fact is the condition of its particular forms.

In conclusion let me say most emphatically that the ethics of Buddhism is summed up in the purification of the heart, in keeping oneself unspotted even though living in the world; and from this eternal root must sprout such things of God as love, a heart of compassion, the virtue of strenuosity, humbleness of mind, longsuffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another,

[p. 78]

and freedom from all evils. It is said that there were eighty-four thousand virtues of perfection practised by all Bodhisattvas, but they are no more than so many leaves and branches growing from the one stem of pure-heartedness.

Footnotes

^69:1 Translation by Dr. Paul Carus. In Pali:

Sabbapapassa, akaranam, kusalassa, upasampada,
 Sacittapariyodapanam: etam Buddhana sasanam.
                                    --Dhammapada, v. 183

^75:1 All that is, is the result of thought, it is founded on thought, it is made of thought. If a man speaks or acts with an evil thought, pain follows him, as the wheel follows the foot of the ox that draws the carriage. All that is, is the result of thought, it is founded on thought, it is made of thought. If a man speaks or acts with a pure thought, happiness follows him, like a shadow that never leaves him.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

WHAT IS BUDDHISM? [*1]

IT seems to be very appropriate and even necessary at the outset to draw a well-defined line of demarcation between what is understood as Hinayana Buddhism and what is known as Mahayana Buddhism. Most people imagine that there is only one school of Buddhism and that that one school is no other than the Buddhism they have learned from the Buddhist books written or compiled or translated by Western Orientalists--Orientalists who are in many respects prejudiced against the doctrine which they propose to study most impartially. Owing to these unhappy circumstances, the outsiders are either generally ignorant or altogether misinformed of the true character of Buddhism. For what is understood by the Western people as Buddhism is no more than -one of its main divisions, which only partially expresses the spirit of its founder.

I said here "divisions," but it may be more proper to say "stages of development." For Buddhism, like so many other religions, has gone

[p. 80]

through several stages of development before it has attained the present state of perfection among the Oriental nations. And it will be evident to you that if we catch only a glimpse of an object and try to judge the whole from this transient impression, we place ourselves in a most awkward position, and shall be at a loss how to extricate ourselves from it. Therefore, let me try in the beginning to take a comprehensive view of the subject we here propose to expound.

Properly speaking, Hinayana Buddhism is a phase of Mahayana Buddhism. The former is preparatory for the latter. It is not final, but merely a stepping stone which leads the walker to the hall of perfect truth. Hinayanism is therefore more or less pessimistic, ascetic, ethical (to be distinguished from religious), and monastical. It fails to give a complete satisfaction to a man's religious yearnings. It does not fully interpret the spirit of Buddha. The Buddhism now. prevailing in Ceylon, Burma, and Siam may be considered to be betraying in a certain way a Hinayana tendency.

The Buddhism of present Japan, on the other hand, is Mahayanistic. It is more comprehensive, more religious, more humanistic, and more satisfying to the innermost needs of the religious consciousness. It cannot be said to be absolutely free from superstition, error, prejudice, etc., for it is a constantly growing, ever-living faith which knows no ossification or fossilization.

[p. 81]

Some pious people are apt to consider their religious belief to be absolutely fixed and unchanging since the dawn of human consciousness; but they have forgotten, in my opinion, the fact that the human mind is still keeping on unfolding itself, that it has not yet exhausted all its possibilities, that it is constantly coming to a clearer consciousness as to its own nature, origin, and destiny. But what I firmly believe is that in the Buddhism of Japan to-day are epitomized all the essential results reached through the unfolding of the religious consciousness during the past twenty or thirty centuries of Oriental culture.

In a word, what has been known in the West as the teaching of Buddha does not represent it in its true, unadulterated color, for it is Hinayanistic in tendency; that is, it is exclusive and not comprehensive, narrow and limited, and not all absorbing and assimilating. What I propose to expound in this lecture to-night is the Mahayana Buddhism, so called by Buddhist scholars of the East.

Let me point out in this connection what is most characteristic of Buddhism as distinguished from any other religion. I refer to a predominant tendency of Buddhism toward intellectuality, and it seems to me that the reason why Buddhism is always ready to stand before the tribunal of science and let her pass a judgment upon its merits or demerits is due to this intellectual tenor.

[p. 82]

It goes without saying that the intellect does not constitute the most essential element of religion, but we must not forget that a religious system too much given up to sentimentalism (understanding it in its purely psychological sense) is generally prone to accede to unwarranted mysticism, ignoring altogether the legitimate claim of the intellect. Buddhism is fortunately saved from this grievous blunder, and always endeavors not to give a free rein to the wantonness of imagination and the irrationality of affection. Love without enlightenment excludes, discriminates, and contradicts itself . Love is not love unless it is purified in the mill of spiritual insight and intellectual discrimination.

What are, then, the fundamental teachings of Buddhism? I deem it best to consider it from two standpoints, ethical and philosophical, or practical and speculative, or affective and intellectual. The philosophical or speculative is preparative for the ethical or practical, for religion is not a system of metaphysics which plays with verbalism and delights in sophistry, but its aim is pre-eminently practical and spiritual. It must bear fruit in this our everyday life.

To begin with the metaphysical side of Buddhism: (1) We Buddhists believe that as far as phenomenality goes, things that exist are all separate and discrete, they are subject to the law of individuation and therefore to that of

[p. 83]

limitation also. All particular things exist in time and space and move according to the law of cause and effect, not only physically but morally. Buddhism does not, though sometimes understood by Western people to do so, advocate the doctrine of emptiness or annihilation. It most assuredly recognizes the multitudinousness and reality of phenomena. This world as it is, is real, not void. This life as we live it, is true, and not a dream.

(2) We Buddhists believe that all these particular things surrounding us come from one ultimate source which is all-powerful, all-knowing, and all-loving. The world is the expression or manifestation of this reason or spirit or life, whatever you may designate it. However diverse, therefore, things are, they all partake of the nature of the ultimate being. Not only sentient beings, but non-sentient beings, reflect the glory of the Original Reason. Not only man but even the lower animals and inorganic substances manifest the divinity of their source. To use the Christian term, God, it [*1] is visible and audible not only in one of its highest manifestations, whom Christians call Jesus Christ, but also in the meanest and most insignificant piece of stone lying in a deserted field. God's

[p. 84]

splendor is seen not only in the Biblical lilies, but also in the mud and mire from which they grow. The melody of divine reason is heard not only in the singing of a bird or in the composition of an inspired musician, but also in the "slums of life" as Emerson phrases it.

(3) This recognition of the oneness of things naturally leads to our third belief, that the one is the many and the many is the one. God does not dwell in the heavens. It does not direct its affairs in a closed office situated somewhere outside this world. It did not create heaven and earth out of nothingness. According to Buddhism, it is a serious error to seek God outside this life, outside this universe. It is living right among ourselves and directing the course of things according to its innate destiny. Though Buddhists refuse to have God walk out of us, they do not identify it with the totality of existence, they are not willing to cast their lot with pantheists so called. God is immanent, surely enough, but it is greater than the totality of things. For the world may pass away, the universe may be shaken out of its foundation, but God will remain and will create a new system out of the former ruins. The ashes of existence will never be scattered to the winds, but they will gather themselves in the ever designing hand of God and build themselves up to a new order of things, in which it is ever shining with its serene radiance.

[p. 85]

To sum up the first part of this discourse, what may be called the metaphysical phase of Buddhism is to recognize (1) the reality of the phenomenal world, (2) the existence of one ultimate reason, and (3) the immanence of this reason in the universe.

Now to come to the practical side of Buddhism: The aim of Buddhism, to state it briefly, is to dispel the clouds of ignorance and to make shine the sun of enlightenment. We are selfish because we are ignorant as to the nature of self. We are addicted to the gratification of the passions, because we are ignorant as to the destiny of humanity. We are quarrelsome and want to make ourselves powerful and predominant at the expense of our fellow-beings, because we are ignorant of the ultimate reason of the universe. Buddhists do not recognize any original sin, but acknowledge the existence of ignorance, and insist on its total removal as the surest means of salvation. Let us, therefore, all be enlightened as to the statement made before. Let us know that we are all one in the reason of the universe, that the phenomenal world is real only to the extent it manifests reason, that egoism has no absolute sway in this life, for it destroys itself when it tries to preserve itself through its arrogant assertion, and that perfect peace is only attained when I recognize myself in you and you in me. Let us all be enlightened as to these things, and our ignorance and egoism are forever

[p. 86]

departed; the wall that divides is destroyed, and there is nothing which prevents us from loving Our enemies; and the source of divine love is open in our hearts, the eternal current of sympathy has now found its unobstructed path. This is the reason why Buddhism is called the religion of enlightenment.

Now that we stand on this eminence of religious sanctity, we know what Buddhist practical faith is. It is threefold: W to cease from wrong-doing, (2) to promote goodness, and (3) to enlighten the ignorant. Buddhist ethics is the simplest thing to Practise in the world. It has nothing mysterious, nothing superstitious, nothing idolatrous, nothing supernatural. Stop doing anything wrong, which is against the reason of things; do whatever is good, which advances the course of reason in this life; and finally help those who are still behind and weary of life to realize enlightenment: and here is Buddhism in a nutshell. It has nothing to do with prayer and worship and singing and what not. Our simple everyday life of love and sympathy is all that is needed to be a good Buddhist.

I was once asked whether there was such a thing as religious life particularly. To which my answer was simple enough: "Attend to Your daily business, do all you can for the promotion of goodness in this world, and out of fulness of heart help your fellow-beings to gain the path of enlightenment. Outside of this there

[p. 87]

cannot be anything to be specially called a religious life."

In the latter part of the T'ang Dynasty in China, there was a famous poet-statesman who is known in Japanese as Hak-Rak-Ten. He learned that there resided in his district a Buddhist monk greatly noted for his saintly life and scholarly learning. The governor went to see him, intending to discuss some deeply religious topics. As soon as he was ushered into the pretence of the monk, he inquired what was thought by the saint to be the most fundamental teaching of Buddhism. The monk immediately replied that it is the teaching of all enlightened ones to cease doing anything evil, to promote goodness, and to purify one's own heart.

Hak-Rak-Ten was nonplused to receive such a commonplace instruction from the mouth of such a scholarly personage professing the faith of Buddha; for he secretly expected to have something highly metaphysical and profoundly speculative, which would naturally lead them to further philosophizing and contentless abstraction. The poet-statesman therefore retorted: "This is what every child of three summers is familiar with. I desire on the other hand what is most abstruse, most essential, most vital in Buddhism." The monk, however, coldly replied: "Every child of three summers may know what I said now, but even a silvery-haired man of eighty winters finds it difficult to put the Buddhist

[p. 88]

instruction into the practice of everyday life."

And it is said that thereupon the Governor reverentially bowed and went home wiser.

What is philosophical in Buddhism is no more than a preliminary step toward what is practical in it. Every religion, if it deserves the name, must be essentially practical and conducive to the promotion of the general welfare and to the realization of Reason. Though intellectualism is one of the most characteristic features of Buddhism, making it so distinct from any other religious system, it never forgets the fact that our religious consciousness ever demands something concrete, that which is visible to our senses, that which is observable in our everyday life. Religion does not necessarily consist in talking on such subjects as the continuation after death of individual personality, original sin committed by some mythical personages, the last judgment to be given by an unknown quantity, a special historical revelation which takes place in a congested brain, and what not. At least, practical Buddhism does not trouble itself with solving these problems through speculation or imagination or sophistry. Let those theologians who delight in abstraction and supernaturalism discuss them to their hearts' content, for that is their profession. We, plain ordinary Buddhists, will keep on removing selfishness, seeking the light that is everywhere, practising lovingkindness

[p. 89]

that does not contradict or discriminate. Says an ancient sage, "The Way is near, and thou seekest it afar." Why, then, shall we ever attempt to walk away from the path which extends right in front of us, so wide and well paved?

Footnotes

^79:1 Read before the National Geographic Society, Washington, D. C., April, 1906.

^83:1 Let me remark here that it is not at all proper to refer to God, the ultimate source of everything, as masculine as is usually done. God is above sex. It is neither "he" nor "she." Even "it" is not appropriate, but will be preferable to the other pronouns.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90]

  

THE MIDDLE WAY

HUNG JEN, the fifth patriarch of the Dhyana sect in China, who died in 675 A.D., had many disciples. One day he made an announcement to them, saying that whoever was capable of giving a satisfactory proof of his thorough comprehension of Buddhism would succeed him in religious authority. And its outcome was the following two stanzas, the first by one of his most learned disciples and the second by his humble rice-pounder, who, however, was awarded the prize and came to be known later as the sixth patriarch.

"The body is the holy Bodhi tree,
 The mind is like a mirror shining bright;
 Exert yourself to keep them always clean,
 And never let the dust accumulate."
              *      *      *

"No holy tree exists as Bodhi known,
 No mirror shining bright is standing here;
 Since there is nothing from the very first,
 Where can the dust itself accumulate?"
              *      *      *

The thesis I am going to expound this evening is that these two views of Buddhism must be reconciled and harmonized in order to walk on the middle path of truth. But before doing so go

[p. 91]

let me acquaint you with the story of the blind men and the elephant.

There was once a powerful king in India, who called all his blind retainers together to his court, and then brought out one of his largest elephants before them, asking what they thought of it. Being born blind, of course they had never seen an elephant, and now in obedience to the royal command they all came around the animal. Each of them touched only a certain portion of the huge body and came to the hasty conclusion that the portion he handled was really the entirety of the beast.

Those that touched the tail thought the elephant was like a broom; those that touched the leg thought it resembled a huge column; those that touched the back imagined the elephant had a body with the shape of a gigantic drum; those that handled the ear thought it reminded them of the wing of a bird; those that touched the tusk thought it had the shape of a flail. Though thus none of them could describe the complete and exact figure of the elephant, each was narrow-minded enough to insist on the verity of his testimony. The king was very much amused to see how utterly they failed to comprehend the object and how fruitless their quarreling was.

Even so, says the Buddha, is the way most of us look at the truth and quarrel over it. Buddhists may think that Buddhism is the whole

[p. 92]

truth and that all other religions are nothing but superstition and prejudice; while Christians will imagine that their religion is the only thing in the world, that they are monopolizing the divine grace, and that therefore all other teachings are impostures and idolatries and heathenisms. The adherents of Mohammedanism may also be convinced of their absolute possession of God; and so with all the other religious systems of the world. Indeed, every religion is disposed to consider that it alone and no one else holds the key to Heaven and eternal life; and on account of this conviction religionists are ever ready to denounce each other with bitterness hardly worthy of their profession and dignity. But to get at the real truth of things we must shake off all these prejudices and endeavor to comprehend the truth as a whole and be always humble and broad-minded and tolerant.

Now to return to the subject. These two stanzas recited at the beginning are suited, I believe, to illustrate in a way my point just made; that is, to obtain a comprehensive view of truth it is not enough to know only one side of the shield, but we must turn it around and see the reverse, as one is complementary to the other. judging superficially, the two stanzas appear to be directly contradicting each other, for while one advocates the strenuous life the other seems to be tending to nihilism and libertinism.

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] In my opinion, however, Buddhism would be incomprehensible if these two apparently antagonizing views were not synthesized and harmoniously blended. To take hold of only one of these and to think that it comprises the whole of Buddhism will be committing the same error as the blind men in the story of the elephant.

Those two stanzas are the two wings of a bird, or the two wheels of a cart, or, perhaps more exactly, one is like the eye and the other the legs. With the eye we can see, but we cannot move, as we have no legs; with the legs we are able to move, but we are blind, as we are without sight. From the standpoint of absolute truth, there is no such thing as mind or matter or even God or universe. But if we confine ourselves to this view and become blind to the other side, which says that the many exists, that the world actually is, we are like the man who has no legs; we are unable to move, we cannot carry ourselves, we are helpless, we cannot live our daily life. Philosophical insight may be far-reaching enough, but it is contentless, it lacks the material on which to work. Therefore, we must look at the other side and see how our practical life is to be regulated; we must see how our legs are fixed, whether they are strong enough to take us where the eye is directing.

Again, we must not forget that practical discipline alone does not lead us to the abode of final enlightenment. It is very excellent not to

[p. 94]

neglect the cleaning of the mirror, the purifying of the mind, which is likely all the time to collect the dust of passion on it. But if we fail to see that a merely conventional, superficial purification is very much like groping in the dark without the knowledge of the import of existence, our spiritual horizon will draw itself within narrow limits like a snail retiring within the shell, and we may lose our original, intrinsic, spontaneous freedom and tranquillity, which belong to the mind by its own constitution; we may put ourselves under an unnecessary yoke, moving only within a prescribed circle. In other words, we may lose simplicity, naturalness, ease of movement in all our thinkings and doings.

In what follows I will consider the teaching of Buddhism as stated in those two stanzas harmoniously viewed.

The first stanza begins with the line, "The body is the holy Bodhi tree." In this, our body is compared to the sacredness of the Bodhi tree under which the founder of Buddhism attained his spiritual enlightenment and laid down the foundation of his system. The body, however evanescent in its character, must be considered holy even as the holy tree, and all the necessary care should be taken to keep it the worthy vessel in which the spirit is lodged. There are many fanatic believers in asceticism and self-mortification, thinking that this material existence is the root of evil and therefore the more is it tortured

[p. 95]

the purer and holier will grow the spirit. The flesh is in its very nature antagonistic to the spirit. They cannot thrive in harmonious relation with each other. The stronger the flesh the weaker the spirit, and vice versa. The line, "The body is the holy Bodhi tree," is directed against those who hold this kind of view. That is to say, Buddhism does not espouse any ascetic practice, nor does it hold a doctrine tending to a dualistic conception of existence which makes the flesh the source of evil and the spirit. the foundation of everything good. The body as a material phenomenon has its limitations, as a living organism has its impulses, desires, passions, and moods; and there is nothing evil or wicked in it. It is thirsty and it must drink; it is hungry and it must be fed. Exposure in cold affects its well-being and it must be clothed. Too much strenuosity exhausts its energy and it must rest. All these things are inherent in it, and unless we demand that the tree grow as the fish, as a Japanese saying goes, it is altogether irrational to wish our bodily existence to be free from all its constitutional wants. Therefore, Buddhism teaches us not to curb them and torture the body, but to regulate them and prevent their going to self-destruction through wantonness.

The second line reads, "The mind is like a mirror shining bright." This may suggest, when contrasted with the first line, a dualistic conception

[p. 96]

of our existence, making mind independent of body. But I am not going to enter into this complicated problem,--the problem of mind and body, whether they are one or separate. For convenience' sake, I take the mind as the subjective aspect of the body and the body as the objective aspect of the mind. To speak more popularly, the mind is the inner side of the body and the body the outer case of the mind. They both make up one solid reality. Within, it is felt as consciousness; without, it is perceived as body. Now, this body is sacred as the Bodhi tree, and every care has to be taken for its well-being. So with the mind: it must be kept perfectly free from the dirty particles of passion, it must be made to retain its original purity through moral discipline.

The mind as it first came from the hands of God was pure, simple, illuminating as the mirror. But in its constant contact with the world of sense, it has become liable to be carried away by its impressions and impulses without ever reminding itself of its original immaculacy. What comes from outside does not, of course, defile the mind, but when the latter loses its own control and gives way to sensuality, the dust begins to accumulate on it. When its transparency is thus gone, the mind becomes a plaything of all chance impulses and haphazard impressions, like a river-ark drifting in the ocean and being tossed up and down by the capricious

[p. 97]

waves. Buddhism calls such a one ignorant and wanting in the Bodhi (wisdom). It therefore admonishes us to reflect within ourselves constantly and not to give a free rein to the sensual, selfish, unenlightened passions. The reason why Buddhism has so many moral precepts and monastic rules to regulate the lives of lay disciples and monks will now be understood. They are all intended for the purification of the mind and the regulation of bodily desires. They are all meant to ward off the evil influences that disturb serenity of mind and simplicity of heart, in order that our divine nature residing within us may fulfil its own significance and be free in its own operations. Buddhism does not desire to impede in any way our rational activities on account of those moral regulations, but simply to check the progress of evil desires, selfish impulses, and unenlightened motives.

So far we have dealt with the ethical and practical phase of Buddhism as enunciated in the first stanza. Now we must go round and see what is the other side of Buddhism, which constitutes the philosophical foundation of the system. It is not enough for us, it is not worthy of the name of a human being, merely to live and not to endeavor to unravel the mysteries of life. As a rational, conscious being, we must look into the reason of things, we must know the why of existence. To live even as a saint is not quite gratifying to the intellectual cravings of

[p. 98]

the human mind. Of course, every religion must find its culmination in our practical life and not in our abstract speculation. Yet we must seek a philosophical basis of conduct. And Buddhism finds this in the second stanza cited at the beginning of this discourse.

At the first blush the gatha seems to smack not a little of nihilism, as it apparently denies the existence of individuality. But those who stop short at this negative interpretation of it are not likely to grasp the deep signification of Buddhism. For Buddhism teaches in this gatha the existence of the highest reality that transcends the duality of body and mind as well as the limitations of time and space. Though this highest reality is the source of life, the ultimate reason of existence, and the norm of things multifarious and multitudinous, it has nothing particular in it, it cannot be designated by any determinative terms, it refuses to be expressed in the phraseology we use in our common parlance. Why? For it is an absolute unity, and there is nothing individual, particular, dualistic, and conditional. It is a great mistake, an intellectual weakness, to suppose that there is such a thing as a personal God or an immortal soul which stands like a mirror bright and shining and which is susceptible of contamination or corruption. For practical purposes we may provisionally admit the existence of an entity which some people call God and which is independent of this

[p. 99]

world; we may again admit the existence of the soul which is the master of this material phenomenon called body. But to understand these things as actually existing as our short-sighted intellect conceives them will be a fatal mistake.

We must first directly comprehend the spiritual reason of things, and then let us with this insight look upon things that are about us. It would be madness to deny the reality of the phenomenal world, but in the midst of these realities the enlightened see their non-reality. There towers a huge mountain, here lies a boundless ocean, birds are singing, trees are growing, and I sit here looking over the verdant meadow; yet, in spite of all these, nay, indeed by reason of these, I believe in the nothingness of existence, in the non-reality of realities, and in the absolute oneness of all things; and it is thereby that I gain my peace of mind and realize the sense of perfect freedom in my everyday life.

All those moral laws and religious regulations which I at first found unreasonably fettering my free activity are now blessings, for I am no more than those laws and rules themselves. I have become master of them. I am the maker of all those moral laws, and my existence consists in the execution of them. I say this, my dear Christian audience, and then ask you, "Does your God feel himself hampered in his activity when he has so many laws of nature to observe? Does he, for instance, complain of the law of

[p. 100]

gravity when he wants an apple to drop on the ground?" Is he not perfectly free in following the laws of nature? and are we not made in his image? I see, then, no obstacles, no hampering, no discordant jarring in my following the laws of my being. And hereby we go back to the first stanza of moral discipline. We find now the middle course of truth, a complete harmonization of rigorism and naturalism, as the principles advocated by those two stanzas may respectively be so termed.

At first we had a feeling of compulsion and restraint, but now at the mastery of the second stanza we have philosophical intuition and feel perfectly at ease. We move as we will, yet we do not transgress. Our conduct, when our spiritual enlightenment reaches this stage, is in complete accord with the reason of heaven and earth, for we are now identified with it. From the start our religious discipline has been to attain this ease, this freedom, this simplicity, this spirituality, and we have at last reached the goal and are at rest. The bird has acquired two strong wings, the cart is supplied with a pair of running wheels, and we have the eyes that see and the legs that walk. There is nothing now in this life that will possibly cause vexation of spirit or the gnashing of teeth and the palpitation of heart.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 101]

  

THE WHEEL OF THE GOOD LAW

BUDDHISM is a religion which originated in India some five hundred years before the Christian Era. Its founder was Siddhartha Gautama, of royal lineage, who, becoming dissatisfied with the life he was born to enjoy, turned away from all forms of ease and luxury which surrounded him. He retired into the Himalaya Mountains when he was nineteen years old, or, according to another tradition, at the age of twenty-nine. He then devoted himself to penance and mortification, which was at the time considered a necessary discipline for those who sought wisdom and enlightenment. He visited many saints and philosophers whose virtue and wisdom were recognized by the people. Some years of rigorous ascetic life passed, and he was acknowledged by his religious comrades as their spiritual leader. But Gautama himself was not satisfied with this, because he was quite convinced that asceticism was not at all conducive to moral culture and spiritual enlightenment. He then altogether abandoned the practice of fasting and other modes of self-torture, and for taking this course of life he was

[p. 102]

deserted by his comrades. But his conviction and determination were not to be shaken by such trifling affairs; he kept on following what he thought would help him best to attain to wisdom and enlightenment.

After several years of deep meditation he awoke one morning under the Bodhi tree and most clearly perceived the way of enlightenment. He was now no more Gautama, a royal prince, but a Buddha, the enlightened one. He was so overjoyed with the revelation that he spent about a week most profoundly absorbed in contemplation, and it is even said that he was not at all inclined to come out of his transcendental ecstasy and self-reflection and to engage in active propaganda work in the world. But in the meantime his great compassionate heart asserted itself. His thought turned toward the miserable spiritual conditions under which his former associates were laboring and from which he was now completely free. He went back to the woods where they were living. At first, they were disposed to deride their former leader, but as he approached his serene countenance and majestic demeanor completely unnerved them, and they prostrated themselves before him and asked his instruction. They were all converted to his view and came to enjoy the real bliss of life and enlightenment.

Buddha now thought of the world at large: "Though the masses are wretchedly struggling

[p. 103]

under delusion, prejudice, narrow-mindedness, bigotry, and superstition, there must be some in the world who are open to conviction, seeking the light of Dharma, Good Law, and those must be saved by all means. If they become enlightened, they will be able to perpetuate my teaching, posterity will learn through them of wisdom and enlightenment, and the truth will not be lost among sentient beings." Thus resolved, the Buddha came out into the world and made Deer Park in Central India the place of his first missionary activity. In describing this event, the Buddhists say that the Wheel of the Good Law, Dharmachakra, has been caused to revolve in this place for the first time in the history of mankind, marking the formal establishment of Buddhism.

The Buddha's long life of near ninety years consisted in never-tiring peregrinations along the banks of the Ganges and over the plains of Central India. He died while thus traveling, and there were present at the time only a few of his disciples surrounding his death-bed. His body was cremated and distributed among eight principal Buddhist kings of India who wished to honor their spiritual benefactor, each by erecting a splendid stupa or pagoda over his earthly remains.

*      *      *

Having thus roughly sketched the life of the founder of Buddhism, we ask now what is the

[p. 104]

[paragraph continues] Wheel of the Good Law caused by him to revolve more than twenty-four centuries ago.

The most powerful motive that influenced Buddha, who was a royal prince, to abandon all his claims to the earthly advantages and to live a monkish, retiring, contemplative life, was his deep insight into the nature of life. He knew that life as it is lived by most of sentient beings was no more than a series of sufferings, for in trying to escape one misery they invariably fall into another misery which is perhaps greater and heavier to endure. He asked himself whether this misery could be exterminated. To ascertain this it was necessary to find out the real fundamental cause of it all. The removal of the cause was the removal of the effect.

In Ignorance he found the cause of misery that surrounds and oppresses us, sentient beings.

People are ignorant as to the real significance of existence; they blindly crave for it and its continuance merely for its own enjoyment; they do not know what destiny is awaiting them at the end of their earthly career; they do not know how pregnant of meaning is their every act, their every thought, their every feeling; they do not know under what conditions a phenomenon called life is possible, and finally they have a very confused notion concerning the true nature of the soul which they identify with the ego, simple, permanent, and absolute. On account of this ignorance, they suffer; on account

[p. 105]

of this ignorance, they keep on augmenting the causes of misery, and are unable to see the light of wisdom.

Buddha declares, there is no doubt that life is suffering, but it also affords enjoyment. The Buddhist life, however, is not to cling to either, for its real purpose is above the concatenation of pain and pleasure, sorrow and joy. Let us first be enlightened and not deviate from the path of righteousness, and we are saved.

The world in which we abide is a world of contrasts; the life we live is a life of opposites. We have the day and the night, we have the spring and the fall, we have men and women. Some are young, others are old; some are just breathing their last, others have now come to the world. The elements attract and repulse one another. The moon waxes and wanes. The waves are rising and receding. The stars are running toward one another and running away from one another. This is the world of constant change, of eternal motion, where takes place a never-ending interaction of forces. It is one force or one set of forces now that predominates, and then another. The point of concentration is eternally shifting. This is the actual experience of life and also its necessary condition.

Therefore, they will come inevitably to grief--they that disregard this experience and condition of life, they that seek in this world nothing but an everlasting continuation of pleasant,

[p. 106]

agreeable sensations. They want to live, and they do not know that their living is really their death. This contradiction causes them an immeasurable amount of suffering. Apparently they are living, that is, they are moving bodily in the world of contrasts and opposites, of pleasures and pains, of sorrows and joys, of good and evil; and yet they want to escape from this actual state of things, they want to enter into a region where they have only monotony, stagnation, and abeyance, and even extinction. For are they not trying to keep the pendulum of life always up on one side only? The pendulum owes its existence to a constant swinging from one side to the other. When this is stopped, it ceases to be itself and exists no more. To live is to move, to change, to walk up and down, to come in and out, to enjoy and to suffer, to -smile and to weep. To refuse to do so is simply courting death. Life is a fabric interwoven with the woof of pain and the warp of pleasure. It cannot be a monotonous series of pleasures, nor that of pains. Therefore, to enjoy life is not to crave for agreeable stimulations alone, nor is it to shun evils. It is to be above them, both pain and pleasure. It is to use the world, as not abusing it, to state it from the Christian point of view.

But many are they that are ignorant of this our actual experience of life. How hard they endeavor to create as much pleasure as they can

[p. 107]

and to cling to it as long as they can, utterly regardless of the true meaning of life! But it is altogether outside of their power to check the approaching shadow of misery which gradually and stealthily but surely envelops them in the end. The greater the joy of the moment, the stronger its reverse. For where the mountains are high, the seas are deep; and the blackness of a raven looks blacker in the whiteness of snow. It is therefore well to remind these hedonists of the necessary condition of life, that there is no pleasure that is not mingled with pain, that there is no bliss which can be obtained without struggle. Whatever blind pleasure-seekers think to be bliss or curse is no other than the products of sensualism and egoism, so long as they are bound with the iron chain of ignorance. Their deeds, sentiments, and thoughts have no moral or religious significance whatever. Their lives are like the bubbles or foam that vanish without leaving any mark on the water. They die just as they are born, blind, ignorant, and benighted.

Life, according to Buddhism, is worth living, because it enables us to do something, because it gives us a chance to work, to apply ourselves, because it is the condition which makes possible the realization of our moral and spiritual aspirations. Even if it is thought by some to be worth living because it supplies us with pleasures of passing moments or because it is desirable for its own sake, Buddhists will not hesitate to surrender

[p. 108]

their lives once for all and will most gladly be absorbed in the eternal abyss of death. Life has nothing in itself worth clinging to, if it did not promise us an opportunity to work. As sentient, conscious beings that we are, it would be most degrading in us to live the life of a stone, to exist just for the sake of existence and for no other purpose.

All conscientious Buddhists realize that there are laws, natural as well as spiritual, in this universe, and that those who dare to infringe upon them are unerringly and even mercilessly punished therefor. It does not make any difference that this infringement is unknowingly or knowingly done, nor does it help the violator to ask for a special grace. An evil act is committed, and the universe is sorrowful for it, as it retards so much the progress and realization of goodness. But it will not let the evil-doer go unpunished. Therefore, this existence has a purpose to attain, an end to reach, an ideal to manifest; and all beings animate and inanimate are working for this universal goal. Our limited consciousness may not have a very clear conception as to every phase of the significance of life, but all enlightened minds are aware of this, that life is not for mere living, but that it is the path which leads to goodness, suchness, and oneness. The moral and spiritual laws are instrumental for these causes, and as long as we are moving in conformity to the laws of conduct, we are promoting the

[p. 109]

noble, worthy ideals, and our duties of life are thereby discharged. Pleasures and pains, joys and sorrows are merely accidents of life. They do not enter into its essential fabric. And consequently they are ignored by the Buddhists. They are not taken into any serious consideration in the determination or selection of duties of life.

Therefore, let us work, let us develop all our possibilities; not for ourselves, but for our fellow-creatures. Let us be enlightened in our efforts, let us strive after the general welfare of humanity and indeed of all creations. We are born here to do certain things. Life may be misery or not; it concerns us not; let us do what we have to do. We are not here wholly alone, we are not the center of the universe, everything is not coming to us. But our existence is conditioned. The fact that we are here at all is due to our mutual support and dependence. We cannot save ourselves unless others are saved. We cannot advance unless the general progress is assured. We must help one another, we must abandon our vulgar ego-centric ideas, we must expand ourselves so that the entire universe is identified with us, and so that our interests are those of humanity. It is therefore most evident that the assertion of the self-will and the giving way to the clamors of the ego-soul is against the reason of life. The attainment of Nirvana and the manifestation of the Buddhist life is possible

[p. 110]

only through the denial of selfhood and through the united labor of all our brother creatures.

This is the doctrine proclaimed by the Buddha after many years of profound meditation on the bank of the Ganges, and constitutes the essence of the Wheel of the Good Law which has been in fact revolving ever since the dawn of sentiency.

The statements above made are usually put down in formula and called the Fourfold Noble Truth; viz., (1) Life is suffering, (2) There is cause for it, which is ignorance, (3) Nirvana, which transcends pain and pleasure, is the goal of our life, and (4) To reach it the moral laws must be put into practice. [*1]

Footnotes

^110:1 As for what is the practical ethics of Buddhism, read the article entitled "Buddhist Ethics." (<page 69>.)

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 111]

  

THE PHENOMENAL AND THE SUPRAPHENOMENAL [*1]

Anica vata sankhara,
 Uppadavaya dhammino;
 Uppajjitva nirujjanti;
 Tesam vupasamo sukho [*2]

BEFORE entering upon an exposition of this stanza which I have selected for the subject of this morning's discourse, I wish to make a short preliminary remark concerning Buddhism generally.

In the study of Buddhism, one important thing which should be borne in mind by scholars is that the religion of Buddha has nothing to do with supernaturalism. Adhering to facts and their plain statements, Buddhists are always reluctant to give themselves away to personal authority or supernatural--which is, in fact, unnatural--revelation. Buddhism may therefore appear to some people rather flat, prosaic,

[p. 112]

and unentertaining, lacking in the fertility and brilliancy of imagination--though this is by no means the case--and they call it sometimes a sort of ethical culture society and not a religious institution. For they think that no religion can exist without a belief in something extraordinary, miraculous, or supramundane which cannot be logically proved and individually experienced. But Buddha most emphatically insists that what he teaches is nothing unusual, being simply the recognition of a plain fact which can be attested by every mortal, that truth is not revealed to us from an unknown source, but is discovered by ourselves through the exercise of a faculty that can be acquired by all self-conscious beings, and that Buddhism is to be believed rationally and not blindly, to be believed because it is true and not because it has been proclaimed by some mythical personage. Whatever defects the teaching of Buddha may possess, I consider its rationality and matter-of-factness as one of its most characteristic and important features, distinguishing it from many another religion.

Further, this rationality of Buddhism is perhaps one of the many causes which make Buddhists remarkably tolerant and broad-minded toward their rival religionists. It is the pride of every conscientious Buddhist that the history of his faith is perfectly free from the stain of blood. When we of modern days turn over the pages of religious cruelty and barbarism, we are

[p. 113]

struck with a bitter sense of irony. It seems incredible that a religion proclaiming the gospel of love could practise such inhumanity. But I regret to say that even to-day there are some who are so hopelessly dogmatic and fanatical as to think that the rose could be sweet and fragrant only under its own name, that truth loses its worth and verity when known by any other name than their own, and that they would fight even unto death in order to replace one set of superstitions with another.

Science is steadily making its progress in various fields of human knowledge, and our intellectual sphere is being constantly widened; while pious, God-fearing religionists are still dreaming of the by-gone days, when their forefathers were engaged in the so-called holy wars, or when they were conducting the most atrocious, most diabolical outrage against humanity called the Inquisition. These facts often make me pause and think of their ultimate significance, wondering how slow man's progress is in things spiritual.

However this may be, Buddhism through its rationality and matter-of-fact-ness has never been intolerant and narrow-minded. It has always borne in mind that howsoever many avenues there may be to the summit of enlightenment, the position once gained will allow us all, regardless of racial and national variations, to see but one universal. light of truth. The highest being is known under various names and appellations,

[p. 114]

among various peoples on earth, according to their culture, education, and environment. Humanity, being essentially the same everywhere, it will sooner or later come to the knowledge of a supreme moral and spiritual power which governs the universe and whose commands we are compelled under penalty of annihilation to respect and obey. Whatever circumstances may lead to a difference of conception as to the details of its operation, the power of religion is fundamentally love,--love that does not exclude nor discriminate nor particularize; and this kind of love is realizable only when we recognize naturally and rationally and humanly the divinity of all existence and the universality of truth, in whatever divers aspects they may be considered and by whatever different paths they may be approached.

*      *      *

Now to return to the subject-proper of this discourse. Buddhism views the world under two aspects, phenomenal and supra-phenomenal. In the phenomenal world, the law of birth and death rules supreme, and here is nothing that will endure forever. Everything that exists under the sun is fleeting; it passes away as rapidly as the swift ships or as the eagle that swoopeth on the prey. The sun that has risen will set, the mountains so towering will crumble, the turbulent ocean will be drained, and the earth itself will be shaken from its foundations. That which has been is no more, and that which is is changing

[p. 115]

fast. Indeed, the world is no more than a constant flux of becoming. Therefore, the Buddha declares: "Transitory, verily, are things, subject to the law of birth and death; and things born are doomed to die."

Mutability or impermanence is one of the most universal facts of the world, and any one who has his eyes wide open will certainly have to recognize it. And this recognition, when logically carried out, will again certainly lead to nonattachment; and non-attachment will in turn bring out in us the desire for immortality. The reason why we cling to worldliness is because we are not thoroughly acquainted with its true character. Its superficiality, its vainglory, its illusiveness, its butterfly-like carelessness and capriciousness,--all this seems to have a peculiar fascination for the sensuous. They have no time to reflect deeply on the nature of these attractions, for they find themselves hopelessly involved in the whirlpool of vanities before they can at all think of extricating themselves therefrom. They look aghast at those who remind them of the mutability of things and of the evanescent nature of pleasures.

We can well imagine how desperate is the situation of an undisciplined, unreflective mind that almost mechanically pursues objects of sense as the moth follows the flame. But as soon as the mind is awakened to the real state of the phenomenal world, it is unspeakably mortified at its

[p. 116]

past folly and infatuation, and it will gradually develop the desire for non-attachment or freedom, in which it becomes estranged from its sensuous surroundings.

But can a mortal secure anything approaching eternity in this phenomenal realm? If everything here is subject to the irrefragable law of birth and death, we cannot in any way give satisfaction to our inner craving for things everlasting and immortal. Buddhism knows this our spiritual demand and teaches us that there exists a region which is supra-phenomenal and of which the spirit can drink to its satiety.

This supra-phenomenal world has no material limitations and therefore is not subject to the law of birth and death. As it is thus transcendent, it is beyond the reach of pain and pleasure, which is the pendulum that regulates the motive and conduct of the sensuous man. This latter is therefore unable to have even a glimpse of this heavenly region that lies beyond. He only who has freed himself from the shackle of phenomenality is no more affected by its mutability, and he is said to be living on the higher plane of existence. The mountains may be removed from their foundation, and the oceans may be exhausted, but a spiritual man will be above all such material vicissitudes, living a life of eternal peace. He calmly reviews the course of existence as it comes and disappears. He serenely abides in the realm of supra-phenomenality. He

[p. 117]

sees the lamp of eternity shining through the mist of transiency. He rises from the howling tempest of birth and death. Physically, he is, and will be no more, but spiritually he is living forever, unborn and imperishable. Because he has founded his kingdom in the Pure Land; where the waves of being and non-being beat no more; where the veil of ignorance and misery no longer hangs low; where the transitoriness, of particulars is forever gone; where love, pure and infinite, embraces, absorbs, unifies every separate existence; and where joy inexpressible flows from the well of eternal peace. Therefore, the stanza above recited concludes with this line: "The termination of birth and death is bliss."

*      *      *

Now, the question again arises, Is this supraphenomenal absolutely separated from the phenomenal world? If so, how can we of the latter ever expect or aspire to raise ourselves to the higher level of existence? If not, how can the supra-phenomenal be the phenomenal, and vice versa, seeing that they each have apparently irreconcilable characteristics? Learned Buddhist scholars will tell us how the identity of the supraphenomenal and the phenomenal can be metaphysically established, and that our mental constitution demands this oneness, or, otherwise, a dualism, which inevitably results, will destroy the fundamental harmony of our logical reasoning. But we who are aiming at the practical

[p. 118]

result of religious discipline would better eschew the theoretical part and be content with our inner individual experience. We would best avoid theorization and state the verdict of Buddhism on this problem rather dogmatically, which is: All depends upon our spiritual condition. If it is irreproachable and immaculate, supra-phenomenal is phenomenal, phenomenal is supraphenomenal. Both are one and the same. Our earthly life is most exalted, most sacred, most divine, most religious. But if the spirit be defiled and corrupted, even a manifestly holy life is no more than gross blasphemy. All hinges on how we keep the spirit, pure or impure. Buddhism is thus thoroughly idealistic, as every true religion ought to be. It teaches the purification of the heart as the beginning and the end of an religious training.

Therefore, the heart holds the key which opens either the portal of sensuality or that of spirituality. In fact, these different portals do not exist objectively. The universe is one and the same for the just as well as for the unjust, but they approach it from various points of view and color it with their own inner pigment. Some are ignorant and selfish, and they interpret life accordingly. Others are simple-hearted and defilement-free, and thus they read the world. Conventionally, a distinction is made between the two worlds, supra-phenomenal and phenomenal, or sensual and spiritual, or worldly and

[p. 119]

saintly; in reality this is our own creation. Let us be free from delusion and sensualism, and things will present themselves in their own true color and form.

The termination of birth and death, pain and pleasure, desire and satisfaction, in short, of all sorts of dualism, does not mean to escape from the world and to lead an ascetic life, nor does it mean to commit suicide and put an end to existence, which is thought the root of all evil. Buddhism understands by the last line of the stanza recited at the beginning of this discourse the purification of the heart from all its selfish desires and defiled sentiments arising from ignorance and prejudice. For the self is no more than an illusory existence, and the separation of "me" from "thee" is fata morgana, and those who believe in their absolute reality are said to be confused. The heart essentially free and pure becomes contaminated as soon as it is caught in the meshes of egoism, and the result is the production of the three venomous desires [*1] and the five consuming passions. [*2] Of course, it would be madness to deny the relative reality of objects of the senses; no one can refute it. But if we go one step further and declare that their reality is final and ultimate, we logically put ourselves in the most awkward position and morally stand on the most unsteady ground. The irreconcilable egoism which characterizes

[p. 120]

the life of the ordinary man is no more than the natural outcome of this fatal realism. To be saved, we must lift the veil of ignorance and come out into the realm of "calm radiance," which is the abode of the enlightened.

The conclusion of the whole affair, then, is: The world is characterized by mutability and impermanence; those who do not rise above worldliness are tossed up and down in the whirlpool of passion. But those who know the constitution of things see the infinite in the finite and the supra-phenomenal in the phenomenal, and are blessed in the midst of sufferings and tribulations.

Footnotes

^111:1 A sermon  at the Buddhist Mission of San Francisco, November, 1905.

^111:2 Translated into English:

Transitory, verily, are things,
 Subject to law of birth and death;
 Things born are doomed to die;
 Their termination is bliss.

^119:1 Avarice, hatred, and infatuation.

^119:2 Inordinate desires arising from the five senses.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 121]

  

REPLY TO A CHRISTIAN CRITIC
 (LETTER WRITTEN IN 1896 TO DR. JOHN H. BARROWS.) [*1]

DEAR SIR:

Friends in America have sent me a number of the Chicago Tribune, dated Monday, January 13, 1896, which contains the report of your second Haskell lecture, delivered at the Kent Theater in the Chicago University. The subject is "Christianity and Buddhism," and I anticipated a friendly and sympathetic treatment of Buddhism at your hands, for I do not doubt that you desire to be just in your judgment. Your utterances are of importance because they will be received as an impartial representation of our religion, since you, having been Chairman of the Religious Parliament, are commonly considered to have the best of information about those religions that were represented at this famous assemblage. I was greatly disappointed, however, seeing that you only repeat those errors which are common in the various Western books on Buddhism. You say, "The goal which made Buddha's teachings a dubious gospel, is Nirvana, which involves the extinction of love and life,

[p. 122]

as the going out of a flame which has nothing else to feed upon." Now the word Nirvana means "extinction" and it means the eradication of all evil desires, of all passions, of all egotism, so that the flame of envy, hatred, and lust will have nothing to feed upon. This is the negative side of Nirvana. The positive side of Nirvana consists in the recognition of truth. The destruction of evil desires, of envy, hatred, extinction of selfishness implies charity, compassion with all suffering, and a love that is unbounded and infinite. Nirvana means extinction of lust, not of love; extinction of evil, not of existence; of egotistic craving, not of life. The eradication of all that is evil in man's heart will set all his energies free for good deeds, and he is no genuine Buddhist who would not devote his life to active work, and a usefulness which would refuse neither his friends nor strangers, nor even his very enemies.

You say that "human life does not breathe, in Buddhism, the atmosphere of divine fatherhood, but groans under the dominion of inexorable and implacable laws." Now, I grant that Buddha taught the irrefragability of law, but this is a point in which, as in so many others, Buddha's teachings are in exact agreement with the doctrines of modern science. However, you ought to consider that while the law is irrefragable, no one but those who infringe upon it groan under it. He who understands the laws of existence, and especially the moral law that

[p. 123]

underlies the development of human society, will accommodate himself to it, and thus he win not groan under it, but in the measure that he is like Buddha he will be enlightened, he will be a master of the law and not a slave. In the same way that the ignorant savage is killed by the electric shock of lightning, while an electric engineer uses it for lighting the halls and streets of our cities, the immoral man suffers from the moral law, he groans under its inexorable and implacable decree, while the moral man enjoys it, and turning it to advantage glories in its boundless blessings.

This same moral law is the source of enlightenment and its recognition constitutes Buddhahood. This same moral law we call Dharmakaya, which is eternal, omnipresent, and all-glorious. We represent it under a picture of a father, and it was incarnated not only in Gautama-Buddha, but also in all great men in a higher or lesser degree, foremost among them in Jesus Christ, and, allow me to add, in George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and other great men of your country. Allow me to add, too, that Buddha's doctrine, far from being skepticism, proclaims the doctrine that man can attain enlightenment and that he attains it not only through study and learning, which, as a matter of course, are indispensable, but also and mainly through the earnest exertions of a life of purity and holiness.

There are many more points in your lecture

[p. 124]

which I feel tempted to discuss with you, but they refer more to Christianity than to Buddhism, and may imply a misunderstanding of Christian doctrines on my part. I am anxious to know all that is good in Christianity and the significance of your dogmas, so that I may grow in a comprehension of truth, but I have not as yet been able to see that mankind can be benefited by believing that Jesus Christ performed miracles. I do not deny the miracles nor do I believe them; I only claim that they are irrelevant. The beauty and the truth of many of Christ's sayings fascinate me, but truth does not become clearer by being pronounced by a man who works miracles. You say that, "We can explain Buddha without the miracles which later legends ascribe to him, but we cannot explain Christ--either his person or his influence--without granting the truth of his own claim that he did the supernatural works of his father." We may grant that Jesus Christ is the greatest master and teacher that appeared in the West after Buddha, but the picture of Jesus Christ as we find it in the Gospel is marred by the accounts of such miracles as the great draft of fishes, which involves a great and useless destruction of life (for we read that the fishermen followed Jesus, leaving the fish behind), and by the transformation of water into wine at the marriage-feast at Cana. Nor has Jesus Christ attained to the calmness and dignity of Buddha, for the passion of anger

[p. 125]

overtook him in the temple, when he drove out with rope in hand those that bargained in the holy place.

How different would Buddha have behaved under similar conditions in the same place! Instead of whipping the evil-doers he would have converted them, for kind words strike deeper than the whip.

I do not dare to discuss the statements you make about Christianity, for fear that I may be mistaken, but I am open to conviction and willing to learn.

I hope you will not take offense at my frank remarks, but I feel that you, if any one in Christendom, ought to know the real teachings of Buddha, and we look to you as a leader who will make possible the way for a better understanding between all the religions of the world, for I do not doubt that as you unknowingly misrepresent the doctrines of the Tathagata, so we may misunderstand the significance of Christianity. We shall be much obliged to you if in justice to the religion of Buddha you will make public this humble protest of mine, so that at least the most important misconceptions and prejudices that obtain among Christians may be removed.

I remain, with profound respect,

Your obedient servant,

Kamakura, Japan.                                SOYEN SHAKU.

 

Footnotes

^121:1 Reproduced from THE OPEN COURT, January, 1897.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT.

THE fundamental idea of Buddhism is "to disperse the clouds of ignorance in order to make the moon of enlightenment shine out in her glory."

By ignorance Buddhism understands the assertion of self-will, which is the root of all evil and misery in this world. Self-will is ignorance, because it is blind to the truth that the world is a relative existence, that the self separated from other fellow-selves is non-entity, and that individuals acquire their reality in proportion as they penetrate the foundation of existence. This truth is ignored by the principle of self-assertion. A man who is self-assertive pushes himself forward without any regard to the welfare of his brother creatures; he hails himself when he reaches the heights of self-aggrandizement; but unfortunately he fails to perceive that his success is but the road to his final destruction. For self-assertion really means self-annihilation. We live in fact in the oneness of things and die in isolation and singleness.

In Christian terminology, selfhood is the "flesh," or "the old man"; such is the meaning

[p. 127]

when Jesus exclaims that "the spirit is truly ready, but the flesh is weak" (Mark xiv, 38), or when Paul speaks of "the old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts" (Eph. iv, 22), or when the flesh is spoken of as profiting nothing (John vi, 63), or allusion is made to its infirmity (Rom. vi, 19), or to its not pleasing God (Rom. viii, 8), or to its lusting against the spirit (Gal. v, 17). Christians are not so intellectual as Buddhists, and therefore, philosophically considered, the terminology of the former is not so definite and to the point as is that of the latter. Besides, the adoption of popular terms often suggests a wrong conception which is not intended; for instance, the distinction between the flesh and the spirit has a tendency to a dualistic interpretation of life. To conceive the nature of the flesh to be diametrically and radically opposed to that of the spirit is not in accord with the essentially monistic teaching of Buddhism. Those who are prone to asceticism and self-mortification are as much condemned by Buddha as the followers of hedonism for being ignorant and far from attaining the path of enlightenment.

When the ignorance of self-assertion is removed, Buddhism teaches, the enlightenment of universal lovingkindness takes its place; and the arrogance, tenacity, indefatigability, and impertinence which characterize egotistic impulses are all converted to do service for the general welfare of humanity,

[p. 128]

and they will then assume different names as most desirable virtues. As soon as the veil of ignorance is raised, the glory of enlightenment which is love is revealed, and we do no more hanker after self-gratification. Why? Because the Buddha-intelligence is universal and works in every one of us to bring out the consciousness of oneness underlying all individual phenomena. We as individuals are all different; mine is not thine and vice versa; and in this sense egoism is true, and the assertion of self-will is permissible to that extent. But we must never lose sight of "the same God that worketh all in all," and "in which we move and live and have our being," for he is the source of eternal life and the fountain of love. "Not what I will, but what thou wilt," is the most fundamental religious truth, not only in Christianity, but in Buddhism. Not the assertion of self-will, but the execution of the will of that being in which we are all one, constitutes the condition of enlightenment.

We must not, however, suppose that the divine will becomes manifest only when all the lust and passions of the flesh are destroyed. This is the teaching of anchorites and not of Buddhists. What the latter teach is to make the inclinations of the flesh those of the spirit, so that there will be left no hiatus between the two. What one wills, the other wills, and no discord or mutual exclusion is then allowed. To express this more Buddhistically, ignorance does

[p. 129]

not depart when enlightenment comes in, but ignorance itself becomes enlightenment; self-will is not annihilated in order to make room for the divine will, but self-will itself assumes divinity.

In the beginning of this discourse, I said that the fundamental idea of Buddhism is to disperse the clouds of ignorance in order to see the moon of enlightenment in her glory. This may suggest the thought that ignorance and enlightenment are fundamentally different and mutually contradicting, and that one thing called ignorance goes out and another thing called enlightenment comes in to take its place, as these two do not agree. But in truth I have there followed the popular dualistic conception of the matter; and therefore let me repeat that in Nirvana, according to Buddhism, there is not such distinction as light and shade, ignorance and enlightenment, coming and going. If there is anything in Nirvana, it is all enlightenment, all purity, and an unconditioned freedom from selfishness. Accordingly, when one attains Nirvana, which is the realization of the Buddhist life, ignorance itself becomes enlightenment and self-will the divine will. What we thought ignorance is now enlightenment; where we located the final abode of the ego-soul, we have now the fount of divine will. This may sound somewhat sacrilegious, but the Buddhists are such consistent and never-yielding monists that they do not shrink from carrying out their logic to the end; they are not

[p. 130]

at all afraid of the charge of blasphemy or irreligiosity likely to be preferred by some pious Christians.

This purification or illumination of self-will, however, must not be confused with antinomianism. or libertinism. The latter is given up to the wantonness of self-will and not to the free activity of the divine will. What the pure-hearted do is always pure, while whatever comes from a heart defiled with egoism is defiled and irrational. There are many points in the religious life which make it very difficult to distinguish the latter from the ethical life, for both are so closely related. But we could consider the subjectivity of religion as most characteristically contrasted to the objectivity of ethics. The distinction between the self-will and the divine will must be personally felt and individually experienced. This may sound vague and be considered as taking refuge in the maze of subjectivism; but the fact is that religion has its foundation in our subjective life, and anything that relates to it lacks in definition and exactitude so typical of things objective and intellectual. Religion, when devoid of this mystical element, loses its irresistible fascination. Of course, we must not make it abide always in the camera obscura of imagination and mysticism. We must take it out in the broad daylight of science and subject it to an intellectual scrutiny. But we cannot for all that ignore the fact that there is something in religion which defies

[p. 131]

or escapes the most penetrating searchlight of intellectual analysis. And in this something there lies its charm, its raison d'etre, and its power to remove vexation of spirit.

Whatever this be, Nirvana, in which the spirituality of a human being is fully realized, can be attained only after most strenuous moral efforts on the part of the aspirant. Intellectual knowledge can be acquired through an outside agency; we of latter days may be far wiser in this particular respect than all our venerable moral and religious teachers of bygone ages, such as Socrates, Plato, Buddha, and Christ. But the spiritual region lies within, and each of us must strive, through our own inner and individual efforts and not through any outside agency, to unfold ourselves and bring about enlightenment. We may have high ideals, but let us remember that they can be realized only after long discipline and untiring exertion. Let those therefore forever strive--those that wish to follow the fundamental idea of Buddhism.

"When the scholar driveth away sloth by earnestness,
 He attaineth to the palace of wisdom,
 Sorrowless in the sorrowing world,
 And the wise one, he, looks upon the ignorant,
 Even as one on the mountain-peak looks upon one on the ground,"
                                         --Dharmapada, 28.

 

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT

THERE are many characteristic points of divergence between religion and philosophy, though they have so much in common that some scholars, broadly speaking, take religion for practical philosophy and philosophy for speculative religion. The difference between the two, however, is not merely that of practicability and theorization. It is, in my judgment, more deeply rooted and fundamental. What is it, then? I believe that that which makes religion what it is in contradistinction to philosophy or ethics consists in the truth that it is essentially founded on facts of one's own spiritual experience, which is beyond intellectual demonstrability and which opens a finite mind to the light of universal effulgence. In short, spiritual enlightenment is indispensable in religion, while philosophy is mere intellection.

By spiritual enlightenment I mean a man's becoming conscious through personal experience of the ultimate nature of his inner being. This insight breaks as it were the wall of intellectual limitation and brings us to a region which has been hitherto concealed from our view. The

[p. 133]

horizon is now so widened as to enable our spiritual vision to survey the totality of existence. As long as we groped in the darkness of ignorance, we could not go beyond the threshold of individuation; we could not recognize the presence of a light whose most penetrating rays reveal all the mysteries of nature and mind. The spirit has found that the light is shining within itself even in its fullest glory, that it even partakes something of this universal light, that it blundered miserably in seeking its own ground outside of itself, that "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, which is, and which was, and which is to come," is no more nor less than itself. And it is through this kind of enlightenment only that we fully satisfy our inmost spiritual yearnings and groanings. Without this, religion loses its significance, becoming merely an applied philosophy or system of metaphysics.

The enlightenment which thus constitutes the basis of the religious life is altogether spiritual and not intellectual. The intellect in its very nature is relative and cannot transcend its own limitations. It is dualistic no matter how high it may take a flight. It always needs an object with which to deal, and it never identifies itself with it, for it cannot do so without destroying itself. There must be the "I" and the "not-I" whenever intellection takes place. Self-alienation or keeping itself aloof from the object on which it exercises itself is the raison d'etre of intellect,

[p. 134]

being its strongest as well as its weakest point. Its strongest point is seen in science and philosophy, while its weakest point is revealed in religion. For religion needs a synthetic faculty by which it can comprehend the realm of particulars, the realm of constant strivings and eternal contradictions. Religion wants to understand and preserve life as it is found, and not to "dissect and murder" it as is done by the intellect. Religion wants to see and not to demonstrate; to grasp directly with her own hands and not to rely upon a medium; to see intuitively and not discursively. What is therefore asked for by a religious spirit is fact and not representation, enlightenment and not reflection; and this will be supplied by no amount of speculation and imagination. We must advance one step further beyond the limits and boldly plunge into the abysmal depths of the Unknowable.

Can a mortal being with his limited consciousness have an insight into a field without its ken? No; as long as he relies solely upon his intellectual faculty, he is forever barred from so doing. For the intellect is really superficial and cannot penetrate through spatial and temporal relations, nor can she free herself from the bondage of logical sequence; and therefore the inner life of our being is altogether unknown to the intellect. We cannot be said to know an object thoroughly by merely becoming familiar with all its attributes, qualities, potentialities, and what not.

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] All these can be understood through the senses and the reasoning faculty. There yet remains a certain feature of the object, the knowledge of which alone completes our understanding of it. Philosophy and science have done a great deal for the advancement of our knowledge of the universe, and there is a fair prospect of their further service for this end. But they are constitutionally incapable of giving rest, bliss, joy, and faith to a troubled spirit; for they do not provide us with a complete knowledge of existence, and are unable to lay bare the secrets of life. What they teach concerns the shell and husk of reality. In order to satisfy fully our religious yearnings we must not stop short at this; we must appeal to a different faculty, which will reveal to us the inmost life of the universe.

Fortunately, we are in possession of this peculiar faculty which might be called the religious sense, and through the exercise of which we come to realize the significance of our existence. How unbearable life would be, if we were not allowed to have this religious faculty and yet we had to raise those spirit-harassing questions which could not be solved by logic!

The faculty seems to have all the essential characteristics of the feeling. It is intuitive and does not analyze; it is direct and refuses a medium of any form. It allows no argument, it merely states, and its statement is absolute. When it says "yes," the affirmation has such a

[p. 136]

convincing force as to remove all doubts, and even skeptically disposed intellectual minds have to admit it as a fact and not a whim. It speaks as one with authority. True, it has only a subjective value, which, however, is just as ultimate and actual as sense-perception. Being immediate, there is no other way to test its validity than that each experience it personally, individually, and inwardly. The sun is risen on the horizon and all that have eyes see it and harbor not the shadow of a doubt as to its presence there. The inner sense which I have called religious faculty makes us feel the inmost life that is running through every vein and every artery of nature; and we are completely free from skepticism, unrest, dissatisfaction, and vexation of spirit. We never try to raise a doubt about the true nature of the feeling and ask ourselves whether it is merely a phenomenon of mental aberration or due to a calenture of the brain. We simply feel, and nothing more or less is to be asserted or denied. And this is what constitutes spiritual enlightenment.

Mere talking about or mere believing in the existence of God and his infinite love is nonsense as far as religion is concerned. Talking and arguing belong to philosophy, and believing in its ordinary sense is a sort of hypothesis, not necessarily supported by facts. Religion, however, wants above everything else solid facts and actual personal experience. If God exists, he

[p. 137]

must be felt. If he is love, it must be experienced and become the fact of one's inmost life. Without spiritual enlightenment, all is an idle talk, like a bubble which vanishes under the least pressure. Without the awakening of the religious sense or faculty, God is a shadow, the soul a ghost, and life a dream. In Buddhism this faculty is known as .

If we distinguish faith from knowledge, the latter can be understood as simply intellectual, while the former is intuition gained through the exercise of the Prajna. In knowledge subject and object coexist and condition each other; in faith they become one, there is identity only and no mutuality. Transcending the reciprocity of the "I" and the "not-I," the Prajna beholds the universe in its ultimate oneness and feels all forms of life in their essential sameness. It knows that the impulse it feels is the quickening spirit of all existence, and that the pulsation of sympathy which beats in response to outside stimuli is the source of universal animation. Why? Because the Prajna feels so by reason of its own constitution.

The dictates of the Prajna are final and there is no higher faculty in our consciousness to annul them. Faith is absolute within its own limits and the office of the intellect is to explain or interpret it objectively. Speaking religiously, faith is fact and has to be reckoned with as such. It is only when it wants to express itself that

[p. 138]

intellection comes in, and individual culture or personal equation makes itself felt. To a great extent, I feel that differences or quarrels among the so-called religionists concerning their confession of faith are due to personal differences in esthetic taste, intellectual calibre, and the influence of environment, while the fact of faith as such remains fundamentally the same with Christians, Buddhists, or Taoists. As everybody endowed with sentiency feels the ice cold and the fire warm, so what the Prajna sees or feels in its inmost being must be universally the same. God, Allah, Dharmakaya, Tao, Holy Ghost, Brahma, and what not, are a mere verbal quibbling over the same fact which is felt in the deepest depths of our being. The inner reason of things which creates or destroys the three thousand worlds in the same breath must be smiling at the human trifling over naught.

Spiritual enlightenment must not be confused with trance, a state of consciousness in which there is nothing but blankness. Those who have had no spiritual experience or who have not come to recognize in the awakening of Prajna something altogether unique in our subjective life-phenomena frequently speak of enlightenment as an abnormal psychical condition, and try to explain it under the same category as hallucination, somnambulism, self-suggestion, and the like. But the fact is that enlightenment is not a special psychic state

[p. 139]

which excludes or suppresses the ordinary exercise of other mental faculties. Enlightenment goes and must go along with all psychological phenomena. If enlightenment is to be gained through the suspension of mentation, religion is false and faith is barren. Enlightenment is enlightenment because it enlightens all our motives, desires, whims, determinations, impulses, thoughts, etc. It does not stand separate from other states of consciousness, sending its commands from a certain vantage ground. In an enlightened mind a feeling or thought as it occurs is purified and free from the taints of ignorance and egotism. Enlightenment is constant and not sporadic. It permeates every mental fibre and works without rest. It is not something extraordinary that takes place by fits and starts. Spiritual enlightenment sheds light on the very reason of consciousness, for it is not a particular event of our psychical life.

When a Buddhist scholar was asked what was the Path, he answered, "The normal state of mind." In other words, spiritual enlightenment consists in following the natural course of human for the enlightened find the ultimate reason of existence in their desire to drink or to eat according to their natural appetite, in their sympathy for the misery and suffering which are endured by the ignorant masses, in their aspiration to fathom the mysteries of nature and life, in their ever-assiduous attempt to realize the

[p. 140]

ideals of lovingkindness and universal brotherhood on this earth, in their ever-varying devices to let each creation fulfill its inherent mission and rest in its reason of existence. The religiously ignorant behave outwardly just as the enlightened, for as far as intellect and morals go there is no manifested difference between the ignorant and the enlightened. But, spiritually speaking, there is a wide gap dividing them, because one knows what he is striving after while the other is blindly feeling his way, and again because one finds an unspeakable bliss in all his doings and thinkings and feelings, while the other labors under a peculiar sensation of uneasiness and compulsion which he cannot well define but feels at the bottom of his heart.

A person may be very learned in all things, and his philosophical knowledge may be very profound. He has studied all the ancient lore of wisdom, and has even formulated his own system of metaphysics in which he has incorporated all the results of his erudition and speculation. But from the religious point of view he is yet far from enlightenment, for his study is like that of the artist who has painted a dragon and forgot to put the eyes in. His elaborate delineation and coloring in various hues of this huge mystic animal have miserably failed to produce the effect desired and attempted, for the eyes are blank and show no trace of the fiery animation which is possessed by the monster. The scholar has neglected the most important

[p. 141]

factor that is absolutely necessary in making up the complete knowledge of the universe. He thought that he knew everything under the sun when he exercised his intellectual power to its full extent and considered existence from all the possible standpoints which his understanding could grasp. But, as I stated before, the knowledge of an object is not complete unless its inner life or reason is felt; in other words, unless the duality of a knowing mind and a known object vanishes, and life is comprehended as it is and not in its intellectual mutilation. Buddhism says that even a blade of grass trembling in the evening breeze cannot be known so long as we cling to this form of individuation and are unable to merge our particular selves with the self of grass. Buddha, it is reported, once brought a flower before an assemblage of his disciples and showed it to them without any comments whatever, and the entire congregation was bewildered what to make of this strange behavior on the part of their master, except Kashyapa, who, thoroughly understanding the import of this .incident, softly smiled and nodded. Thereupon the Buddha solemnly proclaimed, "I am in possession of the Eye which penetrates into the depths of the Dharma and the mysteries of Nirvana. I now give it to thee, O Kashyapa, that thou mayest guard it well." What sort of eye could it have been which was transmitted from Buddha to Kashyapa and which made the

[p. 142]

latter comprehend something incomprehensible in the flower in Buddha's hand?

In this we see the discrepancy between philosophy and religion more and more accentuated. It is sufficient for philosophy to know, but religion demands more than that. When the existence or non-existence of God is proved, philosophers are satisfied, for they have made the utmost use of the intellect, which is their sole weapon of attack and defense. In fact, they sometimes show a disposition to deride those who disagree with them. But as long as there is some unutterable yearning in the human heart for something more real, more vital, more tangible than mere abstraction, mere knowing, and mere "proving," we must conclude that our consciousness, however fractional, is capable of coming in touch with the inmost life of things in another way than intellection. The existence of Prajna, the organ of spiritual insight, therefore, is admitted by Buddhism, and their religious discipline is directed towards the awakening of this faculty, which is rightly designated "the mother of all Buddhas," and "the sharpest sword that cuts ignorance and egotism."

But one must not imagine that there is consciousness, there is Prajna, and there is enlightenment. In point of fact, they are all one simultaneous act of the universal reason. We speak of them as if they were three different things: the sentient being is endowed with consciousness,

[p. 143]

and this consciousness has the faculty to become acquainted with its own reason of existence, and the resultant mental state constitutes what is called spiritual enlightenment. Intellectually, this distinction of course is inevitable, but as a man actually experiences it, the only fact he is conscious of is that he is, not as a particular being separate from others, but as simply existing and living. Buddhist scholars call this exalted state of spirituality cunyata = emptiness, or canti = tranquillity, or samadhi = contemplation.

A few words may not be amiss here to explain these terms, which have been frequently misunderstood by the outsider. "Emptiness" may suggest a deprivation of all mental operations as in the trance, and "tranquillity" a dormant, sleeping, or "not-yet-awakened" state of mentality, while contemplation" tends to indicate a withdrawal or suspension of all psychical functions; thus making spiritual enlightenment a synonym of death or annihilation. Such misinterpretations as these, however, ever prove the inherent onesidedness of the understanding and consequently its inability to lead us to the final abode of eternal reason which has really "no-abode." Buddhists use the term "emptiness" to describe the "deep things of God" which are absolute and not relative. For when we say, "he is," it may be taken as meaning that he is as we individuals are.

By "All is empty, quiet, and abiding in eternal

[p. 144]

contemplation," Buddhists understand that the ultimate reason of the universe as manifested in all forms of animation and intelligence knows no disturbance, no commotion, no transgression, in the midst of all the stirring-up and moving-on of this phenomenal world. This, again, I have to state, guarding against misapprehension, does not mean that there is something within each existence which like the axle of a wheel or like the kernel of a seed forms its central part and remains quiet or alive even when the peripheral parts are whirling around or going to decay. Buddhism most emphatically condemns this sort of dualism as heretical and evil-breeding. The Ultimate reason is absolutely quiet when it is moving on; it is perfectly empty when it is filled to the brim; it is eternally one when it is differentiating itself into myriads; it has no abode whatever where it finds itself located, housed, and roomed. And there is nothing paradoxical or enigmatic in this statement; it is plain as daylight and simple as the logical axiom a = a. But to realize its truth one must be spiritually enlightened, must go beyond the narrow limits of intellection, must drink directly from the well of eternal vitality and find out personally how it tastes, bitter or sweet.

Let philosophers and theologians say whatever they wish concerning the existence, nature, and activity of God; let them speculate as much as they wish on the theology of the universe and

[p. 145]

the destiny of mankind and many other abstruse problems of metaphysics; but let you who earnestly aspire to know what this life really means turn away from those wise men and reflect within, or look around yourselves with an open heart which watches and receives, and all the mysteries of the world will be revealed to you in the awakening of your Prajna.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

PRACTICE OF DHYANA

THREE things are usually considered necessary for the realization of the Buddhist life: 1. Cila (moral precepts), 2, Dhyana (contemplation), 3,  (wisdom); and these are cooperative and mutually related.

To be a good Buddhist, first of all, a man must be ethical and regulate his life according to the moral precepts, which were laid down by Buddha and are universally applicable. Next, he must be philosophical, that is, he must train his mind so as to be capable of practising introspection. The mechanical observance of the moral laws is not becoming to the dignity of a rational, conscious being. Man must be master of himself, intellectually, morally, and spiritually. To be so, he must be able to examine his own states of consciousness and direct his thoughts and desires to the end where lies the rationale of existence. This habit of self-examination is attainable only through the practice of dhyana, contemplation. Lastly, he must be religious, by which is meant that he should have an insight going deep into the indwelling reason of things, and this insight, according to Buddhism, is the

[p. 147]

outcome of the mental training acquired by self-introspection. Prajna, which is the most fundamental of all the psychic faculties possessed by man, lies inactive and altogether unrecognized when the mind is busily engaged in receiving impressions and elaborating on them through the ordinary process of understanding. It has no time to withdraw within itself and watch how impulses are awakened, stimuli felt, thoughts matured, in short, how the inner working goes on. It never knows what a precious stone it harbors within its being, which, when discovered, will illuminate the inmost significance of life and put an end to all vanities and vexations of spirit. The practice of dhyana, however, brings this latent faculty of consciousness to the surface and makes a new man out of old, worn-out, and apparently unpromising stuff.

Therefore, the three requisites of the Buddhist life are helping one another like a tripod to stand together and to accomplish their common purpose. The moral precepts cannot be intelligently and thoroughly followed unless a man has gained a complete control of himself through contemplation and self-introspection. But this dhyana-practice will not be of much value, religiously considered, to his daily life unless it leads to the awakening of Prajna (wisdom) and to the comprehension of the ultimate facts of life. Whatever difference there may be in the different schools of Buddhism, those three forms

[p. 148]

of discipline, as they are often called, are admitted by them all as most essential for the realization of their ideal life. The importance of the moral codes as formulated by Buddha will not be questioned even by followers of non-Buddhist faiths, and as to the signification of spiritual insight, which constitutes the essence of religious life, I have somewhere touched upon the subject. In this short discourse I wish to say a few words concerning the practice of dhyana.

*      *      *

Dhyana is essentially Hindu or, rather broadly speaking, Oriental in its origin as well as in its significance. In this we can trace one of the many characteristics which lend a peculiarly charming color to Oriental culture. The Oriental mind ever strives after the One and is so idealistic in all its tendencies as sometimes altogether to ignore the external world. It shuts out all the impressions the senses may bring in from without, thus endeavoring to realize the aspiration after unity and eternality. It does not care so much for the subjugation of natural forces to its own will as for the deliverance of self from its illusory imprisonment. It does not antagonize the world in which it lives, but calmly contemplates it, reviewing its vagaries or vicissitudes, or whatever they may be termed. It dwelleth not in the manyness of things, but in their oneness, for its ultimate abode is in the region of the absolute and not in the phenomenal realm.

[p. 149]

[paragraph continues] A mind like this naturally takes more to contemplation than to the strenuous life; it thinks more and acts less; it appreciates instead of criticizing; it synthesizes instead of analyzing. The practice of dhyana, therefore, was the most natural thing for the Oriental people.

The Western people were not altogether unfamiliar with dhyana, as we can judge from the life of a mystic or a medieval Christian monk. But their so-called contemplation or meditation was not as systematic and did not necessarily form a part of their religious discipline. The Hebrews were too fanatically religious to allow themselves the time to reflect. The Greeks were rather scientific and intellectual, while the Romans were pre-eminently practical. The German mystics perhaps were more or less after the Hindu type in their general mental constitution, but they seem not to have made the practice of dhyana a prominent feature of their doctrine. Be that as it may, there is no doubt that dhyana, is an Oriental production.

What is dhyana, then? Dhyana literally means, in Sanskrit, pacification, equilibration, or tranquillization, but as religious discipline it is rather self-examination or introspection. It is not necessarily to cogitate on the deep subjects of metaphysics, nor is it to contemplate on the virtues of a deity, or on the transitoriness of mundane life. To define its import in Buddhism, roughly and practically, it is the habit of with

[p. 150]

drawing occasionally from the turbulence of worldliness and of devoting some time to a quiet inspection of one's own consciousness. When this habit is thoroughly established, a man can keep serenity of mind and cheerfulness of disposition even in the midst of his whirlwind-like course of daily life. Dhyana is then a discipline in tranquillization. It aims at giving to a mind the time for deliberation and saving it from. running wild; it directs the vain and vulgar to the path of earnestness and reality; it makes us feel interest in higher things which are above the senses; it discovers the presence in us of a spiritual faculty which bridges the chasm between the finite and the infinite; and it finally delivers us from the bondage and torture of ignorance, safely leading us to the other shore of Nirvana.

Dhyana is sometimes made a synonym for camatha and samadhi and samapatti. Camatha is tranquillity and practically the same as dhyana, though the latter is much more frequently in use than the former. Samapatti literally is "put together evenly" or "balanced," and means the equilibrium of consciousness in which takes place neither wakefulness nor apathy, but in which the mind is calmly concentrated on the thought under consideration. Samadhi is a perfect absorption, voluntary or involuntary, of thought into the object of contemplation. A mind is sometimes said to be in a state of

[p. 151]

samadhi when it identifies itself with the ultimate reason of existence and is only conscious of the unification. In this case, dhyana is the method or process that brings us finally to samadhi.

*      *      *

Now, the benefits arising from the exercise of dhyana are more than one, and are not only practical but moral and spiritual. Nobody will deny the most practical advantage gained through presence of mind, moderation of temper, control of feelings, and mastery of oneself. A passion may be so violent at the time of its agitation that it will fairly consume itself to utter destruction, but a cool-headed man knows well how to give it the necessary psychological time of rest and deliberation and thus to save himself from plunging headlong into the Charybdis of emotion. And this cool-headedness, though in some measure due to heredity, is attainable through the exercise of dhyana.

Intellectually, dhyana will keep the head clear and transparent and, whenever necessary, make it concentrate itself on the subject at issue. Logical accuracy depends greatly on the dispassionateness of the arguing mind, and scientific investigation gains much from the steadiness of the observing eye. Whatever be a man's intellectual development, he has surely nothing to lose, but a great deal to gain, by training himself in the habit of tranquillization.

In these days of industrial and commercial

[p. 152]

civilization, the multitudes of people have very little time to devote themselves to spiritual culture. They are not altogether ignorant of the existence of things which are of permanent value, but their minds are so engrossed in details of everyday life that they find it extremely difficult to avoid their constant obtrusion. Even when they retire from their routine work at night, they are bent on something exciting which will tax their already over-stretched nervous system to the utmost. If they do not die prematurely, they become nervous wrecks. They seem not to know the blessings of relaxation. They seem to be unable to live within themselves and find there the source of eternal cheerfulness. Life is for them more or less a heavy burden and their task consists in the carrying of the burden. The gospel of dhyana, therefore, must prove to them a heaven-sent boon when they conscientiously practise it.

Dhyana is physiologically the accumulation of nervous energy; it is a sort of spiritual storage battery in which an enormous amount of latent force is sealed,--a force which will, whenever demand is made, manifest itself with tremendous potency. A mind trained in dhyana will never waste its energy, causing its untimely exhaustion. It may appear at times, when superficially observed, dull, uninteresting, and dreamy, but it will work wonders when the occasion arises; while a mind ordinarily addicted to dissipation

[p. 153]

succumbs to the intensity of an impulse or a stimulus without much struggling, which ends in complete collapse, for it has no energy in reserve. Here, let me remark incidentally, can be seen one of the many characteristic differences between Orientalism and Occidentalism. In all departments of Oriental culture a strong emphasis is placed upon the necessity of preserving the latent nervous energy and of keeping the source of spiritual strength well fed and nourished. Young minds are trained to store up within and not to make any wasteful display of their prowess and knowledge and virtue. It is only shallow waters, they would say, that make a noisy, restless stream, while a deep whirlpool goes on silently. The Occidentals, as far as I can judge, seem to be fond of making a full display of their possessions with the frankness of a child; and they are prone to a strenuous and dissipating life which will soon drain all the nervous force at their command. They seem not to keep anything in reserve which they can make use of later on at their leisure. They are indeed candid and open-hearted-traits which sometimes seem wanting in the Orientals. But they certainly lack the unfathomableness of the latter, who never seem to be enthusiastic, clamorous, or irrepressible. The teaching of Lao-tze or that of the Bhagavadgita was not surely intended for the Western nations. Of course, there are exceptions in the West as well as in the East. Generally

[p. 154]

speaking, however, the West is energetic, and the East mystical; for the latter's ideal is to be incomprehensible, immeasurable, and undemonstrative even as an absolute being itself. And the practice of dhyana may be considered in a way one of the methods of realizing this ideal.

*      *      *

In the Chandradipa-samadhi Sutra, the benefits of dhyana-practice are enumerated as follows: (1) When a man practises dhyana according to the regulation, all his senses become calm and serene, and, without knowing it on his part, he begins to enjoy the habit. (2) Lovingkindness will take possession of his heart, which, then freeing itself from sinfulness, looks upon all sentient beings as his brothers and sisters. (3) Such poisonous and harassing passions as anger, infatuation, avarice, etc., gradually retire from the field of consciousness. (4) Having a close watch over all the senses, dhyana guards them against the intrusion of evils. (5) Being pure in heart and serene in disposition, the practiser of dhyana feels no inordinate appetite in lower passions. (6) The mind being concentrated on higher thoughts, all sorts of temptation and attachment and egotism are kept away. (7) Though he well knows the emptiness of vanity, he does not fall into the snare of nihilism. (8) However entangling the nets of birth and death, he is well aware of the way to deliverance therefrom. (9) Having fathomed the deepest depths

[p. 155]

of the Dharma, he abides in the wisdom of Buddha. (10) As he is not disturbed by any temptation, he feels like an eagle that, having escaped from imprisonment, freely wings his flight through the air,

*      *      *

The practice of dhyana is often confounded with a trance or self-hypnotism,--a grave error which I here propose to refute. The difference between the two is patent to every clear-sighted mind, for a trance is a pathological disturbance of consciousness, while dhyana is a perfectly normal state of it. Trance is a kind of self-illusion which is entirely subjective and cannot be objectively verified, but dhyana is a state of consciousness in which all mental powers are kept in equilibrium so that no one thought or faculty is made predominant over others. It is like the pacification of turbulent waters by pouring oil over them: no waves are roaring, no foams are boiling, no splashes are spattering, but a smooth, glossy mirror of immense dimension. And it is in this perfect mirror of consciousness that myriads of reflections, as it were, come and go without ever disturbing its serenity. In trances certain mental and physiological functions are unduly accelerated, while others are kept altogether in abeyance, the whole system of consciousness thus being thrown into disorder; and its outcome is the loss of equilibrium in the organism--which is very

[p. 156]

opposite to what is attained through the practice of dhyana.

Again, some superficial critics think that Buddhist dhyana is a sort of intense meditation on some highly abstracted thoughts, and that the concentration which works in the same way as self-hypnotism leads the mind to the state of a trance, called Nirvana. This is a very grievous error committed by those who have never comprehended the essence of religious consciousness, for Buddhist dhyana has nothing to do with abstraction or hypnotization. What it proposes to accomplish is to make our consciousness realize the inner reason of the universe which abides in our minds. Dhyana strives to make us acquainted with the most concrete and withal the most universal fact of life. It is the philosopher's business to deal with dry, lifeless, uninteresting generalizations. Buddhists are not concerned with things like that. They want to see the fact directly and not through the medium of philosophical abstractions. There may be a god who created heaven and earth, or there may not; we could be saved by simply believing in his goodness, or we could not; the destination of evil-doers may be hell and that of good men paradise, or this may be reversed: true Buddhists do not trouble themselves with such propositions as these. Let them well alone; Buddhists are not so idle and superficial as to waste their time in pondering over the questions which have no

[p. 157]

vital concern with our religious life. Buddhists through dhyana endeavor to reach the bottom of things and there to grasp with their own hands the very life of the universe, which makes the sun rise in the morning, makes the bird cheerfully sing in the balmy spring breeze, and also makes the biped called man hunger for love, righteousness, liberty, truth, and goodness. In dhyana, therefore, there is nothing abstract, nothing dry as a bone and cold as a corpse, but all animation, all activity, and eternal revelation.

Some Hindu philosophers, however, seem to have considered hallucinations and self-suggested states of mind as real and the attainment of them as the aim of dhyana, practice. Their conception of the eightfold dhyana-heaven in which all sorts of angels are living is evidence of it. When the mythical beings in those regions practise dhyana, they enter into different stages of samadhi. They first come to think that they are lifted up in the air like a cloud; (2) they feel the presence of some indescribable luminosity; (3) they experience a supernatural joy; (4) their minds become so clarified and transparent as to reflect all the worlds like a very brilliant mirror; (5) they feel as if the soul has escaped bodily confinement and expanded itself to the immensity of space; (6) they now come back to a definite state of consciousness in which all mental functions are presented and the past and present and future reveal themselves; (7)

[p. 158]

they then have the feeling of absolute nothingness, in which not a ripple of mentation stirs; (8) lastly, they are not conscious of anything particular, nor have they lost consciousness, and here they are said to have reached the highest stage of samadhi.

But according to Buddhism all these visionary phenomena as the outcome of dhyana are rejected, for they have nothing to do with the realization of the religious life. In the Curangama Sutra fifty abnormal conditions of consciousness are mentioned against which the practiser of dhyana has to guard himself, and among them we find those psychical aberrations mentioned above.

*      *      *

To conclude. Dhyana, beside its being an indispensable religious discipline for attaining enlightenment, is one of the most efficient means of training oneself morally and physically. It is beyond question that dhyana leads to the awakening of a hidden spiritual faculty possessed by all conscious beings and to the realization of one's spiritual significance in spite of the various material limitations. But, apart from this religious importance, dhyana is singularly effective in the tranquillization. of the mind, the purification of the heart, as well as in the relaxation of the nervous tension. A man will never realize, until he is thoroughly trained in dhyana, how confused and entangled his thoughts are, how susceptible he is and how

[p. 159]

easily his mind is unbalanced, how soon his nervous force in reserve is exhausted and his entire system is given up to an utter breakdown, how fully his senses are occupied in seeking excitement and gratification, and finally how neglectful he has been in the promotion of higher and nobler interests of life and in the cultivation of refined thoughts and purer feelings. Dhyana, therefore, whatever its religious merits, is not devoid of its practical utilities and even for this reason alone its exercise is universally to be recommended.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 160]

  

KWANNON BOSATZ

THE topic of my discourse to-day is Kwannon Bosatz, or Goddess of Mercy as she is commonly known.

I am not going, let it be remarked at the beginning, to make any historical investigation of this deity, or Bodhisattva according to Buddhist terminology. I am not concerned here with the pedigree of Kwannon, who was originally a Hindu male deity of greatest energy, called Avalokiteshvara. Whatever history she may have had in ancient India, the deity is no more known to us as she or he was. According to our present knowledge, Kwannon has come to be identified with his consort Tara and is no longer a male deity representing supreme energy, but as the goddess of mercy and love, the principle of universal lovingkindness. We shall take her, then, as we understand her in these latter days, ignoring altogether her historical development. Moreover, Kwannon is no more a Hindu deity, but has completely been naturalized in the Far Eastern soil.

In my opinion, man's religious needs are essentially the same whether he has his accidental

[p. 161]

place of birth in the East or in the West. When he feels the needs, he endeavors to find the best means of gratification according as he is situated, either in his history or tradition or folklore or superstitious beliefs. From the material thus obtained he constructs the real thing needed, and with his intellectual development he elaborates it and brings it to perfection. When we see this finished production of man's inner religious yearnings, we altogether put aside its historical relations and appreciate it as it is as a manifestation of man's inner nature. Our consideration of Kwannon will then be from this standpoint.

Now, Kwannon consists of two words, kwan and on, which is an abbreviation of a fuller title, Kwan-ze-on. Kwan literally means "to see," "to perceive," or "to look upon." But let me remind you that this perception is not physical, not sensorial, but spiritual, inward, and transcendental. It is an insight into the true significance of things with the mental eye which is possessed by all sentient beings. The next character, ze, means the "world" or "universe," including everything that exists; and the last, on, is "sound" or "voice." Taken altogether, Kwan-ze-on is "one who perceives the world-sound."

Here I have to remark that the sound Kwannon perceives, it may be known to you, is not physical, that it has no reference to the wave-motion of atmosphere, which reaching our auditory

[p. 162]

nerves is interpreted as sound. When we view things that are about us with the spiritual eye, they all become convertible to one another, so that one can be expressed by the terms of another: sound is color, color is taste, odor is sound, etc. From the sensuous point of view, this is altogether incomprehensible, for what the eye sees is color and what the ears hear is sound, and they are absolutely irreducible to each other's terms. In the phenomenal world individuation rules, and things cannot be otherwise than they appear to our particularizing senses. But when we transcend the limits of phenomenality, or when we look inward into the very reason of things, all forms of separation and particularization vanish, and taste becomes smell, sight becomes hearing, etc., which is characteristic of the supra-individual realm of ideality.

This being so, one who hears the world-sound is no more nor less than he whose spiritual insight has gone deep into the very foundation of existence, whose knowledge comprehends everything and understands the reason of things, why they are so and not otherwise, and whose life and thought are in perfect harmony with the mind that controls the destiny of the universe. He has gone, as we say, to the other shore, he is a Buddha, the enlightened.

If we wish to reach this stage of spirituality, we must train ourselves not to be distracted by the phenomenality of things, but directly to

[p. 163]

envisage the ultimate essence of existence which is free from all modes of duality. In this, the perceiving and the perceived are not two, the hearing and the heard are not separate, the "I" and the "not I" are not what they appear to the senses. But there is but one reality and we can call it by any name. Buddhism is not particular in this matter of designation. You may call it God or reason or life or suchness or love, but let it only be noticed that you must not make it something altogether outside this universe, nor must you consider it a mere abstraction which has no business in this concrete world. To avoid this miscomprehension on the part of the untrained, Buddhism has called it "Sound" in this particular relation and declares that all things are of one Sound in which every discordant note is eternally synthesized. Not only the wind that blows, the waves that roar, the flute that whistles, but the mountains, rivers, oceans, suns, heavens, and everything that exists, are no more than so many variations of the Sound, eternal, ultimate, and unifying. Do not think that this is too hidden and esoteric; only train yourselves in the meditation of Buddhism, and you come to realize the truth of my statement. First, recognize the oneness of the ultimate principle, and think of its abiding in all things; and you will surely comprehend the point here somewhat mystically presented.

We often find another appellation attached to

[p. 164]

[paragraph continues] Kwannon, the Goddess of Mercy, and that is Bodhisattva (Bosatz in Japanese and Pu sa in Chinese). It means a sentient being whose essence is wisdom, and is a title generally given to a highly enlightened, saintly Buddhist, or, in fact, to any sage of any faith.

What constitutes the essence of this being is love that sacrifices itself for the sake of others. A Bodhisattva will deny himself if he knows that by so doing he can save his fellow-beings from suffering, misery, ignorance, and self-delusion. Or he may assert himself if he sees that his creatures can be saved best through this assertion. His only object of life is to benefit others, his only principle of life is love, and his means of achieving this end and of realizing this principle is wisdom. He moves by love and regulates his movement by wisdom. His fountain of love is inexhaustible, and every feeling and thought and desire and resolution and everything else comes from this divine source; but his love does not move blindly, but most intelligently, for he is not only pure in heart but enlightened in mind. He knows that his self is a delusion, that if it exists at all it is in others and not in himself, that it embraces the whole universe and is not groaning within the narrowest and darkest cell of his own person.

Kwannon, therefore, is not only love incarnate, but a representation of wisdom and enlightenment. But as we have wisdom more emphatically

[p. 165]

represented by such Bodhisattvas as Monju (Manjucri in Sanskrit) and Seshi, we see in Kwannon the virtue of lovingkindness made most predominant, and for this reason the Bodhisattva has come to be represented as feminine. Whatever other virtues may be possessed by woman, she is adored for her tenderness, lovingkindness, longsuffering, and self-sacrifice. If she be without these qualities, however brilliantly intellectual or majestically imposing, she might be honored and respected, but she will never be an object of worship and adoration, for nobody will come before her, fall on his knees, and ask her for an all-embracing love--love which is pure, unselfish, and ennobling. Kwannon, therefore, will best be conceived as feminine.

When we ordinarily speak of love, we are apt to think of its blindness and exclusiveness. For love is contrasted with hate and associated with impulse. Because of the former, love necessarily discriminates and is prone to partiality and concentration; and because of the latter, love moves without regard to its consequence and knows not its ultimate purpose. But the love that makes up the being of Kwannon is not that kind of love, but that which is most comprehensive and universal as to embrace the entire universe, just and unjust, good and evil, pious and sacrilegious. In this love there is not a trace of partiality or discrimination. It is like rain that falls on all forms of vegetation, while each plant is benefited

[p. 166]

in its own peculiar way. It is, again, like the sun that shines upon all forms of life, while the latter make use of the sunshine each according to its own nature. The sun or rain thus benefiting everything harbors no thought of discrimination. Kwannon's love for all sentient beings is no more than an exhibition of the universal energy of animation and enlightenment, which creates, fashions, and regulates the world.

It is now evident to you, I believe, that in such spiritual love as that of Kwannon there is no commercialism, no mercenary principle, which says, "I give you so much and in return expect from you such favor." Kwannon abhors this spirit of modern times which penetrates almost every fibre of our civilization. If you want to worship Kwannon, she must be worshiped in spirit and truth. You must have your heart cleansed of impurity, selfishness, and ignorance. You must have your egoistic impulses baptized by the water of enlightenment. It is only when you are pure in heart and humble in spirit that you are ushered into the presence of Kwannon Bosatz and become the recipient of all her infinite blessings. This is what Buddhism would call grace. Grace is not a special favor conferred upon an unworthy subject, but the legitimate result of self-purification.

Buddhists think love emanates from wisdom or samadhi or self-reflection. As long as we are sense-bound, we are not able to destroy the wall

[p. 167]

of individuation and to realize the universal principle of love; and accordingly our love is limited, impulsive, and exclusive. In order to realize the love of Kwannon, we must shake off the filthy garment of selfishness by means of sound contemplation and earnest self-discipline. Unreflective persons live generally on the surface of things. They are unable to assort and systematize the ever-varying impressions which they get through the senses. They move according to blind impulses and selfish desires, by which they are bound hands and feet. They are unreasonable. They do not penetrate the bottom of things where lies the reason of existence. They may sometimes do some noble deeds, but that is not enlightenment, only madness. What is done by fits and starts does not constitute wisdom. The love that originates from an impure source cannot be made the foundation of our religious life.

When the love of Kwannon is made concrete, it expresses itself in various forms according to the needs of circumstance. In the Pundarika Sutra Kwannon is described as incarnating herself in many different personages. For instance, when she sees it most expedient to save a certain class of people through a certain mode of expression, she will assume the special mode and exercise all her influence in that capacity. She will be a philosopher, or merchant, or man of letters, or person of low birth, or anything else

[p. 168]

as required by the occasion, while her sole aim is to deliver all beings, without exception, from ignorance and selfishness. Therefore, wherever there is a heart groping in the dark, Kwannon will not fail to extend her embracing arms.

It will be interesting in this connection to compare the activity of Kwannon with what Paul conceives of the activity of God as in his first epistle to the Corinthians (xii, 4 et seq.): "Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all." . . . .

This conception of Kwannon, it seems to me, has had a great influence in shaping the national character of my countrymen. Whatever tenderness of heart they may have, they owe it to the lovingkindness of Kwannon. Those who have traveled in Japan must have seen a great many shrines dedicated to her and multitudes of people gathering before them and offering flowers and incense and prayers. This may be a superstitious practice,--this worshiping of a mythological deity; but when we think what spiritual consolation and benefit the masses derive therefrom, we must be a little lenient in our judgment of their intellectual attainment. Being simple-hearted, they believe in the response by Kwannon to their earnest prayers. The universal wave of love is vibrating in every sentient being, and

[p. 169]

when this innermost chord is touched through the deepest spiritual commotion one can suffer, it vibrates, and the vibration reaches the very source of life, which is the love of Kwannon, and there takes place the phenomenon called communion. The universal love-principle has thus made itself known to the human heart.

To add one more word. It seems to me that the Virgin Mary of your religion corresponds to the Buddhist Goddess of Mercy, Kwannon Bosatz. Human nature everywhere seems to request what Goethe calls "eternal femininity." Christians according to their needs have created Maria. Though she is a historical figure, she has been invested with all the necessary qualities that will satisfy their inner yearnings. Buddhists have Kwannon, who, whatever her historical standing in critical Buddhism, fully answers their religious cravings. From the Christian point of view, Kwannon is a Maria incarnate; and from the Buddhist standpoint, Maria is a representative of Kwannon among a class of people who designate themselves Christians. The truth must be one and humanity the same everywhere, and it is my earnest wish that the time will soon come when the East and the West will all join in the adoration of truth, disregarding all their accidental differences and contradictions.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170]

  

BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE [*1]

ONE of the features peculiar to Buddhism and which appeals most powerfully to Oriental imagination is that man's life is not limited to this existence only, that if he thinks, feels, and acts truthfully, nobly, virtuously, unselfishly, he will live forever in these thoughts, sentiments, and works; for anything good, beautiful, and true is in accordance with the reason of existence, and is destined to have a life eternal.

It is not the ideal of the Buddhist life to escape worldliness and to enter into eternal stillness, as is sometimes understood by Occidental scholars. Buddhists do not shun struggle and warfare. If a cause is worth contending for or defending, they will not hesitate to sacrifice for it not only this life but all of their future lives. They will appear upon this earth over and again and will not rest until they have gained the end, that is, until they have attained the ideal of life. Man, therefore, lives as long as his ideas and feelings conform to the reason of the universe. This is the Buddhist conception of life eternal.

[p. 171]

If I am not mistaken, it was at the time of the Independence War, or it might have occurred somewhere in the Old Country,--you will pardon my imperfect memory--but the fact is that a military officer who served as a spy for his native country was caught by the enemy and was sentenced to be hung. At the execution the officer exclaimed, "The pity is that I have only one life to sacrifice for my country." Pity indeed it was that the officer did not know the truth and fact that from his very corpse there have risen so many patriotic spirits breathing the same breath that he breathed. He was not dead, he was never hung, he did not vanish into an unknown region; but he is living a life eternal, he is being born generation after generation, not only in his own country, but also in my country, and in your country, and in fact all over the three thousand worlds (as they were believed to be existing in Hindu mythology).

In this respect a Buddhist general quite famous in the history of Japan had a decided advantage over the Christian officer just mentioned. The general is still worshiped in Japan as the type of loyalty and patriotism. He lived about six hundred years ago. Before the Emperor of the time came to know him, he was a rather obscure general and would have died without imprinting his immortal name on the pages of Japanese history. But Fate decreed otherwise, and he was requested by the Emperor to lead his royal

[p. 172]

army against the invading enemy, who greatly outnumbered his forces and was led by a very able general. Masashige, which is the name of our hero, had his own plan as to how best to make a stand against the onslaught of the overwhelming enemy. But some ignorant court favorite influenced the Emperor and the hero's proposition could not prevail. He then knew he was going to fight a losing battle, but determined to do his best under the circumstances, if necessary to fight to the bitter end. At last came the day, and the enemy developed the plan as he had calculated. There was nothing for him to do but to check the advance of the enemy as long as he could, so that the Emperor could find time enough to make his safe escape from the capital. He fought most gallantly, and repeatedly repulsed the furious attacks of the enemy. But many times outnumbered, and occupying a strategically disadvantageous position, and himself covered with many wounds, he saw the uselessness of further resistance. He then gathered his commanding generals around him and asked them if they had anything to desire in this life before they bid farewell to all things earthly. They replied that they had done everything within their power, their obligations were completely filled, and there was nothing more to be desired. But our hero, Masashige, made a solemn utterance: "I pray that I be born seven times on this earth and

[p. 173]

crush all the enemies of our Imperial House." They all then drew their daggers and put an end to their present lives.

I do not know how this story strikes you Christian audience, but upon us Buddhists it makes a very profound impression. It seems to be pregnant with a great religious significance. It is not altogether necessary to specify how many times we are to be reborn. Let us only have a thought or feeling that is worth preserving and actualizing, and we shall come to this life as many times as is necessary to complete the task, even to the end of the world. Let us only do what is in accordance with the reason of things, and the work, which is no more than the world-reason actualized, will create a new agency as needed through successive generations. This corporeal existence, this particular temporary combination of feelings and thoughts and desires, may dissolve, may not last forever as it is, for it is no more than an agent in the hands of the world-soul to execute its own end. When it decrees that its agent must put on a new garment, this will take place as it is willed. "Let there be light," it commands, and behold there it is!

It is not Buddhistic, therefore, to hanker after personal immortality and to construct diversity of theories to satisfy this illegitimate hankering. Do whatever you think right and be sincere with it and the work will take care of itself, hankering or no hankering after immortality.

[p. 174]

[paragraph continues] My Japanese hero gave an utterance to his inner feeling and conviction only to make his generals perfectly understand the significance of his and their work. He did not mean to come to this life exactly seven times, nor did he mean to continue his personal existence as he was individually. He did mean this, that his work should find its new executors in the form of a worshiper or an imitator or a successor or a disciple or a friend, who would be inspired by that noble example. And most certainly did he find a legion of his selves following closely behind his back. Are not all loyal and patriotic soldiers and sailors who died in the recent war with Russia all the incarnations of our most beloved hero-general, Masashige? Did he not find his selves in all those brave, courageous, self-sacrificing hearts? Was he not leading in spirit all these soldiers to the execution of the work he once planned? Who says, then, that the hero breathed his last when he fought this losing battle some six hundred years ago? Is he not indeed still living in the heart of every patriotic and loyal citizen of Japan, nay, of any people that aspires to be a nation?

When the late commander Hirose went to blockade the entrance to Port Arthur, he must have been inspired by the same sentiment which he expressed in his swan song; he must have become conscious of the immortality of the work in which he has thoroughly incarnated himself.

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] In his last utterance he put this in verse: "Though I may die here while executing this work, I will come back seven times over and again to discharge my duties for my country. I have nothing to fear, nothing to desire at the present moment. Calmly and smilingly I embark on this fated boat." [*1] Can we not say here that the idea which was our long deceased hero himself, found its conscious expression in this brave Commander? Those who fell in the field and on the water were equally his incarnations, only with this difference that the former gave utterance to his conscious sentiment, while the latter remained mute, though in their inmost hearts the same sentiment was moving. If otherwise, how could they enjoy that serene contentedness which characterized every stricken warrior of my country in the recent war?

Some may say that this is fatalism or determinism, but every clear-headed thinker would see in this not a fatalistic conception of life but a hopeful solution of existence, a firm belief in the final triumph of good over evil, and the calm assurance that the individual lives as long as it identifies itself with a noble thought, worthy work, exalted sentiment, uplifting impulse, in short, with anything that cements the brotherly tie of all mankind. Those who are used to look at things from the individualistic point of view may not understand very clearly what I have so

[p. 176]

far endeavored to explain to you; but the fact is, however tenaciously we may cling to our individual existences, we are utterly helpless when that which comprehends everything wills otherwise than our selfish desires; we have but to submit meekly to the ordinance of the unknown power and to let it work out its own destiny regardless of ourselves. When Schleiermacher defines religion as a feeling of absolute dependence, he has rightly laid his hand on that indefinable, uncertain sense which lurks in the dark recesses of every conscious mind,--the sense which intuitively recognizes the weakness of individuals as such, but which feels an immense strength in their identification with a supraindividual being or power. In this, it must be evident to you, there is nothing fatalistic nor fantastic.

All sincere Buddhists are firmly convinced of the truth of non-egoism, and they do not think that the value of an individual as such is ultimate. On account of this, they are not at all disturbed at the moment of death; they calmly accept the ordinance and let the world-destiny accomplish what end it may have in view. This freedom from the individualistic view of life seems to have largely contributed to the perfection of the Japanese military culture known as Bushido. Old Japanese soldiers, nobles, and men of letters, therefore, displayed a certain sense of playfulness even at the most critical moment

[p. 177]

when the question of life and death was to be decided without the least hesitation. This playfulness, as I view it, stands in a marked contrast to the pious, prayerful attitude of the Christians in their dying moments.

Ota Dokwan, a great Japanese statesman-general of some four hundred years ago, was assassinated in his own castle by a band of spies sent by his enemy. They surrounded him when he was altogether unarmed. He was stabbed, and he fell on the ground, covered with wounds and helpless. One of the assassins approached closer, and applying the dagger at the victim's throat to finish their cowardly work, he asked what the unfortunate general had to say before he bade farewell to this world. The general most calmly answered:

"At the moment like this
 It must be a struggle indeed
 To part with this life so dear,
 If I had not abandoned altogether
 The thought of ego, which is a non-reality."

Finding peace of heart in this solution of life, Buddhists, whatever their social positions, are ever ready to sacrifice their lives for a cause which demands them. They know that the present individual existences will come to an end, they will not be able to see the faces dearest to them, to hear the voices tenderest to them, as they depart from this world; but they know at the same time that spiritually they live for

[p. 178]

ever and are in constant communication with their friends, that they never lead a solitary, unconnected life in some invisible region. What Buddhism has contributed to Japanese culture is its higher conception of life and nobler interpretation of death.

Buddhists do not think that "I" is "I" and "you" is "you" when each of us is Separated from the other. "I" is possible when "you" exists, so with "you" who is possible through the existence of "I." This consideration is very important, as it constitutes one of the fundamental principles of Buddhist ethics. For according to Buddhism an unconditional assertion of egoism is due to the ignorance of the significance of the individual. Most people imagine that the individual is a final reality, stands by itself, has nothing to do with other fellow-individuals; in fact their existence is tolerated only so far as it does not interfere with his own interests. They first build a formidable fort around individualism and look down at their surroundings, thinking that the position must be defended at all costs. For it is their conception of life that with the downfall of individualism the universe goes to pieces.

The Oriental mode of thinking, however, differs from this. We take our standpoint first on that which transcends individuals, or we take into our consideration first that which comprehends all finite things, that which determines the

[p. 179]

destiny of the universe; and then we come down into this world of relativity and conditionality, and believe that the earth will sooner or later pass away according to the will of that which controls it. That is to say, individuals will not stay here forever, though the whole which comprises individuals will. Therefore, Oriental ethics considers it of paramount importance to preserve the whole at all hazards, whatever may be the fate of individuals.

For instance, suppose my country is threatened by a powerful enemy, and I will, when called for, sacrifice everything personal and try to do my best for the conservation of my national honor and safety. This is what is called patriotism. My parents are old and they are not able to take care of themselves, and I will do everything for their comfort and alleviate the loneliness of their declining age. Did they not bring me up to this stage of manhood? Did they not go through all forms of hardship for my sake? Did they not care for me with infinite tenderness of heart? Do I not owe them all that I am to-day? Did they not help me to this position and enable me to do whatever is within my power for the welfare and preservation of the whole to which I belong? When I think of this, the feeling of gratitude weighs heavily on me, and I endeavor to be relieved of it by doing all acts of lovingkindness to my parents. This is what you call filial piety, and the same consideration will apply

[p. 180]

to the cases of teachers, elder people, friends, and family.

Whatever be the defects of Oriental ethics,--and I think they are not a few,--I firmly believe that what makes Oriental culture so unique is due to the emphasis laid upon patriotism, filial piety, faithfulness, and abnegation of self.

*      *      *

Before concluding, I wish to add a few words as a Buddhist subject of Japan. All the world knows what Japan has achieved so far in the history of mankind, especially what she has accomplished in her gigantic struggle with a most powerful nation of Europe. There must have been many causes and conditions through a happy combination of which Japan was able to do what she has done; and among those conditions I would count the influence of American friendship and sympathy as one of the most powerful. If America had tried to play some high-handed diplomacy, imitating some of the European powers, she could have easily seized my country and held it under subjection since Commodore Perry's entrance into Uraga. The fact that the United States did not stoop to play a mean trick upon Japan helped not a little to lift her to the present position. For that reason, we, people of Japan, owe a great deal to you, people of the United States of America.

As a Buddhist I have been long thinking how best to repay this special favor received from the

[p. 181]

friendly people among whom I am traveling now. You have everything you need in the line of material, industrial, commercial civilization. By this I do not mean that you are wanting in spiritual culture and moral refinement, but I am inclined to think that it would not be altogether inappropriate to ask you to get more and more acquainted with what constitutes Oriental culture and religious belief. And it shall be my duty and pleasure to make such an opportunity of mutual understanding readily possible in every way. Accordingly, I thank you, ladies and gentlemen, for your efforts which have resulted in this enjoyable meeting with each other.

Footnotes

^170:1 Address at the George Washington University, April, 1906.

^175:1 From memory.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 182]

  

THE STORY OF DEER PARK [*1]

BRAHMADATTA, king of Baranasi, one day went out hunting in the forest, where he saw two groups of deer, each of which consisted of five hundred individuals and was escorted by a leader. One of them wore a coat decorated in the colors of the seven precious jewels. He was one of the former incarnations of Bodhisattva Shakyamuni, while the other leader was that of Devadatta.

The Deer-Bodhisattva was greatly grieved at the sight of so many of his fellow-animals being killed by the royal hunting party. His great loving heart was stirred to its core and he could not endure any longer to witness the butchery. He determined to see the king in person and to have the matter settled in a more humane way. When he moved forward, a veritable shower Of arrows greeted him, but he was not to be overcome and made a steady advance towards the king. Observing this indomitable resolution displayed by the Deer-Bodhisattva, the king ordered

[p. 183]

the party to cease shooting and allowed him to approach unmolested.

Said the deer, "It grieves my heart to see so many innocent creatures sacrificed merely to gratify your selfish passions. If you wish to have us for your table, we could arrange to send you each day one victim, to be chosen alternately from our two groups. Only let us be spared from a general massacre." The king consented to this arrangement.

For a while the plan worked without obstruction, but now it happened that a prospective mother-doe had to be chosen for the victim. She was exceedingly mortified over the ill fate, not for her own sake, but for that of her baby that was coming to see the light ere long. She went to Devadatta, to whose group she belonged, and asked him for a special dispensation, saying that "It being my fate to be sacrificed this time, I have no complaint to make as far as I alone am concerned, but the baby I am about to give birth to is not to be deprived of existence with its mother, for its doomsday has not yet arrived. Would that your majesty would contrive some means to execute the plan as arranged and yet to save my innocent child."

But Devadatta was cold-hearted and bluntly said, "Who in the world desires to be killed? Does not every living creature wish to preserve its life as long as it can? The turn is yours. Be gone, and no more of this wailing."

[p. 184]

The doe thought within herself that she did not at all deserve the wrath of Devadatta, and this added to her grief and despondence. But a happy idea occurred to her. As the last resort she resolved to go and see the Bodhisattva, asking him if he knew some way of saving her at this critical moment. Being questioned by him as to the steps taken by Devadatta, concerning this matter, she said: "My king has no compassion for me, but is enraged without due cause--it seems to me. I know, however, that your love is boundless and that you are the last refuge for the helpless and despondent. This is the reason why I, though not belonging to your group, am here to ask for your infinite wisdom."

The Bodhisattva took a great pity on the despairing mother-doe and thought: "If she has to be sacrificed, her innocent unborn child will have to share the same fate. If a substitute were to be selected, an injustice would be done. The only person that could take her place without disturbing the prearranged order is nobody else than myself. I shall then be the victim this time instead of the mother-doe."

Coming to this conclusion, the Bodhisattva offered himself to the king as the victim of the day. Asked the king, "What brings you here? Are all your deer gone already?" Replied the Bodhisattva, "Your grace and benevolence is known the world over, and nobody would dare violate your injunctions; but it grieves me to see

[p. 185]

the propagation of my race unnecessarily checked. I have come to the knowledge of such a case to-day and I pity it. If I make any change in the order of victims as arranged at the outset, it will be unreasonable. If I do not save the mother, it is against the nature of a sentient being. This is the reason why I present myself to-day before you. Life is short and everything is subject to the law of impermanence. Why shall I not practise lovingkindness while I am yet alive?"

The king was greatly moved by the words of the Bodhisattva and expressed his deep appreciation as follows: "It is myself and not you that belongs to the beastly creation. I am a deer in a man's form. Though you are in appearance a lower animal, you are in heart a human being. What makes one differ from another is not outward signs but inner reason. If endowed with a loving heart, though a beast in form, one is human. From this day I swear not to delight any more in partaking of animal flesh. Fear not, my friend, but be at ease forever."

It was in this wise that the forest was reserved for the deer to roam about in as they pleased and came to be known as Deer Park.

Footnotes

^182:1 Deer Park in Benares was the place where Buddha first caused the Wheel of the Good Law to revolve. See the beginning of the Sutra of Forty-two Chapters.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 186]

  

THE STORY OF THE GEM-HUNTING [*1]

IN ancient times there was a king who had among his valuable possessions a precious stone which he most highly prized. An attendant of his one day dropped it accidentally in a very deep lake which was in his palace garden. The king was greatly troubled and immediately made an inquiry among his subjects whether there was any one who could locate the precious treasure in the water and safely restore it to his hands, adding that such a one would receive a handsome reward.

There was among his retainers a man called Clear-Sighted, whose optical power was considered almost supernatural, and everybody thought that he was the man who could find the lost gem in the lake, however deep and wide it might be. The man was brought before the king and was directly commissioned to make a search for the gem.

Clear-Sighted dived deep into the water and tried to locate the precious stone at its bottom. But, singularly, his sight did not avail him to any

[p. 187]

great extent, for he was utterly unable to observe it anywhere. The harder he strove the dimmer became his sight. Completely disappointed at this unexpected discovery of his shortsightedness, he came out from the bottom of the lake, and reported his miserable failure to the king, whose mortification now knew no bounds.

The king did not know what to do; he could not reconcile himself to the new situation. A long consultation was held again, but no one seemed to be able to solve the problem in a practical way. In despair they finally came to test a most unusual method, which seemed almost absurd and ridiculous.

They knew there was a man called Sightless, and thought if Clear-Sighted was of no avail this blind man might be found useful in such a case as this, which was so extraordinary. At any rate, the attempt would not result in making the situation worse. Things miraculous have frequently been performed by the blind, and why not in this case?

Sightless was sent for and asked to go down -into the water and find the lost gem. The man went down as he was told, without any protestation. When he came out after a short time, the treasure was in his hand. The king was overjoyed and rewarded him most generously

The moral of this allegorical story is that much cunning and great learning are not the

[p. 188]

most effective means, as ordinarily supposed, to obtain the priceless gem of religious truth, but that the simple in heart and poor in spirit will find the way to heavenly bliss.

Footnotes

^186:1 This story was told by the Rev. Shaku to illustrate Chapter 9 of the Sutra of Forty-two Chapters.

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

THE SACRIFICE FOR A STANZA [*1]

IN one of his many previous births on this earth, Buddha appeared as a son of a Hindu prince. Desirous to gain spiritual insight into the ultimate reason of existence, he retired to the solitude and quietness of the mountains, as was customary in India, and became deeply absorbed in meditation. He thought: "Life is misery; it is nothing but a series of sufferings. How can I escape this everlasting torture? Unless I gain all-knowledge and grasp eternal life and realize perfect bliss, it is of no use to come here and live this life repeatedly. Of what worth is this life to me, to all beings, unless we escape the curse of ignorance by penetrating the ultimate foundation of existence? Until I gain enlightenment and immortality, I will not move from my seat which I have taken here under this tree, and I will bring all my spiritual powers into activity toward that end. If I am fortunate enough to realize it, I will not keep the spiritual

[p. 190]

bliss all to myself, but will proclaim it to all sentient beings on earth, and enlighten them, and make them happy as well."

It was midnight and silence reigned upon the earth. Buddha was deeply enwrapt in his thoughts. Suddenly he heard a voice which came from nowhere he knew. It did not sound like a human voice; it was clear, penetrating, and resounding; he thought the universe was filled with a resonant reverberation of this mysterious voice. As he listened to it he could understand these two lines of a gatha:

"All component things are transient;
 The law is to be born and die."

When he could make out these two lines, a spiritual illumination came over his mind, and he felt in himself something superhuman, something divine. His mind became so widened as to embrace the entire universe, and he experienced a feeling of inexpressible joy. He looked across the valley, and lo! there his gaze fell on a hideous monster straightway confronting him. Buddha was bewildered and did not know what this all meant.

The monster was a Yaksha, so inhuman and awe-inspiring, with the eye so furiously glaring on Buddha, and the mouth stained with dripping blood. It was this monstrous devil that had just recited those two lines which had so greatly inspired him that he thought they came from a mouth other than that of this evil genius.

[p. 191]

This unexpected and altogether mysterious appearance, however, did not at all disconcert Buddha, as he was still under the spiritual spell induced by those two noble lines. His only thought which he had at that moment was that the lines were not quite complete and that something was needed to make them so. Stating only the fact of universal impermanence, they did not show the way to escape it or to transcend it. The reason why we mortals are groaning under the yoke of karmaic causation is that we are yet ignorant of its true significance, that we have not yet severed the tie of birth and death.

So said Buddha to the Yaksha: "Those lines which you have just recited are beautiful but incomplete. Let me have the remaining two, which will complete the gatha. For this is not only for my own benefit, but for the benefit of all mankind. Pray be good enough to disclose what is yet kept behind."

Said the monster: "I will gladly comply with your request, but at this very moment I suffer from a bodily need and have not strength enough to recite the remaining two lines for you. My empty stomach must be fed and I live on human flesh. Would you first satisfy my appetite? I should then be able to let you have what you desire."

Buddha said: "I am ready at any moment to sacrifice myself, O Yaksha, but when I exist no more, who in this world will transmit these

[p. 192]

lines all complete to posterity? The truth will then be eternally lost to mankind. I, therefore, beseech you to recite those two remaining lines before I die, and I will engrave the whole stanza on this rock standing near by. After this is done, you can dispose of my body as you please. The stanza thus left on the stone will be noticed some day by a passer-by and brought out to the world for the enlightenment of my fellow-beings."

The Yaksha said: "As you are so earnest and sincere, I grant your wish. Listen to my recitation:

"Transcending birth and death,
 How blissful is the Absolute!"

When the Yaksha finished, Buddha made one of his fingers bleed, and with the dripping blood inscribed the whole stanza on the rock. This being done, Buddha threw himself over the precipice in order to fulfill his promise. But behold! at this crisis the hideous vampire suddenly changed his features, he became Sakrendra, a reigning god of the heavens and a most powerful guardian angel of Buddhism. Buddha, falling into the abyss, was miraculously received in the arms of this god, who now honored and revered him. The heavens showered flowers and the universe resounded with divine music.

Footnotes

^189:1 From the Mahanirvana Sutra (Nanjo's Catalogue, No. 1113). This story was told to explain the miraculous origin of the famous stanza beginning with "Anicca vata sankhara." See the sermon "The Phenomenal and the Supra-phenomenal." (See <page 111>.)

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

BUDDHIST VIEW OF WAR [*1]

"THIS triple world [*2] is my own possession. All the things therein are my own children. Sentient or non-sentient, animate or inanimate, organic or inorganic, the ten thousand things in this world are no more than the reflections of my own self. They come from the one source. They partake of the one body. Therefore I cannot rest quiet, until every being, even the smallest possible fragment of existence, is settled down in its proper appointment. I do not mind what long eons it will take to finish this gigantic work of salvation. I work at the end of eternity when all beings are peacefully and happily nestled in an infinite loving heart."

This is the position taken by the Buddha, and we, his humble followers, are but to walk in his wake.

Why, then, do we fight at all?

Because we do not find this world as it ought to be. Because there are here so many perverted

[p. 194]

creatures, so many wayward thoughts, so many ill-directed hearts, due to ignorant subjectivity. For this reason Buddhists are never tired of combating all productions of ignorance, and their fight must be to the bitter end. They will show no quarter. They will mercilessly destroy the very root from which arises the misery of this life. To accomplish this end, they will never be afraid of sacrificing their lives, nor will they tremble before an eternal cycle of transmigration. Corporeal existences come and go, material appearances wear out and are renewed. Again and again they take up the battle at the point where it was left off.

But all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas never show any ill-will or hatred toward enemies. Enemies--the enemies of all that is good--are indeed wicked, avaricious, shameless, hell-born, and, above all, ignorant. But are they not, too, my own children for all their sins? They are to be pitied and enlightened, not persecuted. Therefore, what is shed by Buddhists is not blood,--which, unfortunately, has stained so many pages in the history of religion,--but tears issuing directly from the fountain-head of lovingkindness.

The most powerful weapon ever used by Buddha in the subjugation of his wayward children is the practice of non-atman (non-egotism). He wielded it more effectively than any deadly, life-destroying weapons. When he was under the

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] Bodhi-tree absorbed in meditation on the non-atmanness of things, fiends numbering thousands tried in every way to shake him from his transcendental serenity; but all to no purpose. On the contrary, the arrows turned to heavenly flowers, the roaring clamor to a paradisiacal music, and even the army of demons to a host of celestials. And do you wonder at it? Not at all! For what on earth can withstand an absolutely self-freed heart overflowing with lovingkindness and infinite bliss?

And this example should be made the ideal of every faithful Buddhist. Whatever calling he may have chosen in this life, let him be freed from ego-centric thoughts and feelings. Even when going to war for his country's sake, let him not bear any hatred towards his enemies. In all his dealings with them let him practise the truth of non-atman. He may have to deprive his antagonist of the corporeal presence, but let him not think there are atmans, conquering each other. From a Buddhist point of view, the significance of life is not limited to the present incarnation. We must not exaggerate the significance of individuals, for they are not independent and unconditional existences. They acquire their importance and a paramount meaning, moral and religious, as soon as their fate becomes connected with the all-pervading love of the Buddha, because then they are no more particular individuals filled with egotistic thoughts

[p. 196]

and impulses, but have become love incarnate. They are so many representative types of one universal self-freed love. If they ever have to combat one another for the sake of their home and country,--which under circumstances may become unavoidable in this world of particularity,--let them forget their egotistic passions, which are the product of the atman conception of selfishness. Let them, on the contrary, be filled with the lovingkindness of the Buddha; let them elevate themselves above the horizon of the mine and thine. The hand that is raised to strike and the eye that is fixed to take aim, do not belong to the individual, but are the instruments utilized by a principle higher than transient existence. Therefore, when fighting, fight with might and main, fight with your whole heart, forget your own self in the fight, and be free from all atman thought.

It is most characteristic of our religion, as we understand it, that while Buddha emphasized the paramount significance of synthetic love, he never lost sight of the indispensableness of analytical intellect. He extended his sympathy to all creatures as his own children and made no discrimination in his boundless compassion. But at the same time he was not ignorant of the fact that there were good as well as bad people, that there were innocent hearts as well as guilty ones. Not that some were more favored by the Buddha than others, but they were enabled to acquire

[p. 197]

more of the love of the Buddha. One rain falls on all kinds of plants; but they do not assimilate the water in the same fashion. Buddha's love is universal, but our hearts, being fashioned of divergent karmas, receive it in different ways. He knows where they are finally led to, for his love is unintermittently working out their salvation, though they themselves be utterly unconscious of it.

Above all things, there is the truth, and there are many roads leading to it. It may seem at times that they collide and oppose one another. But let us rest confident that finally every ill will come to some good.

Footnotes

^193:1 Reproduced from THE OPEN COURT, May, 3, 1904.

^193:2 The "triple world" (triloka) is a common Buddhist term for "universe." The three worlds are "the world of desire"--(kamaloka), "the world of bodily form" (rupaloka), and "the immaterial world" (arupaloka).

     Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 198]

  

AT THE BATTLE OF NAN-SHAN HILL [*1]

ALL that I can say is, "It beggars description!" Verily, it is the acme of brutality and recklessness conceived in this world of individualization (namarupa). Even the fight between the Asura and Sakrendra, the demons and the angels, witnessed by our Buddha, seems here to sink into insignificance.

As far as my unaided eye can see, nature around me is calm. The Tai-lien Bay to the left and the Kin-chou Bay to the right, both as tranquil as mirrors, and above us and over the Nan-Shan Hill, where directly in our front the Russian fortifications stand, the sky expands in majestic serenity. Nothing suggests the awful carnage which there is enacted. Guns roar, bombs burst, but we do not see whence they come, and their knell only offsets the solemnity of these peaceful surroundings. But when I look through a powerful field-glass, I behold the hillsides strewn with dead and wounded, and soldiers rush onward over these wretches, while the

[p. 199]

enemies on the hill are madly scrambling, stumbling, and falling. I shudder at the sight.

*      *      *

Still more appalling is a visit to the battlefield after the fight. Yesterday, when I viewed Nan-Shan Hill from a distance, imagination lent enchantment to the spectacle, and at times the cannonade even impressed me with grandeur. But I am now confronting actualities,--actualities whose terror and horror can never be forgotten. From the top of yonder hill, where, under the calm summer sky, nature smiled in beauty, I could form no true conception of the tragedy, which, as I see now, took place here in unparalleled fury and madness. What a strange paradox is this contrast,--a most horrible catastrophe of human life happening in the most delightful surroundings! It makes me meditate again on the doctrine of our teacher.

*      *      *

Buddhism provides us with two entrances through which we can reach the citadel of perfect truth. One is the gate of love (karuna) and the other the gate of knowledge (). The former leads us to the world of particulars and the latter to the realm of the absolute. By knowledge we aspire to reach the summit of spiritual enlightenment; by love we strive to rescue our fellow-creatures from misery and crime. View the vicissitudes of things from the unity and eternity of the religious standpoint,

[p. 200]

the Dharmadhatu, and everything is one, is on the same plane, and I learn to neglect the worldly distinction made between friend and foe, tragedy and comedy, war and peace, samsara and nirvana, passion (kleca) and enlightenment (bodhi). A philosophical calm pervades my soul and I feel the contentment of Nirvana. For there is nothing, as far as I can see, that does not reflect the glory of Buddha. Even in the midst of this transcendent universality, however, my heart aches with a pain, undefinable yet insuppressible. Love for all sentient beings asserts itself, and that frigid indifference of the intellect gives way.

And why was it necessary that the many horrors of this present war should come to pass? Why had those poor soldiers to sacrifice their lives? In every one of them a warm heart has been beating, and now they are all lying on the ground in piles, stiff and stark like logs.

O Mother Earth! All these my fellow-creatures, it is true, are made of the same stuff of which thou art made. But do not their lives partake of something not of the earth earthy, altogether unlike thyself, and, indeed, more than mere gross matter? Are theirs not precious human souls which can be engaged in the works of peace and enlightenment? Why art thou so gravely dumb, when thou art covered with things priceless that are being dissolved into their primitive elements?

In this world of particulars, the noblest and

[p. 201]

greatest thing one can achieve is to combat evil and bring it into complete subjection. The moral principle which guided the Buddha throughout his twelve years of preparation and in his forty-eight years of religious wanderings, and which pervades his whole doctrine, however varied it may be when practically applied, is nothing else than the subjugation of evil. To destroy the ninety-eight major and eighty-four thousand minor evils, that are constantly tormenting human souls on this earth, was the guiding thought of the Buddha. Therefore, every follower of the Buddha builds a great boat of love, launches it on the great ocean of birth and death, steers it with the great rudder of faith, and sails forth with a steadfast mind through the whirling tempest of egotistic desires and passions. No Buddhist will ever relax his energy, until every one of his fellow-creatures be safely carried over to the other shore of perfect bliss.

War is an evil and a great one, indeed. But war against evils must be unflinchingly prosecuted till we attain the final aim. In the present hostilities, into which Japan has entered with great reluctance, she pursues no egotistic purpose, but seeks the subjugation of evils hostile to civilization, peace, and enlightenment. She deliberated long before she took up arms, as she was well aware of the magnitude and gravity of the undertaking. But the firm conviction of the justice of her cause has endowed her with an

[p. 202]

indomitable courage, and she is determined to carry the struggle to the bitter end.

Here is the price we must pay for our ideals--a price paid in streams of blood and by the sacrifice of many thousands of living bodies. However determined may be our resolution to crush evils, our hearts tremble at the sight of this appalling scene.

Alas! How much dearer is the price still going to be? What enormous losses are we going to suffer through the evil thoughts of our enemy, not to speak of the many injuries which our poor enemy himself will have to endure? All these miserable soldiers, individually harmless and innocent of the present war, are doomed to a death not only unnatural, but even inhuman!

Indeed, were it not for the doctrine of love taught by the Buddha, which should elevate every individual creature to the realm of a pure spirituality, we would, in the face of the terrible calamities that now befall us, be left to utter destruction and without any consolation whatever. Were it not for the belief that the bloom of truly spiritual light will, out of these mutilated, disfigured, and decomposing corpses, return with renewed splendor, we would not be able to stand these heart-rending tribulations even for a moment. Were it not for the consolation that these sacrifices are not brought for an egotistic purpose, but are an inevitable step toward the final realization of enlightenment,

[p. 203]

how could I, poor mortal, bear these experiences of a hell let loose on earth?

The body is but a vessel for something greater than itself. Individuality is but a husk containing something more permanent. Let us, then, though not without losing tenderness of heart, bravely confront our ordeal.

*      *      *

I came here with a double purpose. I wished to have my faith tested by going through the greatest horrors of life, but I also wished to inspire, if I could, our valiant soldiers with the ennobling thoughts of the Buddha, so as to enable them to die on the battlefield with the confidence that the task in which they are engaged is great and noble. I wished to convince them of the truths that this war is not a mere slaughter of their fellow-beings, but that they are combating An evil, and that, at the same time, corporeal annihilation really means a rebirth of soul, not in heaven, indeed, but here among ourselves. I believe I did my best to impress these ideas upon the soldiers' hearts; and my own sentiments I express in the following stanza, one of the many poems composed on the field of battle:

Here, marching on Nan-Shan,
   Storming its topmost crest,
 Have thousands of brave men
   With dragon valor pressed.
 Before the foe my heart
   Is calmed, composure-blessed,
 While belching cannons sing
   A lullaby of rest.

 

Footnotes

^198:1 Reproduced from Tim OPEN COURT, December, 1904.

    Zen for Americans, by Soyen Shaku, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT A SERVICE HELD IN MEMORY OF THOSE WHO DIED IN THE RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR
 (AT THE GOLDEN GATE HALL, NOVEMBER, 1905.)

I AM requested here to-night to speak concerning our brethren who fell in the greatest and most sanguinary war of modern times,--the war that only recently was brought to a conclusion. But what shall I say? Shall I eulogize the glory of their death? or shall I depict to you the unimaginable horrors of war? or have I to praise the prowess and success of our Japanese army and navy? or have I to dwell upon the innumerable sufferings of our people at home which have been brought about by the war? I am not, however, an orator in any sense of the word, and am utterly disqualified for the task laid down before me, either to glorify the dead or to denounce war. All that I can do is to look upon the matter from a purely religious viewpoint and to express my own ideas concerning those unfortunate dead who fell in the defense of our fatherland. And, if I can, let me try to make their departed spirits calmly repose where they fell, while I demonstrate to those left behind

[p. 205]

the fact that the immortality of the soul consists in the realization of noble deeds, and not in the continuation of personality after death, if such a thing be at all possible

*      *      *

When we are talking in the abstract we are apt to see only the bright side of war--its inevitableness, its sublimity, its awe-inspiring scene, its perfect organization, its earnestness, its patriotism, and so forth, and we forget at what price these glorious things are bought, we forget that war is the most horrible evil of human life, that killing one another with whatever beautiful excuse is a proof of moral depravity, that our mission here under the sun is not to destroy life, but to preserve and develop it. Are we not here to realize the ideals of universal brotherhood and eternal peace? Are we not here to help one another and to promote our mutual welfare? Are we not here to make a grand universal home in which everybody is respected, believed, and loved? Let me ask, then: Does war in any way subserve this end? does it augment our happiness? does it make us respect one another? does it bring more life into the world? Let those who would answer affirmatively these questions go to one of those bloody battlefields in Manchuria and tell us what is disclosed before their unprejudiced eyes.

This is one of the most hotly contested hills around Port Arthur. Battles have been fought

[p. 206]

all morning and all afternoon, positions have been alternately taken by our soldiers and enemies. Battalions after battalions have been rushed forward only to fall under the veritable showers of death-dealing missiles, while those fortunate ones who have escaped the hell of fire are greeted with a phalanx of cold steel. And what do we see before us now? Hundreds of hundreds of dead and wounded are scattered all over the hill, friends and foes indiscriminately. Are not some of them yet writhing in their last agony? Where does that faint groaning come? Were not those stark corpses the most lively, most briskly moving bodies a few hours ago? Were not a courageous heart and a noble mind abiding in each one of them? The moon is just rising, and her pale light but enhances the ghastliness of the sight. The perfect stillness of horror! And I speak of this from my personal experience.

Now let me again ask: From where do these soldiers come? They must have parents--some of whom are aged and perhaps decrepit--sisters and brothers, and some of them must be even husbands and fathers on whom tender women and helpless children are depending. Now that their mainstays are gone and their beloved are forever departed, grief and suffering indescribable must be reigning in all these thousands of homes. Some of them, reduced to abject poverty and utter helplessness, must go begging

[p. 207]

or to self-destruction to save themselves from shame. What wrong did they commit to be thus terribly punished? The wrong, if it be so called, was that they had able-bodied, strong-minded sons or husbands. What a heart-rending ordeal they have to pass!

This most saddening fact is brought home more forcibly when we are personally related to the unfortunate dead.

News of victory is welcome and we feel elated over it. But think of the price we have paid for it with thousands of precious human lives. And especially when we find some of our personal friends and acquaintances mentioned among the dead or seriously wounded, how depressingly the news weighs upon us! I often spend many hours at a time brooding over the sad event, my thoughts being deeply buried in the unfathomable problems of philosophy and religion, which have baffled many a wise man ever since the dawn of intellect. Though I have formed in my humble way my own welt- and lebensanschauung with which I interpret the affairs of the world and the phenomena of soul-life, I cannot help being struck with the calamities which follow in the wake of war. I am not necessarily absorbed in pessimism, but I feel an unspeakable feeling at the bottom of my heart and with wonder and awe think of a power by whose hand the course of this life and the destiny of the universe are directed.

[p. 208]

Why is human life so cheap? Why can it not be made to resist flying lead? Why is it so frail as to succumb to the thrust of cold steel? Why was it not made invulnerable, so that water could not drown and fire could not consume? Man, how conceited thou art when thy pulse beats and thy blood is warm! How haughty, god-like, immortal thou art when thou sittest alone and uninterruptedly pursuest thy egotistic schemes and intrigues! But, alas! thy dreams depart and thou must face cold, brutal realities. What a pitiful sight thou presentest now! Thou runnest against a mass of granite, cement, and steel, or against the exploding nitroglycerin, which is thine own handiwork, and thou art reduced to atoms, thou art blown to nothingness, whence thou perhaps didst come. How fragile thou art! Is this not the thought that agitates those who reflect upon the horrors of war and the destiny of mankind?

But are we not made for some other and better purposes than being merely material, physical, sensual, earthly, corporeal? Has not human existence more significance than a mere sentient organism whose life is as delicate as a drop of dew? Are we not capable of being more than what we appear to the senses? Are we not also living in a realm which transcends the world of sense and perception? To these questions I answer most definitely, and say "yes." However weak and helpless and flickering like a

[p. 209]

solitary lamplight before the wind, we are most assuredly more than a corporeal existence. Our limbs may be torn to pieces, our brains be smashed to nothing, our bones be ground to powder; but our deeds, our thoughts, our feelings will survive. It is in the realm of sense and perception that we are born and die. In the realm where our true being resides there is no such thing as birth and death. In the spiritual -kingdom ours is an eternal growth, a perpetual unfolding, a never-ending development. The flesh will decay and return to dust, but the spirit which consists of our noble deeds and thoughts forever rejuvenates itself. It is like the snake's shedding its skin: the bodily existence is the skin, which is cast off whenever the spirit so desires. It is immaterial how the body fares, for the spirit is the master and its commands have to be obeyed at all hazards. The spirit decides when and how its outer integument shall be renewed. To be more exact and literal, the spirit which is immortal has limited itself to effect its own differentiation and development under the bodily condition. The body is therefore needed to complete the mission of the spirit, but the body is so created as to be subservient to the spirit and to be willing to carry out what the latter wills.

In ancient Oriental mythology we have a divine phenix, the only one of its kind and of remarkable beauty, that living five or six hundred

[p. 210]

years in the Arabian desert built a funeral pile of spices and aromatic gums, ignited it with the fanning of its wings, sang a melodious dirge, and burned itself in the all-purifying fire, only to come out again in the freshness of youth and to continue its former life. Is it not a wonderful bird, this divine phenix of eternal life? But more wonderful indeed is our spiritual life.

I believe all Japanese are familiar with the story of Kusunoki Masashige, who exclaimed in his last moment that he would be reborn seven times and protect his royal family against the enemy. You also know well the anecdote of the late Commander Hirose, who expressed the same sentiment in one of his last poems. But in point in of fact these heroes are not only seven times reborn, but infinitely, so long as this universe endureth and humanity survives. Do not think for a moment that this is merely theoretical and has no concrete significance. Far from it. We who are breathing to-day the spirit of the illustrious general and the valiant sailor are no more nor less than their reincarnations. Those who come after us and become possessed of the same sentiment are their and our spiritual descendants. Rebirth does not mean the reawakening of the dead. Reincarnation does not mean the resuscitation of a dried-up mummy. The immortality of the soul does not mean the continuation of the individual soul as conceived by most religionists. The spirit is not a thing material

[p. 211]

and sensual, however ethereally or astrally you may conceive it. It is a transcendental existence, which knows no limiting conditions such as space, time, or causation. Where you feel a noble feeling, where you think a beautiful thought, where you do a self-sacrificing deed, there is the spirit making itself felt in your consciousness.

There is but one great spirit and we individuals are its temporal manifestations. We are eternal when we do the will of the great spirit; we are doomed when we protest against it in our egotism and ignorance. We obey, and we live. We defy, and we are thrown into the fire that quencheth not. Our bodily existences are like the sheaths of the bamboo sprout. For the growth of the plant it is necessary to cast one sheath after another. It is not that the body-sheath is negligible, but that the spirit-plant is more essential and its wholesome growth of paramount importance. Let us, therefore, not absolutely cling to the bodily existence, but, when necessary, sacrifice it for a better thing. For this is the way in which the spirituality of our being asserts itself.

This being the case, war is not necessarily horrible, provided that it is fought for a just and honorable cause, that it is fought for the maintenance and realization of noble ideals, that it is fought for the upholding of humanity and civilization. Many material human bodies may

[p. 212]

be destroyed, many humane hearts be broken, but from a broader point of view these sacrifices are so many phenixes consumed in the sacred fire of spirituality, which will arise from the smouldering ashes reanimated, ennobled, and glorified. The spirit which dwelt in them and brought them to the altar now assumes another material expression in the form of coming generations. Those fallen in the field are returning to dust in order to nourish vegetation, or, as the Japanese would express it, to fill- the hungry stomach of the wild dog. But this is true only of their particular bodily forms. As to the spirit, it has not gone up to a mythical region which some religious people call heaven. It has not vanished into the air in the fashion of a ghost. Nor is it sitting by the so-called Heavenly Father encircled by a host of angels. We Buddhists are not believers in fiction, superstition, or mythology. We are followers of truth and fact. And what we actually see around us is that the departed spirits are abiding right among ourselves, for we have the most convincing testimony of the fact in our inmost consciousness which deceives not. They descend upon us, they dwell within us; for are we not being moved by their courage, earnestness, self-sacrifice, and love of country? Do we not feel supernaturally inspired and strengthened in our resolution to follow them and to complete the work they have so auspiciously started? Personally and individually,

[p. 213]

we may grieve over their being no more among us in their material garb, but superpersonally our life is enriched and illuminated by their death.

We understand, therefore, by the immortality of the soul the perpetuation of spiritual life, not individually but supra-individually. The life runs in and through individuals, but it is more than the totality of them. It does not die with their annihilation, it survives them, and wears another garment of bodily existence, making itself ever younger, stronger, and nobler. In this sense, Japanese belief in the ancestral shades is justifiable. They are not really vanished in the haze of bygone ages; they are living in the freshness of youth in our midst, and what we worship is not their ghostly presence but their living spirit. Those who fell in the late war are not really fallen; they are still alive in the minds and hearts of their friends and worshipers. From the world of sense they are forever departed, but they have found their enduring home in the supra-individual realm. Their bones are crumbling in the dust, but their spirit is enkindled in our hearts. This, one of the plainest facts in the world, will be doubted only by those near-sighted, grossly material egoists who refuse to see the significance of human life.

I am by no means trying to cover the horrors and evils of war, for war is certainly hellish. Let us avoid it as much as possible. Let us

[p. 214]

settle all our international difficulties in a more civilized manner. But if it is unavoidable, let us go into it with heart and soul, with the firm conviction that our spiritual descendants will carry out and accomplish what we have failed personally to achieve. Let, therefore, the dead quietly repose in their last sleep. Nobody will dare stir their glorious ashes. As for us who are left behind, no superfluous words are in place, only we must not disgrace the honor and spirit of the dead who have solemnly bequeathed to us their work to perfect. Mere lamentation not only bears no fruit, it is a product of egoism, and has to be shunned by every enlightened mind and heart.

    


===== BOOK: zun.txt =====


    
The Diwan of Zeb-un-Nissa, by Magan Lal and Jessie Duncan Westbrook, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2] [p. 3] [p. 4]

  

The Wisdom of the East Series

EDITED BY

L. CRANMER BYNG

S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE DIWAN OF ZEB-UN-NISSA

THE FIRST FIFTY GHAZALS
 RENDERED FROM THE PERSIAN BY
 MAGAN LAL
 AND
 JESSIE DUNCAN WESTBROOK

WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES

  

LONDON
 JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
 [1913]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Front cover and spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

  

EDITORIAL NOTE

THE object of the Editors of this series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour.

L. CRANMER-BYNG
 S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
     21, CROMWELL ROAD, 
         S. KENSINGTON, S.W.

     
The Diwan of Zeb-un-Nissa, by Magan Lal and Jessie Duncan Westbrook, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

CONTENTS

          DEDICATION

       <page 6>

     
      INTRODUCTION

       <page 7>

     
      DIWAN-I-MAKHFI--THE GHAZALS

       <page 25>

     
      NOTES

       <page 109>

     
   
     
The Diwan of Zeb-un-Nissa, by Magan Lal and Jessie Duncan Westbrook, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

Thy pleasaunce, Princess, now is desolate; 
 Where once the gleaming water-courses traced
 Their paths among the cypresses, a waste
 Stretches beyond thy ruined garden-gate;
 The rose is dead, the bulbul flown away, 
 And Zeb-un-Nissa but a memory.

But where the rapt faquirs God's praises tell,
 Where at the shrine the pious pilgrims meet,
 Thy verses, Makhfi, holy tongues repeat,
 Thy name is honoured and remembered well:
 For through thy words they win a fleeting gleam
 Of the Divine Beloved of their dream.

So might we, even in an alien tongue,
 Bring from thy mystic garden, where, apart,
 Thou dwelt communing with thy burning heart,
 These echoes of the songs that thou hast sung,
 And catch thy vision of the Soul's Desire,
 The immortal Phoenix with its wings of fire.
                                           J. D. W.

     
The Diwan of Zeb-un-Nissa, by Magan Lal and Jessie Duncan Westbrook, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

INTRODUCTION

THE Princess Zeb-un-Nissa was the eldest daughter of the Mogul Emperor Aurungzebe of India, and was born in 1639. She came of a distinguished line, in direct descent from Genghiz Khan and Tamerlane. Her Emperor-ancestors were famous not only for their valour and statesmanship, but as patrons and inspirers of art and learning, and, moreover, they themselves possessed distinguished literary gifts. Baber's reminiscences are written in so fresh and delightful a style that their charm holds us to-day, and he wrote poetry both in Turki and Persian, even inventing a new style of verse. One of his sons, Mirza Kamran, was also a writer of Persian verse. Although Akbar has given the world no writings of his own--tradition even says that he never found time to learn to write--yet he surrounded himself with a most cultured circle; and Abul Fazl, his talented minister, constantly records in his letters Akbar's wise sayings and noble sentiments. Jehangir, like Baber, wrote his own memoirs, and they are ranked high in Persian

[p. 8]

literature. Shah Jehan wrote some account of his court and of his travels, and a record called the Dastur-ul-Amal, or Laws of Shah Jehan. Aurungzebe wrote books on Musulman law, and the collection of his letters, called the Ruqat Alamgiri, is famous. Nor was this literary talent confined to the men's side of the house. Baber's daughter, Gulbadan, wrote some history of her own times, and has left us an interesting picture of Baber himself; and Zeb-un-Nissa's verses still testify to her skill as a poet.

It is difficult to learn precisely the details of her life; they were not written in any connected biography, for in her later days she incurred the wrath of her stern father, and no court chronicler dared to speak of her. Her mother was Dilrus Banu Begum, daughter of Shah Nawaz Khan. From her childhood she showed great intelligence, and she was instructed from an early age. At seven years old she was a Hafiz--she knew the Koran by heart; and her father gave a great feast to celebrate the occasion. We read that the whole army was feasted in the great Maidan at Delhi, thirty thousand gold mohurs were given to the poor, and the public offices were closed for two days. She was given as teacher a lady named Miyabai, and learned Arabic in four years; she then studied mathematics and astronomy, in which sciences she gained rapid proficiency. She began to write a commentary

[p. 9]

on the Koran, but this was stopped by her father. From her early youth she wrote verses, at first in Arabic; but when an Arabian scholar saw her work he said: "Whoever has written this poem is Indian. The verses are clever and wise, but the idiom is Indian, although it is a miracle for a foreigner to know Arabian so well." This piqued her desire for perfection, and thereafter she wrote in Persian, her mother-tongue. She had as tutor a scholar called Shah Rustum Ghazi, who encouraged and directed her literary tastes. She wrote at first in secret, but he found copies of her verses among her exercise-books. He prophesied her future greatness, and persuaded her father to send all over India and Persia and Kashmir to find poets and to invite them to come to Delhi to form a fitting circle for the princess. This was the more wonderful as Aurungzebe himself cared little for poetry and used to speak against the poet's calling. He had forbidden the works of Hafiz to be read in school by boys, or in the palace by the Begums, but he made an exception in favour of Zeb-un-Nissa.

Among the poets of her circle were Nasir Ali, Sayab, Shamsh Wali Ullah, Brahmin, and Behraaz. Nasir Ali came from Sirhind, and was famous for his pride and his poverty, for he despised the protection of the great. Zeb-un-Nissa admired his verses, and in a way he came

[p. 10]

to be regarded almost as her rival poet. Her coterie used to engage in a poetical tournament--a kind of war of wits. One would propose a line--sometimes it would be a question; another would answer it or contradict it or qualify it or expand it, by a line or lines in the same metre, rhyming with the original line. This is called mushaira--a poetical concourse; and in this quick repartee Zeb-un-Nissa excelled.

She had been betrothed by the wish of Shah Jehan, her grandfather, to Suleiman Shikoh, who was her cousin and son of Dara Shikoh; but Aurungzebe, who hated and feared Dara, was unwilling that the marriage should take place, and caused the young prince to be poisoned. She had many other suitors for her hand, but she demanded that she should see the princes and test their attainments before a match was arranged. One of those who wished to marry her was Mirza Farukh, son of Shah Abbas II of Iran; she wrote to him to come to Delhi so that she might see what he was like. The record remains of how he came with a splendid retinue, and was feasted by Zeb-un-Nissa in a pleasure-house in her garden, while she waited on him with her veil upon her face. He asked for a certain sweetmeat in words which, by a play of language, also meant a kiss, and Zeb-un-Nissa, affronted, said: "Ask for what you want from our kitchen." She told her father

[p. 11]

that, in spite of the prince's beauty and rank, his bearing did not please her, and she refused the marriage. Mirza Farukh, however, sent her this verse: "I am determined never to leave this temple; here will I bow my head, here will I prostrate myself, here will I serve, and here alone is happiness." Zeb-un-Nissa answered: "How light dost thou esteem this game of love, O child. Nothing dost thou know of the fever of longing, and the fire of separation, and the burning flame of love." And so he returned to Persia without her.

She enjoyed a great deal of liberty in the palace: she wrote to many learned men of her time, and held discussions with them. She was a great favourite with her uncle Dara Shikoh, who was a scholar and wide-minded and enlightened. To him she modestly attributed her verses when first she began to write, and many of the ghazals in the Diwan of Dara Shikoh are by her. She came out in the court, and helped in her father's councils, but always with the veil upon her face. Perhaps she liked the metaphor of the face hidden till the day when the Divine Beloved should come; perhaps life behind carven lattices had a charm for her; for her pen-name is Makhfi, the hidden one. Once Nasir Ali said this verse: "O envy of the moon, lift up thy veil and let me enjoy the wonder of thy beauty." She answered:--

[p. 12]

    I will not lift my veil,--
     For, if I did, who knows?
 The bulbul might forget the rose,
     The Brahman worshipper
     Adoring Lakshmi's grace
     Might turn, forsaking her,
         To see my face;
     My beauty might prevail.
     Think how within the flower
     Hidden as in a bower
     Her fragrant soul must be,
     And none can look on it;
     So me the world can see
 Only within the verses I have writ--
     I will not lift the veil.

She was deeply religious, but she was a Sufi, and did not share her father's cold and narrow orthodoxy. One day she was walking in the garden, and, moved by the beauty of the world around her, exclaimed, "Four things are necessary to make me happy--wine and flowers and a running stream and the face of the Beloved." Again and again she recited the couplet; suddenly she came upon Aurungzebe, on a marble platform under a tree close by, wrapt in meditation. She was seized with fear, thinking he might have heard her profane words; but, as if she had not noticed him, she went on chanting as before, but with the second line changed, "Four things are necessary for happiness--prayers and fasting and tears and repentance!"

She belonged, like her father, to the Sunni sect of Musulmans, and was well versed in controversial

[p. 13]

religious points. One of Aurungzebe's sons, Muhammad Ma'uzam, was a Shiah, and when sectarian disputes took place in the court the princess was often asked to settle them. Her decision in one dispute is famous, for it was copied and sent to Iran and Turan, and many scores of Begums are said to have been converted to the Sunni cause on that occasion. At first she took great pleasure in the Tazia celebrations, but gave them up at her father's wish when he came to the throne, and adopted a simpler form of faith.

Much of her personal allowance of four lakhs a year she used in encouraging men of letters, in providing for widows and orphans, and in sending every year pilgrims to Mecca and Medina. She collected a fine library and employed skilled caligraphers to copy rare and valuable books for her; and, as Kashmir paper and Kashmir scribes were famous for their excellence, she had a scriptorium also in that province, where work went on constantly. Her personal interest in the work was great, and every morning she went over the copies that had been made on the previous day. She had contemporary fame as a poet, and literary men used to send their works for her approval or criticism, and she rewarded them according to their merits.

In personal appearance she is described as

[p. 14]

being tall and slim, her face round and fair in colour, with two moles, or beauty-spots, on her left cheek. Her eyes and abundant hair were very black, and she had thin lips and small teeth. In Lahore Museum is a contemporary portrait, which corresponds to this description. She did not use missia for blackening between the teeth, nor antimony for darkening her eye-lashes, though this was the fashion of her time. Her voice was so beautiful that when she read the Koran she moved her hearers to tears. In dress she was simple and austere; in later life she always wore white, and her only ornament was a string of pearls round her neck. She is held to have invented a woman's garment, the angya kurti, a modification, to suit Indian conditions, of the dress of the women of Turkestan; it is now worn all over India. She was humble in her bearing, courteous, patient, and philosophic in enduring trouble; no one, it is said, ever saw her with a ruffled forehead. Her chief friend was a girl named Imami, a poet like herself. Zeb-un-Nissa was skilled in the use of arms, and several times took part in war.

In the beginning of 1662 Aurungzebe was taken ill, and, his physicians prescribing change of air, he took his family and court with him to Lahore. At that time Akil Khan, the son of his vizier, was governor of that city. He was

[p. 15]

famous for his beauty and bravery, and was also a poet. He had heard of Zeb-un-Nissa, and knew her verses, and was anxious to see her. On pretence of guarding the city, he used to ride round the walls of the palace, hoping to catch a glimpse of her. One day he was fortunate; he caught sight of her on the house-top at dawn, dressed in a robe of gulnar, the colour of the flower of the pomegranate. He said, "A vision in red appears on the roof of the palace." She heard and answered, completing the couplet: "Supplications nor force nor gold can win her." She liked Lahore as a residence, and was laying out a garden there: one day Akil Khan heard that she had gone with her companions to see a marble pavilion which was being built in it. He disguised himself as a mason, and, carrying a hod, managed to pass the guards and enter. She was playing chausar with some of her girl friends, and he, passing near, said: "In my longing for thee I have become as the dust wandering round the earth." She understood and answered immediately: "Even if thou hadst become as the wind, thou shouldst not touch a tress of my hair." They met again and again, but some rumour reached the ears of Aurungzebe, who was at Delhi, and he hastened back. He wished to hush up the matter by hurrying her into marriage at once. Zeb-un-Nissa demanded freedom

[p. 16]

of choice, and asked that portraits of her suitors should be sent to her; and chose naturally that of Akil Khan. Aurungzebe sent for him; but a disappointed rival wrote to him: "It is no child's play to be the lover of a daughter of a king. Aurungzebe knows your doings; as soon as you come to Delhi, you will reap the fruit of your love." Akil Khan thought the Emperor planned revenge. So, alas for poor Zeb-un-Nissa! at the critical moment her lover proved a coward; he declined the marriage, and wrote to the king resigning his service. Zeb-un-Nissa was scornful and disappointed, and wrote: "I hear that Akil Khan has left off paying homage to me"--or the words might also mean, "has resigned service"--"on account of some foolishness." He answered, also in verse, "Why should a wise man do that which he knows he will regret?" (Akil also means, a wise man). But he came secretly to Delhi to see her again, perhaps regretting his fears. Again they met in her garden; the Emperor was told and came unexpectedly, and Zeb-un-Nissa, taken unawares, could think of no hiding-place for her lover but a deg, or large cooking-vessel. The Emperor asked, "What is in the deg?" and was answered, "Only water to be heated." "Put it on the fire, then," he ordered; and it was done. Zeb-un-Nissa at that moment thought more of her reputation than of her

[p. 17]

lover, and came near the deg and whispered, "Keep silence if you are my true lover, for the sake of my honour." One of her verses says, "What is the fate of a lover? It is to be crucified for the world's pleasure." One wonders if she thought of Akil Khan's sacrifice of his life.

After this she was imprisoned in the fortress of Salimgarh, some say because her father distrusted her on account of her friendship with her brother, Prince Akbar, who had revolted against him; others say because of her sympathy with the Mahratta chieftain Sivaji. There she spent long years, and there she wrote much bitter poetry:--

So long these fetters cling to my feet! My friends have become enemies, my relations are strangers to me. 
 What more have I to do with being anxious to keep my name undishonoured when friends seek to disgrace me?
 Seek not relief from the prison of grief, O Makhfi; thy release is not politic.
 O Makhfi, no hope of release hast thou until the Day of Judgment come.
 Even from the grave of Majnun the voice comes to my ears--"O Leila, there is no rest for the victim of love even in the grave."
 I have spent all my life, and I have won nothing but sorrow, repentance, and the tears of unfulfilled desire:--

[p. 18]

Long is thine exile, Makhfi, long thy yearning,
 Long shalt thou wait, thy heart within thee burning, 
 Looking thus forward to thy home-returning.
 But now what home hast thou, unfortunate?
 The years have passed and left it desolate,
 The dust of ages blows across its gate.

    If on the Day of Reckoning
 God say, "In due proportion I will pay
 And recompense thee for thy suffering,"
 Lo, all the joys of heaven it would outweigh;
 Were all God's blessings poured upon me, yet
     He would be in my debt.

When her memory was becoming dim in the hearts of her friends, Nasir Ali alone thought of her, and wrote a poem to her, saying that, now, the world could not delight in her presence, and he himself had to go about the earth unhappy, having no one but himself to appreciate his verses. But she sent no answering word.

When she was released she lived solitary in Delhi, and the verses she wrote there are very melancholy, telling of the faithlessness of the times:--

Why shouldst thou, O Makhfi, complain of friends, or even of enemies? Fate has frowned upon thee from the beginning of time.
 Let no one know the secrets of thy love. On the way of love, O Makhfi, walk alone. Even if Jesus seek to be thy companion, tell him thou desirest not his comradeship.

Here is one of her saddest poems, expressing something of the tragedy of her life:--

[p. 19]

    O idle arms,
 Never the lost Beloved have ye caressed:
 Better that ye were broken than like this
 Empty and cold eternally to rest.

    O useless eyes,
 Never the lost Beloved for all these years
 Have ye beheld: better that ye were blind
 Than dimmed thus by my unavailing tears.

    O foolish springs,
 That bring not the Beloved to my abode;
 Yea, all the friends of youth have gone from me,
 Each has set out on his appointed road.

    O fading rose,
 Dying unseen as hidden thou wert born;
 So my heart's blossom fallen in the dust
 Was ne'er ordained His turban to adorn.

She died in 1689 after seven days' illness, and was buried in her garden at Nawakot, near Lahore, according to the instructions she left. The tomb is desolate now, although once it was made of fine marbles, and had over its dome a pinnacle of gold; it was ruined in the troublous times of the dissolution of the Mogul Empire. The great gate still stands, large enough for an elephant with a howdah to enter, and within the enclosure is a tower with four minarets, roofed with turquoise and straw-yellow tiles. But the garden that was in its time very splendid, being held second only to that of the Shalimar of Shah Jehan, has disappeared;

[p. 20]

and the walls rise up now from the waving fields of grain.

The garden which she laid out in Lahore itself and which was called the Chauburgi, or four-towered, can still be traced by portions of the walls and gates remaining. Three of the turrets over the archway still stand, ornamented with tiles in patterns of cypress-trees and growing flowers, and the gateways have inscriptions in Arabic and Persian. One of these tells that she presented the garden to her old instructress Miyabai.

In 1724, thirty-five years after her death, what could be found of her scattered writings were collected under the name of the Diwan-i-Makhfi, literally, the Book of the Hidden One. It contained four hundred and twenty-one ghazals and several rubais. In 1730 other ghazals were added. Many manuscript copies were made in both India and Persia; some beautifully illuminated examples are known and preserved.

The Diwan-i-Makhfi shares the characteristics of other Sufic poetry--the worship of God under the form of the Beautiful Beloved, who is adorable but tyrannical, who reduces the lover to abject despair, but at last bestows on him a gleam of hope when he is at the point of death. The Beloved is the Hunter of the Soul, chasing it like a deer through the jungle of the world:--

[p. 21]

I have no peace, the quarry I, a Hunter chases me,
     It is Thy memory;
 I turn to flee, but fall; for over me he casts his snare,
     Thy perfumed hair.
 Who can escape Thy prison? no mortal heart is free
     From dreams of Thee.

The lover is the madman, who for his love is scorned and mocked by the unsympathetic world. The personified Power of Evil, the Enemy, lurks at the devotee's elbow, ready to distract him from the contemplation of God.

The poet was evidently acquainted, not only with the theories of Sufism, but with the practices of the faquirs as well. We read of the assembly of the devout, as in the Dargah at Ajmer to-day: how they greet the morning with floods of tears and deep sighs, how they beat their hearts of stone till the sparks of divine love fly out from them. The hatchet to strike the flinty heart is the symbol of the Sufic poet: one sees it in the portraits of Hafiz and others. There is also the scoffing at the orthodox who meet within the mosque, and the glorification of the more advanced soul to whom all the universe is the temple of God, nay even God himself--"Where I make my prayer--at that place is the Kiblah."

But the poems of Zeb-un-Nissa, in addition to what they share with other Sufic poetry, have a special Indian flavour of their own. She inherited the Akbar tradition of the unification

[p. 22]

of religions, and knew not only Islam, but Hinduism and Zoroastrianism also. Her special triumph consists in that she weaves together the religious traditions and harmonizes them with Sufic practices. In some of her poems she hails the sun as the symbol of deity. Constantly she speaks of the mosque and the temple together or antithetically--saying that God is equally in both, or too great to be worshipped in either:--

    No Muslim I,
     But an idolater,
 I bow before the image of my Love, 
     And worship her:

    No Brahman I,
     My sacred thread
 I cast away, for round my neck I wear 
     Her plaited hair instead.

Sometimes she even combines the Hindu and Musulman idea:

In the mosque I seek my idol-shrine.
 On the Day of Judgment we should have had much difficulty in proving that we were true believers, had we not brought with us our beloved Kafir idol as a witness.

The glorification or adoration of the pir, or spiritual teacher, is also shown in her poems. He is the intermediary between God and man, and is sometimes symbolized as the Morning Breeze, bringing from the enclosed garden the

[p. 23]

fragrance to those, less privileged, who can only stand without the gate.

The Diwan-i-Makhfi is widely read in India, and is highly esteemed. Its verse is chanted in the ecstatic concourses which meet at festivals at the tombs of celebrated saints; so that, although her tomb has been despoiled of the splendour which befitted the resting-place of a Mogul princess, she has the immortality she perhaps would have desired. In one of her verses she says:--I am the daughter of a King, but I have taken the path of renunciation, and this is my glory, as my name Zeb-un-Nissa, being interpreted, means that I am the glory of womankind.

J. D. W.

DULWICH VILLAGE,
     March 1913.

[p. 24]

IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE COMPASSIONATE, THE MERCIFUL

     
The Diwan of Zeb-un-Nissa, by Magan Lal and Jessie Duncan Westbrook, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

THE DIWAN OF ZEB-UN-NISSA

  

I

        To Thee, first,
 From the clouds of Whose mercy is born
 The rose of my garden, I look!
 Let the praise of Thy love the beginning adorn
     Of the verse of my book.

        Athirst
 For Thy love are my body and soul;
 Like Mansur the grains of this clod,
 My body, cry out--They are parts, Thou the whole,
     Themselves they are God.

        The waves
 Of Thy deluge of love o'er the boat
 Of mortality roll;
 No Noah could lift from the deeps till it float
     My love-drowned soul.

[p. 26]

        As slaves
 The powers of the darkness for me
 Will obedient fly;
 If a word of my praise be accepted by Thee, 
     Like Suleiman I.

        And now
 No more do the ready tears start
 As laments from my tongue,
 For like pearls the blood-drops that are drawn from my heart
     On my lashes are hung.

        Bear thou,
 O Makhfi, with patience thy pain,
 It is endless, and leave thou the night
 Of thy passions; for then shall not Khizr attain
     Such a spring of delight.

[p. 27]

  

II

O THOU Who all things mortal and divine 
 Hast fashioned, and by Whom alone we live, 
     May there still shine
 The torch of hope that Thou to us didst give!

Within us stirs the leaven of Thy love,
 As streams of water of Thy mercy run.
     Look from above
 And bless Mahmoud and all that he hath done.

Whether it be in Mecca's holiest shrine,
 Or in the Temple pilgrim feet have trod,
     Still Thou art mine,
 Wherever God is worshipped is my God.

The morning I shall greet with tears and sighs,
 And from my heart that burns with holy fire
     A breath shall rise
 To burnish thus my mirror of desire.

Give me thy tears, O Makhfi, let them rain
 In quenching torrents on my burning heart;
     So hot its pain
 At every sigh I breathe the flames outstart.

[p. 28]

  

III

    O PROPHET, o'er the world
 Thy soul-compelling banner is unfurled:
     See how thy faith hath spread
 Till Iran and Arabia are led.
     Thy lips unclose
 Like petals of a newly-budded rose,
     And from them flow
 Thy words of wisdom, till not only know
     The sons of men,
 But birds within the garden sing again
     Thy words of gold.
 O thou whose beauty I with joy behold,
     Nature in truth
 Made never loveliness like to thy youth.
     Snared me it hath
 Till fain would I renunciation's path
     With patience tread,
 And follow where thy holy feet have led.
     But how can I
 My cherished joys to my poor heart deny,
     Or, even more,
 My cherished sorrows can I yield, for sore
     My heart doth bleed
 Where cruel love hath wounded it indeed.

[p. 29]

    Look thou and see
 Where from my wounds there drops continually
     A crimson flood;
 But fragrant flowers are springing from my blood,
     And every thorn
 Wherewith my weary wandering feet are torn
     Turns to a rose.
 O Makhfi, if the Kaaba keeper close
     To thee his door,
 Complain not: thou possessest even more
     A holy place;
 For look into the Well-Beloved Face,
     Over His Eyes
 Arches more fair than Kaaba gates arise;
     Thy heart shall bend,
 Itself an archway welcoming the Friend.

[p. 30]

  

IV

MY eager heart a pang of rapture stings
    When the long-wandering wind unto me brings
       The perfume of thy presence on its wings.

And so I wait in this my sorrow's night,
    Until thou givest to my weary sight
       Thy beauty for my longing eyes' delight.

The world through Islam light in darkness saw
    And walked safe guided by thy Scroll of Law,
       Bowing to God in hope and holy awe--

To God, Who sinners can forgive and lead,
    Inscrutable Himself, yet Who can read
       The hidden heart and comprehend its need.

O Prophet, shining like a lonely gem,
    The fairest of Heaven's highest diadem,
       Look on men's need and intercede for them.

Thou art the veil through which the light doth shine,
    Nay, thou thyself the very torch divine--
       Naught else behold these dazzled eyes of mine.

[p. 31]

  

V

HERE is the path of love--how dark and long
     Its winding ways, with many snares beset!
 Yet crowds of eager pilgrims onward throng
     And fall like doves into the fowler's net.

Now tell me what the grain that drew the dove?
     The mole it was upon a cheek so fair.
 Tell me of what was wove the net of love?
     The wandering curls of the Beloved's hair.

The festival of love is holden here,
     The goblet passes; drink thou of this wine,
 Yea, drain it to the lees, and never fear
     Intoxication that is all divine.

How easy 'tis to sigh and to complain!
     All the world weeps to give its woe relief;
 But proudly in thy heart conceal thy pain,
     And silent drink the poison of thy grief.

Here is the source of light, the heavenly fount,
     Here is the vision of eternal grace;
 Brighter than Moses thou, when from the Mount
     He came, God's radiance shining in his face.

[p. 32]

The wine at night unto the morning lends
     Its exaltation, morning to the night
 Its dream bequeaths in turn: so never ends
     The sequence of the happy soul's delight.

But, Makhfi, tell me where the feast is made?
     Where are the merry-makers? Lo, apart,
 Here in my soul the feast of God is laid,
     Within the hidden chambers of my heart.

[p. 33]

  

VI

MY heart is looted of its treasure, left
 Careless and unprotected, to my shame, 
 And thus I weep, feeling myself bereft,
       Knowing myself to blame.

With mine own hands the altar-fire I lit;
 As flame within a lamp my heart afire
 Glows even through the body casing it,
       And burns it with desire.

Could I my foolish heart to ashes burn
 Then might I rest, my sorrow then might cease;
 Unto the ocean of Thy love I turn
       To find within it peace.

I sink within its waters, nor above
 Its surface can my weary limbs uplift,
 Deep-drowned I within the sea of love
       Lapped by its waves must drift.

A wilderness this lonely heart of mine
 Till love transformed it to another guise,
 And now it shines as fair as the divine
       Gardens of Paradise.

[p. 34]

I would that I my longing might outpour,
 My grief might turn to hymns, my pain might tell
 In psalms like that sweet singer sang of yore,
       David of Israel.

Unto the fields like pecking birds I go
 To gather up the ears of golden grain,
 But only tears, not corn, I gather--lo,
       They fall in floods like rain.

O wise one, at the feast of love be glad,
 But careful too, and guard thy cup of wine;
 In ecstasy I drank the share I had,
       O Sage, take heed of thine.

With slumber, Makhfi, heavy are thine eyes,
 And though thy tale has not attained its close,
 So deep a languor on thy spirit lies;
       Seek thou for it repose.

[p. 35]

  

VII

As at the coming of the spring-tide rains
 Rivers of sap through growing trees upstart,
 So runs Thy love throughout my very veins,
 Yea, to the tender tendrils of my heart.

I beat my flinty heart till from it flies
 The spark divine of the eternal fire,
 And from the flashing gleams I see arise
 The lightning of Thy love--my heart's desire.

Come, O ye weak in faith, for help is here,
 Behold these flashes from our hearts that fly,
 Had ye the eye of faith they would appear
 Like the white light that gleamed on Sinai.

Come to the feast of love, for it is spread;
 Share ye the wine-cup where we drink so deep;
 Behold the wine--the tears that we have shed,
 The wine-cups are our eyes that ever weep.

But, as we drink, upon us falls the spell,
 The dream, the vision, and the ecstasy;
 The wine of pain turns blood, nor can we tell
 If we exist, or if we cease to be.

[p. 36]

Within the jungle of this world of woe
 The lion of desire stalks ravenous.
 Girded with faith let us as hunters go:
 If we resist him he will flee from us.

Ofttimes my heart can sing and can rejoice,
 Pouring forth hymns throughout my rapturous days;
 Alas, that powers of evil choke my voice,
 And blast my thoughts, and burn my psalms of praise!

[p. 37]

  

VIII

FROM the glance Thou bestowed, O Beloved,
     flows beauty no words can express;
 My life--it were little to offer in thanks for Thy
     bountifulness.
 How shamed were the pious assembly, how
     grieved in their hearts when they heard
 That for love of Thy fluttering tresses the utter-
     most nations were stirred.
 My heart is riven in fragments, ravaged by tears
     of my grief,
 But to one whom Thy lashes have wounded never
     there cometh relief.
 At Thy feet, O haughty Beloved, I lay down the
     pride of my brow,
 I am near to Thy heart as Thy raiment; why
     sayest "A stranger art thou"?
 O Makhfi, walk boldly like Majnun in the valley 
     of grief undismayed,
 Girt round with thy new dedication, the promise
     of love thou hast made.

[p. 38]

  

IX

      O SAKI, do thy task;
     Into this moon-like goblet pour
 The golden wine that, shining like the sun,
       From out the dusky flask
     Comes till my goblet bubbles o'er,
 As from the clouds the dawn when night is done.

      Behold my luckless heart,
     So broken, so dissolved by pain,
 It even flows in tears between my lashes;
       And yet how can I part
     With it, while still to me remain
 Its shards--I wait till it is burnt to ashes.

      I knew long, long ago,
     Your promises were less than naught,
 I blotted them for ever from my mind.
       Why was I born to know
     An age above all others fraught
 With love ungrateful and with fate unkind?

      But grasp thy joy; who knows,
     Makhfi, what may to thee befall?
 The firm foundations of the earth may shake,
       The breeze that blows
     May, if this empty life be all,
 The bubble of our vain existence break.

[p. 39]

  

X

    I ASK not from Heaven that it give
       Fortune or power,
     I ask but a garden apart,
       Where for the brief hour
     That we are appointed to live,
 Of earth the delight that is nearest divine
           Might be mine--
 To live in the love of the friends of my heart.

    The rapturous nightingale sings,
       Wooing the rose
     In the midst of the garden new-born:
       But only the gardener knows
     Of the labour that brings
 To the garden its beauty; he toiled in the heat,
           And his feet
 Have been wounded by many a thorn.

    Immortal is beauty, for, see,
       Like the sun in his might,
     It illumines the worlds and all things that
           are made
           With the joy of its light;
     For this be our thanks unto Thee,

[p. 40]

And for the great teachers vouchsafed in our need
       To guide and to lead,
 Their presence to be our safe shelter and shade.

    Upon us Thy mercy bestow!
       Consider how weak,
     How afflicted we are and how sorrowful;
       then
       When we passionate seek
     For oblivion, and Thou dost know
 How time on our desolate spirit has beat
       And brought us defeat--
 O save us, nor let us endure it again.

    O happy the seer who knows
       Good and evil are one,
     Who has learned how self-poised he may live,
       Who is shaken by none,
     To whom spring with its rose
 And autumn are equal:--not him canst thou
       teach
       Or, careless one, preach
 To him; thou indeed hast no counsel to give.

    If perilous love doth thee lead,
       If thou enter his track,
     In the desert like Majnun thou dwell'st
       evermore,
       Thou shalt never look back;
     Nor even take heed

[p. 41]

To thy life if thou lose it or keep it, and pain
       Shalt disdain,
 Nor seek on the limitless ocean of love for a shore.

    O Makhfi, as out of the nest
       The fledgling birds fall
     And fluttering, helpless, are caught in the
       snares,
       So see after all
     Thou art caught like the rest,
 For, flying too boldly, thy feeble wings fail,
       And thou dost bewail
 Thy fate, thus enmeshed in the net of thy cares.

[p. 42]

  

XI

AWAKE, arise, my soul, for it is spring;
     Let the narcissus, with its scent divine,
 Cast its bewitchment, let the Saki bring
     His idol, for indeed he worships wine.

To the forbidden path turn not aside,
     And, tyrannous Beloved, let thine eye
 Look on thy victims trampled in thy pride,
     Who for a glance from thee would gladly die.

Some pay their worship at the Kaaba shrine,
     Some pray within the Temple courts apart,
 But, Makhfi, think what secret joy is thine,
     To bear thine idol ever in thy heart.

[p. 43]

  

XII

FRIENDS had I, many friends, who shared with me
        Days glad and sad,
 But mine they are no more, I am cut free
       From all I had.

Dust falls within the cup of Kaikobad
        And King Jamshid,
 Nor reeks the world if they were sad or glad,
       Or what they did.

Only to-day have we, and through the sand,
       With feet that tire,
 We march, but never reach the promised land
       Of heart's desire.

I follow on where Wisdom's feet have led,
       And firmly hold,
 The while this hard and thorny path I tread,
       Her garment's fold.

How many hearts, O Love, thy sword hath slain,
       And yet will slay!
 They bless thee, nor to God will they complain
       At Judgment Day.

[p. 44]

When in the mosque to seek thine idol there
       Thou wendest, may
 Thy steps fall gently, Makhfi, lest thou scare
       The birds away.

[p. 45]

  

XIII

WHY should I argue that on Sinai
     Celestial radiance glows?
 I cannot reason; though the world deny,
     My heart enlightened knows.

My heart is hot within me, yea, has burst
     In flames of love the while
 So fierce that like a drop to slake my thirst
     Were all the floods of Nile.

So deep in sin am I--I cannot wend
     Where holy pilgrims fare
 To Mecca, even if Abraham, God's friend,
     Should come to lead me there.

I tire of wisdom's kingdom which is mine,
     I tire of reason's sway:
 Passion of love, O carry me to thine,
     A hundred miles away.

Lo, when I come unto the water's side
     The obedient waves retire,
 My flaming heart exultantly shall guide
     Like Moses' torch of fire.

[p. 46]

Though evil days are mine, of joy bereft,
     With pain that never ends,
 Fate, do with me your worst, there still is left
     The Friend beyond all friends.

Tell me, O Makhfi, is it I who sin?
     Is this my sin I bear?
 Is it the body's or the soul's within
     That lived and sinned elsewhere?

[p. 47]

  

XIV

      O FOOLISH heart,
 Thy carelessness how can I comprehend?
 Hast thou no strength, no will, to tear apart
 The barrier that divides me from my Friend?

      See how the budding flower,
 Emerging fair from out her torn green dress,
 Is beauteous in the garden for her hour,
 As Yusuf in his youthful loveliness.

      Go, breeze of spring,
 Haste to tell Yakub, blinded by his tears,
 The tidings that shall end his sorrowing
 And lift the darkness from his troubled years.

      Treading love's path so long,
 Under such heavy burdens did I bow,
 At last my chastened heart has grown so strong,
 No task, no pain, can bend my spirit now.

      O fortunate,
 More blessed than Alexander's lot is mine.
 Come to me, O ye thirsty: this my fate--
 To know the giver of celestial wine.

[p. 48]

      I have wiped clean my heart
 From actions, yea, and from desires as well,
 And yearn alone for peace, to have no part 
 At Judgment Day, either in Heaven or Hell.

[p. 49]

  

XV

    BEHOLD the fire renewed within my heart,
 My sighs have lashed it with their breath until
       the flames outstart;
     Nor may this feeble cage, my body, stay
 The fluttering of this bird, my soul, that longs to
       fly away.
     The rocks would melt, and into tears would
       flow,
 Could they but hear the never-ending murmur
       of my woe;
     For in the dark foreboding of my heart
 There sounds the warning bell that calls the
       caravan to start:
     O Love, I have bewailed for all these years
 Thy tyranny, but none has heard my voice
       except my tears.
     Behold how poor I am, but yet so proud,
 I would not sit at Hatim's table with the eager
       crowd:
     See, I have watched throughout the lonely
       night
 Of separation, when there never came my heart's
       delight,

[p. 50]

    And in my desolation tears of blood
 Gushed from my stricken, widowed heart in
       never-ending flood:
     Yet to me, purged by grief, does hope arise,
 My withered chaplets change to fragrant flowers
       of Paradise.
     Love holds me in these cruel fetters bound,
 My faithfulness to Thee: beside Thy feet, a 
       beaten hound,
     I crouch and fawn for crumbs of love from Thee.
 O Makhfi, if thy sighs could reach the bosom of
       the sea,
     Even within the cold and lightless deep
 Caught from thy heart a quenchless flame should
       leap.

[p. 51]

  

XVI

    O LOVE, I am thy thrall.
 As on the tulip's burning petal glows
 A spot yet more intense, of deeper dye,
 So in my heart a flower of passion blows;
 See the dark stain of its intensity,
     Deeper than all.

    This is my pride--
 That I the rose of all the world have sought,
 And, still unwearied in the eager quest,
 Fainted nor failed have I, and murmured not;
 Thus is my head exalted o'er the rest,
     My turban glorified.

    O blessed pain,
 O precious grief I keep, and sweet unrest,
 Desire that dies not, longing past control!
 My heart is torn to pieces in my breast,
 And for the shining diamond of the soul
     I pine in vain.

    Behold the light
 That from Thy torch of mercy comes to bless
 The garden of my heart, Beloved One,
 With the white radiance of its loveliness,
 Till my wall's shadow shall outvie the sun,
     And seem more bright.

[p. 52]

    I humbly sit apart;
 The Kaaba courts the true believers tread,
 I dwell outside, nor mix my praise with theirs;
 Yet every fibre of my sacred thread
 More precious is to God than all their prayers--
     He sees the heart.

    O Makhfi sorrowing,
 Look from the valley of despair and pain;
 The breath of love like morning zephyr blows,
 Pearls from thine eyelids fall like gentle rain
 Upon the garden, summoning the rose,
     Calling the spring.

[p. 53]

  

XVII

THE wine of my delight has lost its taste;
 The earth of my existence turns a waste,
 No wholesome grass grows there, but only weed;
 My flaming spring of life has passed indeed.
 I searched for joy, but never found the end;
 My empty hands, outstretched, can greet no friend;
 And if God's pardon never come to me,
 Then less than withered grass my prayers must be.

But, Makhfi, look with a discerning eye--
 Deeper than thy despair thy bliss may lie;
 Though on the path of love thy feet may tire,
 New strength shall come to thee, and new desire.

[p. 54]

  

XVIII

TYRANNICAL LOVE, that goads me and gives me no rest,
 As proud as thine arrogant self is this heart in my breast,
         It will keep in its pain
 Its faithfulness, though it be trampled beneath thy disdain.

This mirror, my heart, is broken against my desire;
 O Heaven, give me not of your pity, nay, rather admire
         My soul that is proud;
 My head, though I beat it in sorrow, has never been bowed.

Think not that with joy and with ease I pursue my desire;
 With heart that is weary, with footsteps that lag and that tire,
         I follow my quest,
 To attain through the difficult way to the kingdom of rest.

[p. 55]

Yet, Makhfi, look up from thy desolate region of night,
 And see how the army of sorrow has taken to flight;
         Dawn comes, and despair
 Has vanished before the miraculous arrows of prayer.

[p. 56]

  

XIX

    DESOLATE one, O when
 Shalt thou the shining garden see again?
 Keep thou within thee, holy and apart,
     The garden of thy heart;

    As the long-prisoned bird,
 Forgetting that it ever flew, and heard
 Songs of the wild, and pinions wide unfurled,
     Makes of the cage its world.

    No fear indeed thou hast,
 O heart within the net of love held fast,
 Of separation's bitter agony--
     Thy love is one with thee.

    Sadly we wait and tire,
 And sight of the Beloved Face desire
 In vain, till in our hearts the hope is born
     Of Resurrection morn.

    O heart, thine be no less
 Than the ascetic Brahman's faithfulness,
 The knotted veins his wasted body bears
     As sacred thread he wears.

[p. 57]

    What is a lover's fate?
 What shall befall to him unfortunate?
 The world shall cry, to please its idle whim,
     "Crucify him!"

    Why dost thou then complain
 That on thy feet there drags this heavy chain?
 Nay, it befits thee well such weights to wear;
     Much hast thou learned to bear.

    As, far upon the hills,
 Despairing Ferhad, weary of life's ills,
 Welcomed kind Death, and wept, so for relief
     Weep thou and salve thy grief!

    And see the thorny waste
 Whereon thy bruised feet their pathway traced,
 This wilderness, touched by thy blood that flows,
     Blooms fragrant as the rose.

    O Love, shall I repine
 The noose of death around my neck to twine
 At thy behest? Nay, if thy glory gain,
     Proud am I in my pain.

    O Makhfi, if thy fate
 Be that, without the garden, desolate
 Thou dwell--reck not of it; life is a dream, 
     And we, that seem
 To live and move and love, no more at all
     Than shadows on a wall.

[p. 58]

  

XX

    SAFELY the kings had kept their regal seat,
     Nor ever known the poison of defeat,
     Had not the Turks the invading army led,
     And the crown toppled from each kingly head:
 So were we not, O Master, led by thee
 Vain were our struggles, scant our victory!

    How strong thou hast become, O moth, how great,
     Worshipping thus the flame! this is thy fate--
     Vainly to love and die, yet thou canst bear
     The burning sparks and ever scorn despair:
 Thou knowest, fluttering nearer to the fire,
 In death thou shalt be one with thy desire.

    O cruel Love,--when on the Judgment Day
     Thy tyranny God shall in full repay,
     And all the blameless blood that thou hast shed
     Shall be revenged upon thy haughty head:
 Black shall the place of judging be, no less
 Than Kerbela's accursed wilderness.

    Haply indeed, O Judge, wilt thou be kind,
     And pity in thy heart for sinners find;

[p. 59]

    Think of the memory of their disgrace,
     How dark humiliation stains their face,
 The shame that stings and goads them to repent--
 Will these not be sufficient punishment?

    Within the desert of the world astray,
     How many weary wanderers lose their way!
     But Love with beckoning hand appears, to bless,
     Finds them a pathway through the wilderness,
 And though, like Majnun, in the wild they roam,
 Leads them through toils and tribulations home.

[p. 60]

  

XXI

UNTO the garden of attainment ne'er
         Our pathway led,
 And never were our eyes anhungered fed
 With vision of Thy blessed countenance,
         Never a glance
 Attained we of that face for ever fair.

Wherefor my tears fell down in floods like rain,
         And as I sighed
 I thought of my desires unsatisfied,
 And memory summoned up with vain regret
         The garden where we met,
 But meet no more, I tell my heart with pain.

What have I then to do with high estate?
         Fortune I lay aside
 And all wherein the world has taken pride:
 Yet in this day of my humility
         Precious to me
 As wine of kings I hold my cup of fate.

[p. 61]

Despair not, sorrow-laden Makhfi, though
         No grass appears
 Within this desert watered by thy tears.
 Why with their arguing do learned men
         Question God's mercy, when
 His works His infinite compassion show!

[p. 62]

  

XXII

GREEN is my garden, watered by my tears,
     And through my soul the perfume of the rose
     Kindling my heart with its enchantment flows;
 O Saki, bring the cup, for there appears

Gleaming within the garden through the night
     A radiance fair our feasting to illume;
     What is this glamour shining through the gloom?
 My heart's blood, glowing, yields the heavenly light.

O, I have drunk my cup of cherished grief,
     And love the torment of my wounded heart;
     As the scars heal I tear their lips apart,
 And in my pain find rapturous relief.

Why should I then permit the winds of care
     To ruffle thus my soul, as airs of spring
     Through the Beloved's tresses wantoning?
 For I have risen to fortune from despair.

O fear not, if within the house of prayer
     The feeble camphor candle fails and dies;
     From out the flaming furnace of my sighs
 Will rise another light, more fierce, more fair.

[p. 63]

The perfumed winds that with the dawn arise,
     Have they not, Makhfi, caught thy soul away
     And drenched it with delight, so all the day
 There cling about thee airs of Paradise?

[p. 64]

  

XXIII

FOR my love's madness all the world on me
     Hath heaped its scorn; so from its ways I flee,
         To find a refuge from its cruelty.

A hermitage, with peace my soul to bless,
     Here in a corner of the wilderness,
         Unseen by secular eyes shall I possess.

Who is the man who boasts to be Love's slave,
     And yet this petty life of his would save?
         Poor Love, whose votaries are not more brave!

When I was young I asked, and Love gainsaid;
     What slips, what wanderings, on Love's road I made,
         Until I summoned Wisdom to my aid!

The mirror of my heart I burnish bright
     Until, reflected fair for my delight,
         The Self's eternal beauty greets my sight.

Like Yaqub blinded by his agony,
     No face in all the world is aught to me;
         What use have eyes except to look on Thee?

[p. 65]

  

XXIV

    How long, O burning heart,
 Canst thou keep hidden! see how flames outstart,
     And vapour from thy sighs
 Will darken e'en the stars within the skies.
     Driven by my love I must
 Wander like Majnun, where the desert dust
     Falls on his weary head,
 Eternally for Leila doomed to shed
     His unavailing tears.
 The soul by Love enlightened never fears
     The unseeing world that says
 He must be mad who treads within Love's ways;
     But joyful he and wise,
 For Love has given new vision to his eyes.

    See, Makhfi, cruel Love,
 How in his haughtiness he rides above
     The hearts of men, how red
 His sword with lovers' blood that he has shed!

[p. 66]

  

XXV

WHEN I behold the garden in the spring,
 Rejoicing like a nightingale I sing;
 And if the cruel gardener, with his guile,
 Try to ensnare me--like a rose I smile.

The morning breeze that from the garden flies
 Can give no joy, no gladness, to my eyes;
 For, useless breeze, never to me he brings
 The fragrance of Thy garments on his wings.

But here before the garden door I wait;
 Why should I deem myself unfortunate?
 For by Thy holy threshold shall I stay,
 And with my lashes sweep its dust away.

This bird, my heart, is taken in Thy net
 And flutters unavailingly; but yet,
 Thy captive though it be, how canst Thou keep
 Prisoned the sighs that from my bosom leap?

O rare and precious Phoenix of the soul,
 Vainly I sought for thee; beyond control
 My heart has yearned for thee; ever thy wings
 Have hung above my soul's imaginings.

[p. 67]

Thou Enemy, that hold'st me from my quest,
 If even in the sea thou enterest
 When from my anger thou dost seek to flee,
 My burning soul will find and conquer thee.

O bulbul, glad within the garden sing,
 'Tis Makhfi who has won for thee the spring
 That blossoms in thy heart; but in her own
 The barren winds of lonely autumn moan.

[p. 68]

  

XXVI

O LOVE, tell me what is Thy nature, that out of
     my kingdom of pride,
 Thou canst ravish my soul and canst hold it,
     and keep it enslaved at Thy side;
 Who knows of Thy infinite wisdom, who knows
     what Thy lovers have borne
 When madmen the world has proclaimed them
     and cast them derision and scorn?

To drink of my blood I am thirsting, to shed it
     abroad like a sea,
 To sacrifice all am I seeking, to die as a victim
     for Thee.
 My heart through the anguish of loving has
     swooned 'neath the load of its grief,
 Come thou with thy magic, O music, and give
     to my spirit relief.

Like Ayub I sit in the ashes o'erwhelmed by the
     wrath of the skies,
 Yet out of the night of my sorrow shall hope
     like the morning arise:

[p. 69]

To the desolate mountains, like Ferhad, by sorrow
     and longing possessed,
 I have wandered with pain and with yearning,
     with hope and despair in my breast.

Yet, Makhfi, unveiled is thy secret, abroad all
     thy passion is told:
 Who saw not the beauty of Yusuf when he in
     the market was sold?

[p. 70]

  

XXVII

    I HAVE no need for wine:
 To me the languorous and magic scent
 Breathed by the flowers within the garden, lent
 Intoxication that is more divine.

    Forgive me then, I pray,
 That I no wine in the assembly quaffed,
 For I have drunk of a diviner draught,
 Its fragrance ever haunts me, night and day.

    My heart a bird doth seem
 That never joyfully can soar and sing,
 For, shut within its cage of sorrowing,
 It sees the garden only in a dream.

    Shall I not then complain
 When every atom of my body cries
 Against your tyranny, O cruel skies,
 That yield me days so dark and full of pain?

    Grant me, O Fate, this boon,
 Give me a little day of joy, of spring,
 When even in its cage my heart might sing
 Glad as a bird: Death comes, thou knowest, soon.

[p. 71]

    Although I seem so poor,
 Pity me not for empty-handedness;
 My haughty eagle soul I still possess,
 And I have had the courage to endure.

    How many, many years
 Within the prison walls of lonely grief
 Shall I remain and never know relief,
 Like Yaqub, blinded by my useless tears?

    Though my proud soul
 Torn from its saddle low into the dust
 May be by cruel hands of fate downthrust,
 I know my feet will somehow reach the goal.

    As through life's desert fare
 Love's pilgrims, Makhfi, may it be thy pride
 Unto Love's realm their caravan to guide,
 Thy footsteps be the bell to lead it there.

[p. 72]

  

XXVIII

How uselessly and long I struggled hard
     With thee, mine Enemy, nor from the fight
 Aught have I won; my trait'rous heart I guard,
     And turn away for ever from thy sight.

What wonder if the fire within me rise
     Into a flame outleaping fierce and swift,
 And that the heavy vapour of my sighs
     Unto the darkened eyes of Heaven should drift!

Think not, though at the feast no more I sit,
     That I have done with joy: there still remains
 The dream that once was mine--I cherish it,
     Like wine its memory courses in my veins.

What though within this valley of Despair
     From sorrow I can never find surcease,
 May I be given, in answer to my prayer,
     One day at least of rest, one night of peace!

So sad my fate that, though I long and toil
     Until my forces flag and faint and tire,
 I cannot burnish off the stains that soil,
     The rust that dims my mirror of desire.

[p. 73]

Though poor I am indeed, yet weak am I
     And cannot dare with my irresolute will
 The purse that holds my treasure to untie,
     Its golden harvest in my lap to spill.

And yet, O Makhfi, if with eyes made clear,
     Freed from the world's illusion, thou shalt see,
 Lo, the faquir's torn garments shall appear
     More regal than the robes of majesty.

[p. 74]

  

XXIX

IMPATIENT were my hands, and in their haste
 Never could they untie the knot of fate,
 So vain it is to wail my life laid waste,
     My hours unfortunate.

And strange it is that even in my heart
 The sweet tormenting flame of my desire
 Is quenched; impatiently I pulled apart
     The brands and killed the fire.

And never did the blossoms of success
 Within my hope's enchanted garden bloom,
 And my fair beacon-light of happiness
     Is sunk in gloom.

Faithless Beloved, many friends are Thine;
 So many love and have been loved by Thee,
 They give their hearts, what carest Thou for mine?
     What need hast Thou of me?

[p. 75]

  

XXX

O RIVAL, snatch not from my lips away
 The cup that holds the wine of my delight;
 The mirror of my joy turns cold and grey,
     Darkened before my sight.

As through the gloom the radiant sun above
 Comes brightening the world, and shades depart,
 So do I burnish with the oil of love
     The rust from off my heart.

I vainly stretch imploring hands that long
 To touch Hope's gleaming garment as she flies;
 Though my desire may fail, yet Hope is strong
      And keen, and never dies.

When on the cup that held the drink divine
 Of last night's feast the light of morning falls,
 The joy of night, the magic of the wine,
     The goblet's sight recalls.

Like thee, O Ferhad, in my loneliness
 Toiling upon the mountains I have been,
 But never drank the sherbet of success,
     Sweet as thy lips, Shirin.

[p. 76]

Mortals we are, and, fashioned thus of earth,
 Vain, Makhfi, is this world in which we trust,
 Dust is the rank of kings, the pride of birth,
     Yea, thou thyself art dust.

[p. 77]

  

XXXI

DOWN in the dust and sunken in disgrace
     My honour lies for all the world to see,
 But why should I bear shame upon my face?
     What is the honour of the world to me?

Although the times on my unhappy head
     Have heaped the burdens I can hardly bear,
 I have not wept; I smile in pride instead;
     Upon my brow are graved no lines of care.

For many years hath sorrow dwelt with me,
     Yet I repine not, and so fiercely wage
 My war against despair, it turns to flee--
     I am the Rustum of this later age.

Though callous Fate upon me vengeance wreak,
     O breezes blowing from the heavens above
 Bring unto me what I, like Yaqub, seek--
     The perfume of the garments of my Love.

[p. 78]

  

XXXII

    HASTEN, O Saki, bring
 The wine that it may grant its quickening
 To my dead heart; and to the withered flowers
     Come like the showers
 That give the resurrection of the spring.

    What weary days
 Are these, that never in the perfumed ways
 The bulbul sings among the cypress trees;
     Only the morning breeze
 Finds entrance there, and with the roses plays.

    Masiha, thou canst heal,
 Thou wise Physician, hear our heart's appeal!
 Give us the bitter draught to cure our grief,
     And grant relief;
 Blame not the shrinking from thy cup we feel.

    Glimmer not, pearly dawn,
 Let not the veil of night be yet withdrawn;
 I long to send, with arrows of my sighs,
     Unto the skies
 My eager prayers before the night be gone.

[p. 79]

    I craved release
 From griefs that burn and pains that never
     cease,
 But all my cries to Heaven were empty breath;
     Not even Death
 Coming at last, could give my spirit peace.

    If, on the Judgment Day,
 Grieving for my transgressions, I shall pray
 For mercy for the evil I have done,
     O Self-Existent One,
 Grant that my tears shall wash the sin away.

    O Makhfi, for thy fate
 Be not thou fearful nor disconsolate;
 Higher, upon the Day of Reckoning,
     Faquir than king,
 There shall be then none lowly and none great.

[p. 80]

  

XXXIII

    CAST not, Beloved, on me
 Such angry looks from thy narcissus eyes,
 Already conquered by their sorcery
 Before thy feet my heart a captive lies.

    Knotted within my heart,
 The very chords that answered to thy touch,
 My heart-strings at thy presence thrill and start,
 For I have sighed and have lamented much.

    O ye who sleep in peace,
 You know not of the troubles Love can send,
 The days whose tribulations never cease,
 The weary nights that drag without an end.

    Where, then, does Mecca lie?
 Here is the Kiblah where I make my prayer:
 Tell me the physic for my malady--
 The anodyne for grief is everywhere.

    O Love, where dost thou lead,
 Upon what travel fares our caravan?
 By Hedjaz desert shall thy footsteps speed,
 The longest journey since the world began.

[p. 81]

    So poor, indeed, my fate,
 Never to me did Love his secrets tell
 As to those others, high and fortunate,
 Who near his inmost shrine for ever dwell.

[p. 82]

  

XXXIV

WHY should we but in the assembly pray?
     Only when friends are gathered call for wine?
 Lo, I have done with this hypocrisy,
     And ever pray and drink the cup divine.

The fountain of my spirit has run dry,
     So that in tears no more my sorrow flows,
 Mute is the heart that wailed continually,
     Silent the bulbul in the garden-close.

Here, as we tread the pilgrim's way, we find
     The torch of inspiration like a fire,
 Men see it not, so dull they are and blind,
     They yearn not for the garments of desire.

To each was given on the Creation-day
     His fitting portion, his appointed share,
 Why should'st thou then demand from destiny
     More joy than others have, less pain to bear?

O Makhfi, for thy counsel all have come,
     Their secrets thou hast kept concealed, apart,
 But why should'st thou, who for their sakes art
       dumb,
     Tell shamelessly the secrets of thy heart?

[p. 83]

  

XXXV

How long upon this soul that dwells in pain
 Thy vengeance, O Tormentor, shalt thou pour?
 Could I the Land of Love in peace attain,
 Thy poisoned sting should torture me no more.

No unguent salves these wounds upon my heart,
 The diamond lancet's healing pang I crave,
 So keen my pain I tear my scars apart,
 Come with thy kindly cruelty, and save!

From out my keeping has my heart been reft,
 Why, let it go then: wherefore should I weep?
 Over the empty hut a faquir left
 No watchman comes his careful guard to keep.

Hearken, the time of parting sounds for thee.
 How long, O Makhfi, wavering like the fire,
 A Kafir shall thy restless spirit be,
 Blown like a flame, tormented by desire?

[p. 84]

  

XXXVI

    HOW hard to read, O Soul,
 The riddle of life here and life beyond!
 As hard as in the pearl to pierce a hole
 Without the needle-point of diamond.

    Chide not that 'mongst the flowers
 The bulbul doth ecstatically sing;
 His passion, yea and his delight, are ours,
 Along the garden paths meandering.

    We, by our pain made brave,
 Seek not despair nor hope; neither outlast
 Their little day. We take but what Fate gave,
 Not as Zuleikha, brooding o'er the past.

    O careless ones, in vain
 The treasure of your life has passed away,
 Heedless that nothing of your years remain,
 You talk like children of another day.

    How vain the tears you weep!
 Your sorrow fruitless, your remorse too late;
 The threshold with your lashes wherefore sweep,
 When, Makhfi, see, the shrine is desolate?

[p. 85]

  

XXXVII

WHEN thou unveil'st thy shining countenance,
 Burnt are my lashes by thy lightning glance,
 And all the night I passionately weep
 While o'er my heart tempests of longing sweep;
 And if I see it not, desiring it,
 My heart is darkened like a lamp unlit.

I have no hope, no comfort, anywhere,
 Caught by the fluttering tresses of thy hair.

No flower can open in my garden bed
 Until my heart's blood dyes its petals red,

Sing softly of thy love, or silent be,
 O Makhfi, lest the Hunter secretly
 Shall come and hear thy voice, and capture thee.

[p. 86]

  

XXXVIII

THE love of Thee the bulbul sings,
 The moth that burns its silken wings
     Thy love has drawn into the fire,
     And, see, the wine of Thy desire--
 On every goblet's lip it clings.

No ease, no respite anywhere
 Is now for me, for in Thy snare
     Blindly or willingly I fall,
     No liberty have I at all,
 Bound by the fetters of Thy hair.

So many tears mine eyes have shed,
 Such streams of blood my heart has bled,
     That now mine eyes can weep no more,
     Nor can the failing fountains pour, 
 For dry the source from which they fed.

Thou, Makhfi, in the burning fire
 Of love and unassuaged desire
     Tossing in wild remorse, shalt dwell;
     Love's secrets weakly didst thou tell,
 So thou shalt pay with penance dire.

[p. 87]

  

XXXIX

NOT fierce enough, O moth, the flame to burn
     those yearning wings of thine,
 Not bright enough the torch of love within our
     palace halls to shine.
 Mine eyes have scattered pearls of tears, no
     consolation did they gain;
 The matchless jewel of my soul is given away,
     and all in vain;
 Long is my bitter tale of grief, of separation
     from my Friend,
 Unfinished is it even yet, although my life has
     reached its end:
 Useless, O Saki, is thy cup, no wine of comfort
     flows for me
 Who drink alone the wine of blood; to others
     give thy remedy:
 Tale after tale of love is told, linked all together
     like a chain.
 The fetters hold my heavy heart, of liberty I
     dream in vain:
 Under the angry storms of death my boat of 
     life has foundered deep,
 My house is fallen, round its dust winds of 
     annihilation sweep.

[p. 88]

Yet, Makhfi, if within thy heart the flame of
     heavenly love arise,
 Thy lonely desert shall be fair as garden groves
     of Paradise.

[p. 89]

  

XL

IF from the spot upon my heart the veil
 Should fall, and all the world should know my tale,
     How would the roses burn with envious light
         Knowing themselves less bright!

Though all the day the leaping fire of sighs
 May from my fast-consuming heart arise,
     Winds of mischance so blow and scatter it,
         My torch is not yet lit.

I leave the world, and to the woods I fly,
 But in the forest hunted still am I;
     I seek the silence of the lake and hill,
         But Love pursues me still.

The malady of Love has turned my brain,
 For all my life I have abode with pain;
     Then why should I from sorrow seek to flee?
         Sorrow is kin to me.

Here in the dwelling of unhappiness,
 My silent, desolate sorrow I possess;
     For how can shining love with me remain
         Within this house of pain?

[p. 90]

Behold the pages of my book of life!
 Blotted its record, black with sin and strife,
     As if the woe of all the world should be
         Ever pursuing me.

O Makhfi, from this goblet thou shalt gain
 No exaltation, no surcease from pain;
     For tears of blood that flow from eyes grown dim
         Fill it unto the brim.

[p. 91]

  

XLI

THOU bringest never, long-lost happiness,
 To still my heart's distress
 The remedy I crave. Why to the crowd
 Should I thus voice aloud
 My sadness, drawing scorn upon my name,
 Telling the world my shame?
 If in the close-hung darkness of the night
 There shine no thread of light,
 What matter? Though no torches flame for me,
 My sorrowing heart can see
 Illumined by the fire of grief it bears.
 Why tangled in the cares
 Of worldly hopes, O heart unsatisfied,
 Restless wilt thou abide,
 Seeking those things that thou shalt never gain?
 Help askest thou in vain
 From useless friends, and far into the skies
 Peace like the Phoenix flies.
 Behold, no herb of sweet content has grown;
 For we have only sown
 In far-off springs the seeds of our disgrace.
 How could we bear to face
 The direful Judgment Day, did we not bring
 Our idol, witnessing

[p. 92]

That by this Kafir worship which we give
 We true believers live?
 Upon the sea of bliss our boat is set,
 But comfort comes not yet;
 Over the soul waves of the tempest rise
 Menacing to the skies.

So weary, Makhfi, are thine eyes with tears,
 Darkened the world appears,
 Nor can they tell, by grief and watching worn,
 The rosebud from the thorn.

[p. 93]

  

XLII

    O Self-Existent, give
 Unto Thy faithful ones their heart's desire,
 And visit not with Thy consuming fire
 O'er-burdened souls, too sorrowful to live.

    No longer can I bear
 The separation and the bitter grief;
 Afflicted am I--grant my soul relief!
 Weary and broken--look on my despair!

    O Thou, whose praise we tell,
 Sever the tyrant bonds, give to the slave
 His freedom, save him, Lord, as Thou did'st save
 Yusuf, the Moon of Canaan, from the well!

    My tears fail, for they must;
 The spring that fed their fountains has run dry;
 Give me Thy peace, O Lord; for what am I?
 Only a handful of afflicted dust.

    But flowers of hope return
 To bloom within my garden of desire,
 For God can call even from flames of fire
 Tulips like torches to arise and burn.

[p. 94]

  

XLIII

ON my tormented heart appears
     Another deep and glowing stain,
 Again there dawns my day of tears
     Of misery, of weary pain.

So much of mine own blood I shed,
     So long the journeys I have done,
 So difficult the path I tread,
     To catch the garment of the sun!

New balm within my heart is borne,
     New lightnings from my glance arise,
 Why then your anger, and the scorn
     Flashing from your narcissus eyes?

Out of my heart you reft away
     The life, my heart from out its place
 You ravished, and I can but pray--
     O lift the veil that hides your face!

[p. 95]

  

XLIV

    LONG, long am I denied
 The vision of thy face, for o'er it flows
 The musky darkness of thy waving hair,
 As though a temple-curtain should enclose
 The Kaaba, and our hearts, unsatisfied,
     Could never see it there.

    O Reason, that can speed
 A runner in the valley of desire,
 We need not strength like thine, for we possess
 A remedy to cure us when we tire;
 The thorns and brambles are the salves we need
     For pain and weariness.

    Night after endless night
 I sat in lonely grief remembering thee;
 Tears fell into my heart disconsolate.
 How long have I, in striving to be free,
 Broken my bleeding nails, but never quite
     Untied the knot of fate!

[p. 96]

    Lo, where the feast was spread,
 What better could I offer to my guest
 Than wine and music when we revelled long?
 Of all the wines the wine of tears was best,
 One song of sorrow to another led,
     Making continual song.

    Thou shalt attain success,
 O happy lover, walking on the height;
 Thy shadow greater shall be evermore
 Than King Jamshid's, and plumes and pinions bright
 As hath the Phoenix, shall thy soul possess,
     Arrogantly to soar.

    By sorrow crucified,
 A true believer lost his life for thee,
 And yet did not attain what I attain:
 This new delight which is bestowed on me
 Even the friends who travelled by my side
     Could never know nor gain.

    Red with its fount of tears
 Thy rosy face doth like a tulip show,
 To tell what dreams within thy heart arise.
 My tears have washed with their unceasing flow,
 The magic cup wherein the world appears
     Displayed before mine eyes.

[p. 97]

    Stronger my love shall grow:
 Bearing the bonds of sorrow for thy sake,
 More patient and more proud my heart shall be,
 Like the imprisoned bird who tries to make
 His cage a garden, though his wild heart know
     He never shall be free.

    Behold Love's path--it seems
 So long, O Makhfi; but be strong to tread
 Its toilsome way, and come, nor look behind;
 The temple where thou canst bow down thy head,
 The idol fairer than thy fairest dreams,
     Thou shalt desire, and find.

[p. 98]

  

XLV

    No way of joy and ease is mine to tread,
 The road of shame and madness joyfully I choose
       instead;
     And from my heart such streams of blood
       shall pour
 Upon the Day of Judgment, that the Desert
       crimsoned o'er
     Shall all the rosy hues of heaven outvie,
 And Paradise be darkened, envious of its flaming
       dye.
     If, penitent, I shed one tear of shame,
 Then shall be cleansed the follies and the sins that
       stained my name;
     For God shall show compassion in that day,
 My record of transgressions shall be wholly swept
       away.
     The tree of World's Desire has set its roots
 Deep planted in the darkness; sin and shame its
       bitter fruits;
     Then barter not the wealth contentment
       brings
 For all the wide dominions of a thousand mighty
       kings.

[p. 99]

    If from my heart I loose my heavy sighs
 Black whirling from the Desert shall the blinding
       dust arise.

    Though, Makhfi, God shall pardon at the last,
 The Skirt of Intercession hold within thy fingers
       fast.

[p. 100]

  

XLVI

    O GIVE me, friends, your care,
 Lest in my madness loudly I proclaim
 The secrets of the Lord, that all may know.
 Like wax I melt within Love's eager flame,
 But in my breast a heart of stone I bear,
       Mocking its glow.

    Down unto death I went,
 The Heavens upon me showered their cruel blows.
 Pity me, O ye Chosen Ones of God!
 O Enemy, when shall I gain repose,
 How long shall I groan under chastisement,
       Wince 'neath the rod?

    How darkened is my fame!
 Extravagantly have I spent my store,
 And empty-handed in the market stand;
 A dervish am I, and can give no more,
 No emperor, with glory round my name
       And lavish hand.

[p. 101]

    Foundered my boat of life;
 Vainly upon the ocean of despair
 I ventured out, seeking the tranquil shore
 And the Beloved. No farther can I dare--
 I bow to Fate, I turn me from the strife,
       I scheme no more.

    The time of spring is past,
 The rose-leaves in the garden drift apart,
 Among the trees the bulbul sings no more.
 How long, O madness, shalt thou hold my heart?
 How long, O exaltation, shalt thou last
       Now spring is o'er?

    How uselessly is spent
 And cast away the treasure of my life,
 In bitter separation from my Friend!
 Surely, O cruel Heavens, might now my strife
 My grief, my pain, my weary discontent,
       Attain the end!

    O King, O Teacher, see
 E'en in the tale of Alexander's fate,
 Most fortunate of mortals, thou canst read
 Of Dara, broken and disconsolate;
 Yea, sorrowful his shadowed history
       Appears indeed.

[p. 102]

    Upon the feasting day
 Friends joyfully in the assembly meet,
 But Makhfi in the lane of sorrow goes
 Slowly and loth, with melancholy feet,
 No rest, no ease, no peace upon the way,
       The faquir knows.

[p. 103]

  

XLVII

UNTO the garden floats the wandering air
 To tell the roses that are waiting there
 The tidings of thy coming; soft and sweet
 Their petals open as they kiss thy feet.

If from thy moon-like face the veil arise,
 No more will Yusuf turn regretful eyes
 Homeward to Canaan: he will only see
 Thy face, and offer all his love to thee.

No remedy can heal the heart's distress
 Except the vision of thy loveliness.
 Here, suffering souls, the solace that you need!
 Tear not your wounds, no longer make them bleed.

How difficult the hunted deer to find,
 Although his scent be left upon the wind;
 How hard to reach thee, though thine every tress
 Breathes musk of Khotan through the wilderness!

O happy Makhfi! fortunate thy day!
 For thou at the Beloved's feet may lay
 Thy song in homage; happier still, if thou
 Sing rapturously evermore as now!

[p. 104]

  

XLVIII

    So tyrannous thine eyes,
 Even the morning breeze is hot with wrath,
 No soft assuagement in its breath it hath,
     It only faints and dies.

    Like Khizr, strong and fair,
 Whose soul is steeped in the immortal spring,
 The well of life, thou shalt be worshipping
     With holy words of prayer.

    Born to the Khalif's place,
 None other heired such high estate as thine,
 Thou hast the beauty that is all divine,
     Fairer than peri's grace.

    From hope I turned in hate;
 No further now false hope can cozen me.
 I know the cruel Heavens conspired with thee
     To darken thus my fate.

    Makhfi, thy life flows fast,
 The days from out thy hand drop evermore;
 O turn no weary traveller from thy door,
     Give him what cheer thou hast.

[p. 105]

  

XLIX

LET not thy curl, whose loveliness
 Maddens the world, bring new distress
 Upon thy lovers, floating free,
 Tossed by the wind, that all may see
 And fall beneath thy sorcery.

Let not the valley of thy love
 A place of bitter torment prove
 For dolorous souls, already worn
 By all the penance they have borne,
 Betrayed by love, and left forlorn.

No flower, no nightingale am I,
 So from the garden mournfully
 I go. O breezes, free to stray,
 Back to her garden find your way,
 And greeting to my Love convey.

Exiled and driven from thee I pass
 Upon my journey; like the grass
 And patient reeds I bend and shake,
 As my despairing road I take,
 Leaving the body for thy sake.

[p. 106]

Before the soul who understands
 Be silent: in the desert sands
 He learnt his lore. Break not the rest
 Of the afflicted and oppressed
 With poisoned arrows in his breast.

[p. 107]

  

L

O MIGHT I have as surma for mine eyes
 The dust that on her happy threshold lies,
 And there might waiting kneel to kiss at last
 Her feet like those of angels fluttering past!
 My soul has girt around it suffering
 And wears it as the garment that a king
 Gives to his servant, decking him with pride.
 O Enemy that waitest by my side,
 How long shall I be bent beneath thy rod,
 And walk the path of pain my friends have trod?
 The storm sweeps round my house, its ramparts fail,
 Its deep foundations sway before the gale.
 I am a bird, who, flying home to rest,
 Finds that the waters have o'erwhelmed his nest.

Sell not the jewel of thy soul so cheap,
 No friends can help thy heart its wealth to keep.

O King of all the roses, be thou kind
 Unto the bulbul, whose unquiet mind
 Makes him a mad faquir in loving thee;
 For even kings who ride in majesty

[p. 108]

Will stop their chariots e'er a faquir stir.
 Blessed is Makhfi: God has given to her
 The pearl of words, jewel of song divine,
 Fairer than spoils of ocean or of mine.

     
The Diwan of Zeb-un-Nissa, by Magan Lal and Jessie Duncan Westbrook, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

  

NOTES

Alexander: in Persian poetry the type of the most fortunate one, as is Darius of the most unfortunate.

Ayub: Job.

Diwan: a Diwan consists of a series of groups of ghazals (q.v.), the first collection rhyming with the first letter of the alphabet, the second with the second, and so on through the alphabet.

Ferhad: a lover famous in Eastern story. He loved Shirin (the sweet one), who was the wife of King Khosru, about the end of the sixth century. He was a sculptor, and renowned throughout Persia. The King, fearing his rivalry, tried to divert his mind from his passion, and sought to find for him some impossible task. As Shirin had demanded a "river of milk," he was bidden to clear away the rocks obstructing the passage of the great mountain of Beysitoun, and to cause the rivers on the opposite sides of the mountain to join. Ferhad agreed on condition that, if he were successful, Shirin should be given to him. For years he laboured, and carved out wonderful caverns, which can be seen to this day; and the Joui-shir (stream of milk) still flows from the mountain between Hamadan and Hulwan. Only a few days' work remained to be done, when the King heard reports that the project was succeeding: he thereupon sent a messenger to tell Ferhad that Shirin was dead. On hearing this, Ferhad died, some say by killing himself with his axe, others say by throwing himself over a precipice.

Ghazal, or gazel: a form of verse written in a succession of couplets. The first two lines rhyme, and of the succeeding couplets the first line is unrhymed, the second rhymes with the first couplet, and so on, throughout the poem; so that, in the whole poem, all the words which rhyme, rhyme with one another. When this form of verse consists of only four lines, it is called a Rubai. The

[p. 110]

length of a ghazal varies, but it is not supposed to be longer than eighteen couplets. Often the couplets within a ghazal have no apparent connection, and are complete in themselves. The last couplet usually contains the name of the poet.

Hatim, or Hatim Tai: an Arabian chief famed for his generosity: he never refused a request. He was born in Yemen, in Arabia Felix, in pre-Musulman times. Some one asked for his head, and he gave it, and so died.

Hedjaz: the greatest desert in Arabia; along its length pass the principal caravan routes.

Jamshid: the type of the magnificent king. He belonged to the mythical Peshdadian dynasty, and flourished about 800 B.C. He was reputed to be the builder of Persepolis. His reign was a kind of golden age, when sickness and death were unknown. The angel Siroush descended from Heaven to visit him, and left him a robe and an enchanted girdle. He was gifted, like Moses, with a ray of divine light; so that once, when he was descending Mount Alborz, the crowd imagined that there were two suns in the world. His ring and throne had magic powers: when he looked into his seven-ringed goblet he could see what was passing in all the worlds. But pride came into his heart, and he forgot God; his subjects revolted against him and drove him from his kingdom; and he roamed the earth an outcast for a hundred years. He repented, and was restored, with undiminished youth, to his kingdom and power.

Kaaba: the chief sanctuary of Mecca, the holy city of the Musulmans. The Kaaba was revered before the time of Muhammad, and was then a rude stone building; its name came from a word meaning an astralagus, or die, because of its roughly cubical shape. It has been several times rebuilt, but the old form has been preserved except in secondary details. Into its wall is built an ancient black stone, possibly an aerolite, said to have been given by the angel Gabriel to Abraham.

Kafir: an unbeliever; one who is not a Musulman.

Kaikobad: a Sultan of the Seljukian dynasty, renowned not only for his successful wars, but as a great builder of palaces.

[p. 111]

Kerbela: the place of the massacre of Hussain, the grandson of the Prophet, and his children, by the Ommeyyades. It is situated in Mesopotamia, near the western bank of the Tigris, twenty-eight miles from the ruins of Babylon. It is a great place of pilgrimage for the Shiahs, who hold that the spiritual leadership of Islam devolved upon Ali, the son-in-law of Muhammad, and his descendants. The tomb of Hussain is in a large mosque; and each year two hundred thousand pilgrims from all parts of the Musulman world visit it, sometimes carrying the bones of their ancestors to be buried there. The story of the death of Hussain is annually read, and sometimes enacted as a miracle-play, in Shiah communities, with much wailing and sorrow, on the tenth day of the Mohurrum celebrations.

Khizr: the angel-guardian of the spring of immortality.

Kiblah: the direction in which Mecca lies, indicated by the mehrab, or niche, in the wall of a mosque, to which the worshippers turn in prayer.

Leila and Majnun: the heroine and hero of the celebrated Arabian love-story told by many poets, of whom the most famous are Jami, Nizami, and Hatifi. Kais was the son of an Arabian chief, but, madly loving Leila, the daughter of a neighbouring chief, he was called Majnun, or the mad one. Leila was married to a more powerful suitor, and Majnun wandered for years in the desert, where he taught the secrets of love to the birds and beasts.

Mahmoud: the praised one, a name of the Prophet.

Majnun: the lover of Leila (q.v.).

Makhfi: the hidden one.

Mansur: Mansur al-Hallaj, a Persian saint of the ninth century, who was crucified at Baghdad for declaring that he was one with God.

Masiha: Messiah. Jesus is known in Musulman tradition as the Healer.

Phoenix: a fabulous bird of great size and beauty, habitually dwelling in the Caucasus Mountains, but appearing at very rare intervals. If it spreads its wings over the head of a man, he becomes a king. It was supposed to live for seventeen hundred years, and only one existed in the world at a time.

[p. 112]

Rustum: son of Zal, Prince of Seistan: a traditional hero of Persia, famous for his indomitable strength and bravery. He conquered the Dives, or evil spirits, and performed other miraculous deeds, comparable to the labours of Hercules. He is the hero of the Shah-Nameh of Firdausi.

Saki: the cupbearer.

Shirin: the beloved of Ferhad (q.v.). The name means "sweet."

Suleiman: King Solomon; in Musulman legend lord over angels and demons, of great wisdom and power, understanding the language, not only of all men, but of the beasts and birds. His power lay in his possessing the seal with the name of God.

Surma: kohl, or collyriurn, a black powder used in Egypt and the East for darkening the eyelids and thus giving lustre to the eyes.

Turks: the Turcomans from Turkestan, who ravaged Central Asia from Persia to India and east to China, the Great Wall of which was built as a protection against them.

Yaqub: Jacob, who in Musulman tradition became blind by weeping for the loss of his son Joseph, who had been sold by his brothers as a slave into Egypt; he regained his sight when he smelt the garment of his son which had been brought to him.

Yusuf: Joseph, who is regarded as of superhuman loveliness, surrounded by celestial light, the emblem of divine perfection. He possessed nine-tenths of the beauty allotted to the whole world.

Zuleikha: daughter of Taimus, King of Mauretania. In a dream she saw and fell in love with the image of Yusuf; she was not told his name, but only that his abode was Egypt. She went to Memphis to marry Asiz Potiphar, the Grand Vizier of Pharaoh, imagining her future husband was the vision of her dream. Yusuf was sold as a slave, and was purchased by her; but, being warned by the angel Gabriel in the likeness of his father Jacob, he fled from her. She is represented as always brooding over her lost happiness.

Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.

    
The Diwan of Zeb-un-Nissa, by Magan Lal and Jessie Duncan Westbrook, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

The following advertisements appeared at the end of the original book. They are included for completeness.

  

THE WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES

Edited by L. CRANMER-BYNG and Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE SERIES AND ITS PURPOSE

THE object of the Editors of this Series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour.

NEW VOLUME. JUST OUT

ANCIENT EGYPTIAN LEGENDS. By MARGARET A, MURRAY. 2/- net.

INDIAN

THE HEART OF INDIA. Sketches in the History of Hindu Religion and Morals. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D., Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 2/- net.

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE: An Outline of the Philosophy of the Vedanta. As set forth by the Upanishads and by Sankara. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D., Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 2nd Impression. 2/- net.

[p. 114]

THE BUDDHA'S "WAY OF VIRTUE." A Translation of the Dhammapada. By W. C. D. WAGISWARA and K. J. SAUNDERS, Members of the Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon branch, 2/- net.

THE PATH OF LIGHT. Rendered for the first time into English from the Bodhi-charyavatara of Santi-Deva. A Manual of Ma ha-Yana Buddhism. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D. 2/- net.

LEGENDS OF INDIAN BUDDHISM. Translated from "L'Introduction a l'Histoire du Buddhisme Indien" of Eugene Burnouf, with an Introduction by WINIFRED STEPHENS. 2/- net.

THE WAY OF THE BUDDHA. Selections from the Buddhist texts, together with the original Pali, with Introduction by HERBERT BAYNES, M.R.A.S. 2nd Impression. 2/- net.

IRANIAN (Persian, Pehlvi, Zend, etc.)

THE RUBA'IYAT OF HAFIZ. Translated with Introduction by SYED ABDUL MAJID, LL.D. Rendered into English Verse by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 2nd Impression, 1/- net.

THE SPLENDOUR OF GOD. Being Extracts from the Sacred Writings of the Bahais. With Introduction by ERIC HAMMOND. 2nd Impression. 2/- net.

THE TEACHINGS OF ZOROASTER, and the Philosophy of the Parsi Religion. Translated with Introduction by Dr. S. A. KAPADIA, Lecturer, University College, London. 2nd Edition. 2/- net.

THE PERSIAN MYSTICS.

I. Jalalu'd-din Rumi. By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2nd Impression. 2/- net.

II. Jami. By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2/-net.

THE BUSTAN OF SA'DI. From the Persian. Translated with Introduction by A. HART EDWARDS. 2/- net.

SA'DI'S SCROLL OF WISDOM. By SHAIKH SA'DI. With Introduction by Sir ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 1/- net. With Persian Script added, 2/- net.

THE ROSE GARDEN OF SA'DI. Selected and Rendered from the Persian with Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 3rd Impression. 1/- net.

ARABIC

THE ALCHEMY OF HAPPINESS. By AL GHAZZALI. Rendered into English by CLAUD FIELD. 2/- net.

THE CONFESSIONS OF AL GHAZZALI. Translated for the first time into English by CLAUD FIELD, M.A. 1/- net.

[p. 115]

THE AWAKENING OF THE SOUL. From the Arabic of IBN TUFAIL. Translated with Introduction by PAUL BRoNNLE., Ph.D. 4th Impression. 1/6 net.

THE RELIGION OF THE KORAN. With Introduction by Sir ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. 3rd Impression. 1/- net.

ARABIAN WISDOM. Selections and Translations from the Arabic by JOHN WORTABET, M.D. 2nd Impression. 1/- net.

THE SINGING CARAVAN. Some Echoes of Arabian Poetry. By HENRY BAERLEIN. 2/- net.

THE DIWAN OF ABU'L-ALA. By HENRY BAERLEIN. 2nd Impression. 1/- net.

HEBREW

ANCIENT JEWISH PROVERBS. Compiled and Classified by A. COHEN, late Scholar of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. 2/- net.

THE WISDOM OF THE APOCRYPHA. With an Introduction by C. E. LAWRENCE, Author of "Pilgrimage," etc. 2/- net.

THE WISDOM OF ISRAEL: Being Extracts from the Babylonian Talmud and Midrash Rabboth. Translated from the Aramaic with an Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS. 2nd Impression. 1/- net.

THE DUTIES OF THE HEART. By RABBI BACHYE. Translated from the Hebrew with Introduction by EDWIN COLLINS, Hollier Hebrew Scholar, U.C.L. 2nd Impression. 1/- net.

CHINESE

YANG CHU'S GARDEN OF PLEASURE. Translated from the Chinese by Professor ANTON FORKE. With an Introduction by H. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

TAOIST TEACHINGS. From the Mystical Philosophy of Lieh Tzu. Translated by LIONEL GILES, M.A. 2/- net.

A LUTE OF JADE. Being Selections from the Classical Poets of China. Rendered with an Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 2nd Edition. 2/- net.

THE CLASSICS OF CONFUCIUS.

I. The Book of Odes (Shi-King). By L. CRANMER-BYNG. 4th Impression. 1/- net.

II. The Book of History (Shu-King). By W. GORN OLD. 2nd Impression. 1/- net.

THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS. A new Translation of the greater part of the Confucian Analects, with Introduction and Notes by, LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant in the Department of Oriental Books and Manuscripts of the British Museum. 2nd Impression. 2 - net.

[p. 116]

THE CONDUCT OF LIFE; or, The Universal Order of Confucius. A translation of one of the four Confucian Books, hitherto known as the Doctrine of the Mean. By KU HUNG MING, M.A. (Edin.). 2nd Impression. 1/- net.

THE BOOKK OF FILIAL DUTY. Translated from the Chinese of the Hsiao Ching by IVAN CHeN, first Secretary to the Chinese Legation. 1/- net.

THE SAYINGS OF LAO TZU. From the Chinese. Translated with Introduction by LIONEL GILES, of the British Museum. 4th. Impression. 1/- net.

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC. Selections from the Philosophy of Chuang Tzu. With Introduction by LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon.), Assistant at the British Museum. 2nd Impression. 2/- net.

THE FLIGHT OF THE DRAGON. An Essay on the Theory and Practice of Art in China and Japan, based on Original Sources. By LAURENCE BINYON. 2/- net.

JAPANESE

THE MASTER-SINGERS OF JAPAN. Being Verse Translations from the Japanese Poets. By CLARA A. WALSH. 2/- net.

WOMEN AND WISDOM OF JAPAN. With Introduction by S. TAKAISHI. 2nd Impression. 1/- net.

EGYPTIAN

THE BURDEN OF ISIS. Being the Laments of Isis and Nephthys. Translated from the Egyptian with an Introduction by JAMES TEACKLE DENNIS. 1/- net.

THE INSTRUCTION OF PTAH-HOTEP AND THE INSTRUCTION OF KE'GEMNI. The Oldest Books in the World. Translated from the Egyptian with Introduction and Appendix by BATTISCOMBE GUNN. 3rd Impression. 1/- net.

Editorial Communications should be addressed to
     The Editors of the Wisdom of the East Series,
         50A, ALBEMARLE STREET
             LONDON, W.

  

LONDON: JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
